A.LKROEBER
ANTHROPni RRY-
CULTURE PATTERNS
AND PROCESSES




         A HARBINGER BOOK   M\ $1.95
Anthropology:

CULTURE
PATTERNS
     &
PROCESSES
Anthropology:

CULTURE
PATTERNS

PROCESSES
  A. L. Kroeber




      A Harbinger
 HARCOURT, BRACE & WORLD, INC.
   NEW YORK 6- BURLINGAME
      Copyright 1923, 1948 by Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.


                 First Harbinger Books edition 1963.
Culture Patterns and Processes consists of Chapters i, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10
of the author's complete   ANTHROPOLOGY: Revised Edition. 1948.

     All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
           in any form, by mimeograph or any other means,

          without permission in writing from the publisher.



        Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-12160


                Printed in the United States of America
                                  Contents

WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT
I.   ANTHROPOLOGY, BIOLOGY, HISTORY    2.   ORGANIC AND SOCIOCULTURAL ELEMENTS            3.

ORGANIC OR "physical" ANTHROPOLOGY          4.   SOCIOCULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY        5.   EVO-
LUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES               6.   SOCIETY AND CULTURE     7.

ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES



LANGUAGE

93. LINGUISTIC    relationship: the SPEECH FAMILY        94. CRITERIA     OF RELATIONSHIP
95. SOUND EQUIVALENCES AND PHONETIC LAWS 96. THE PRINCIPAL SPEECH FAMILIES
97. CLASSIFICATION OF LANGUAGES BY TYPES   98. PERMANENCE OF LANGUAGE AND
RACE 99. THE BIOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL NATURES OF LANGUAGE 100. PROBLEMS OF
THE RELATION OF LANGUAGE AND CULTURE lOI. PERIOD OF THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE
102. SPEECH, CULTURE, AND NATIONALITY    IO3. RELATIVE Vl'ORTH OF LANGUAGES   IO4.

SIZE OF VOCABULARY    I05. QUALITY OF SPEECH SOUNDS    I06. RAPIDITY OF LINGUISTIC
CHANGE 107. SPEAKING AND WRITING I08. DIFFUSION AND PARALLELISM IN LAN-
GUAGE AND CULTURE IO9. CONVERGENT LANGUAGES IIO. UNCONSCIOUS FACTORS IN
LANGUAGE AND CULTURE CHANGE III. LINGUISTIC AND CULTURAL STANDARDS



THE NATURE OF CULTURE
112.   WHAT CULTURE IS     II3. COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE II4. ORGANIC DIVERSITY,
CULTURAL HYBRIDITY       II5.THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE I16. FOLKWAYS AND THE
RELATIVITY OF MORALS       II7. CULTURE AND SOCIETY   I18. INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF
SOCIETY    119.   SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES       120.    NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARA-
SITIC CULTURES     121. RURAL AND URBAN   —FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS         122. INTE-
GRATION   —INHERENT OR INDUCED     I23. MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL          I24. PARTICIPATION

125.CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS VALUES I26. MATERIAL AND NON-
                                                  :




MATERIAL CULTURE  127. THE IDEA OF PROGRESS 128. MORE ABOUT PROGRESS I29.
FUNCTION 130. PURPOSE AND NEED
PATTERNS

131. THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN            I32. SYSTEMATIC PATTERNS         I33. TOTAL-CULTURE PAT-

TERNS     134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE             I35.    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS           I36.

CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                I37.   STYLE PATTERNS       I38. BASIC   PATTERN
AND STYLE VARIABILITY I39. THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                             I40.   THE
MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS



CULTURE PROCESSES

141.CULTURE PROCESSES I42. PERSISTENCE I43. MOTOR HABITS I44. OTHER HABIT
CHANNELINGS  I45. INVENTION  I46. NECESSITY I47. ACCIDENT I48. INVENTION AND

PLAY 149. ANTECEDENTS I50. CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS I5I. SOCIAL
ACCEPTANCE        I52.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN              I53.   INVENTION OF INSTITU-
TIONS     154. INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION             I55.   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEG-
REGATION     156.   CULTURAL LOSS       I57.   DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS         I58. EFFECTS

OF isolation: Southampton and easter islands                 159. displacements        160.   kinds
OF loss    161.   problem of the death of cultures



CULTURE CHANGE

162. TYPES   OF CULTURE CHANGE          163.   SUBSISTENCE AND POPULATION CHANGES                 164.

FASHION CHANGE           165.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREEDING
166. LABILE SOCIAL               AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE 168. CULTURAL
                         STRUCTURES     167.
fatigue:     TABOO IN           CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION I70.
                           HAVl'AII   169.
CHANGE BY REVOLUTION I7I. EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION 172. RESISTANCE TO
DIFFUSION 173. MARGINAL CULTURES I74. MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS I75. IN-
TERNAL MARGINALITY 176. ACCULTURATION I77. ACCULTURATION WITH AND WITH-
OUT DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION 178. JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA
179. VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION    180. NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND

MESSIAHS 181. ETHNIC REVIVALS 182. ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY
                             EDITOR'S NOTE
This volume offers a selection of those chapters of Alfred L. Kroeber's classic
work  ANTHROPOLOGY          that deal specifically with matters of Culture Pat-
terns and Processes.

Ifno selection can ever take the place of the complete work from which it is
drawn, this holds doubly true of a work as closely integrated as Kroeber's

ANTHROPOLOGY, which covers a vast area of knowledge, illumines each
of its parts from a single fundamental point of view, and subjects an entire field
of scholarship to the searching inquiry of one    mind of uncommon scope.

The present selection (and its companion volumes, which contain other selec-
tions) claims   no more than that it will serve the convenience of those readers
who wish to study the narrower topic only. However, the section numbers, and
with them the many cross references, that run throughout the parent volume
                                 —
have been retained unchanged to point up how much Kroeber's ANTHRO-
POLOGY     is   a work that is of one piece, and indivisible.
Anthropology:

CULTURE
PATTERNS
     &
PROCESSES
           What Anthropology Is About

I.   ANTHROPOLOGY, BIOLOGY, HISTORY         2.   ORGANIC AND SOCIOCULTURAL ELEMENTS
3.    ORGANIC   OR   "physical"   ANTHROPOLOGY       4,   SOCIOCULTURAL    ANTHROPOLOGY
5.   EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES          6.   SOCIETY AND CULTURE
7. ANTHROPOLOGY      AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES


                     I.   ANTHROPOLOGY, BIOLOGY, HISTORY
     A NTHROPOLOGY   is the Science of man. Of course, this literal, etymological

     /\  meaning is too broad and general. More precise would be: "the science
 J    \ of man and his works and behavior." But even this needs an addition to
make it sufficiently specific, since no one means to claim sciences like physiology
and psychology as parts of anthropology. Now physiology and psychology focus
their attention on particular, men, whom they examine as individuals. This gives
a clue to the additional limitation        we are seeking. Anthropology obviously is
concerned not with particular men as such, but with men in groups, with races
and peoples and their happenings and doings. So let us take as our provisional
basic definition the following:"Anthropology is the science of groups of men
and their behavior and productions." This will include any findings on the total
human species, since this constitutes an aggregate of races or peoples, a sort of
supergroup or total society.
      However, man is an animal or organism and he is also a civilized being
having a history and social qualities. Thus he is investigated         —different aspects
of him are investigated    —both by the organic or biological or      life sciences and by

what are sometimes called the historical and more generally the social sciences.
True, this latter term, "the social sciences," though commonly used, is not easy
to define satisfactorily. But we can leave this difficulty for the philosopher of
science. In practice, anthropology    is   mostly classified as being both a biological
science and a social science. Some universities recognize this fact by having cer-
tain courses of anthropological study count as the one and certain as the other,
or perhaps even the same course counting either way. Such a situation of double
participation is unusual among the sciences. If anthropology is not concerned so
predominantly with man as an animal, or with man as a social human having a
history, that it can be set outright in either the life or the social-historical science
2                         WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                              § 1

category, both aspects are evidently represented significantly in its subject matter.
Could it be that the specific subject of anthropology is the interrelation of what
is biological in man and what is social and historical in him? The answer is Yes.

Or, more broadly, anthropology docs at least concern itself with both organic
and social factors in man, whereas nearly all other sciences and studies deal with
one or the other. Anthropology concerns itself with both sets of factors because
these come associated in human beings in nature. Often they are even inter-
twined in one and the same phenomenon, as when a person is born with heredi-
tary musical capacity and develops this further by study and training. They arc
not always easy to disentangle; but they must be separated if the processes at
work arc to be understood. That job is peculiarly the anthropologist's.


                2.   ORGANIC AND SOCIOCULTURAL ELEMENTS
    To the question why a Louisiana Negro is black and longheaded, the
answer is ready. He was born so. As cows produce calves, and lions, cubs, so
Negro springs from Negro and Caucasian from Caucasian. We call the force at
work heredity. Our same Negro is reputed amiable and easy-going. Is this too
an innate quality? Offhand most of us might reply Yes. He sings at his corn-
hoeing more frequently than the white man across the fence. Is this also because
of his heredity?   "Of course—he     made
                                     is         might be a common answer,
                                               so,"
"Probably    —why not?" a more cautious one. But now our Negro singing the
                                                                      is

"Memphis Blues," which his great-grandfather in Africa assuredly did not sing
As for the specific song, heredity can obviously no longer be the cause. Our
Negro may have learned it from an uncle, or perhaps from his schoolmates;
quite likely he acquired it from human beings who were not his ancestors, or
over the radio, acquired it as part of his customs, like being a member of the
Baptist Church and wearing overalls, and the thousand other things that come
to   him from without instead of from within. At these points heredity is dis-
placed by tradition, nature by nurture, to use a familiar jingle. The efficient
forces now are quite different from those which made his skin black and his
head long. They are causes of another order.
      The particular song of the Negro and his complexion represent the clear-
cut extremes of the matter. Between them lie the good nature and the inclination
to melody. Obviously these traits may also be the result of human example, of
"social   environment," of contemporary tradition. There are those who so be-
lieve, as   well as those who see in them chiefly the effects of inborn biological
impulse. Perhaps these intermediate dubious traits are the results of a blending
of nature and nurture, the strength of each varying according to the trait or the
individual examined. Clearly, at any rate, there is room here for investigation
and weighing of evidence. A genuine problem exists. This problem cannot be
solved by the historical or social sciences alone, because they do not concern
themselves with heredity. Nor can it be solved by biology, which deals with
^ 3                   ORGANIC OR "physical" ANTHROPOLOGY
                                                                                        3
heredity and allied factors but docs not go on to operate with the nonbiological
principle of tradition or with         what is acquired by men when they         live   in
societies.

      Here, then, is one distinctive task for anthropology: the interpretation of
those   phenomena into which both innate organic factors and "social" or ac-
quired factors enter or may enter.
    The word "social" is the customary untechnical one for the nonorganic or
more-than-organic phenomena referred to. It is, however, an ambiguous word
and therefore sometimes a confusing one. As will shortly be pointed out, "social"
refers to both social and cultural phenomena. Until the distinction between
them has been made, we shall either put "social" into quotation marks or use
"sociocultural" instead.



                3.   ORGANIC OR "physical" ANTHROPOLOGY

      The organic sciences underlie the sociocultural ones. They are more imme-
diately "natural," less    "humanized" in their concern. Anthropology therefore
accepts and uses the general principles of biology: the laws of heredity and the
doctrines of cell development and evolution, for instance, and        all   the findings
of anatomy, physiology, embryology, zoology, palaeontology,         and the rest. Its
business has been to ascertain         how far these principles apply to man, what
forms they take in his particular case. This has meant a concentration of atten-
tion, the devising of special    methods of inquiry. Many biological problems, in-
cluding most physiological and hereditary ones, can be most profitably attacked
in the laboratory, or at least under experimental conditions. The experimental
method, however, is but rarely available for human beings living in groups.
Sociocultural phenomena have to be taken as they come and laboriously sifted
and resifted afterward, instead of being artificially simplified in advance, as is
done in laboratory experimentation.
      Then, too, since anthropology is operating biologically within the narrow
limits of one species, it has sometimes been driven to concern itself with minute

traits, such as the zoologist is rarely troubled   with the proportions of the length
                                                       :




and the breadth of the        skull   —the famous cephalic index—for instance; the
number of degrees the arm bones are twisted, and the like. Also, as these data
had to be used in the gross, unmodifiable by artificially varied conditions, it has
been necessary to secure them from all possible varieties of men, different races,
sexes, ages,   and their nearest brute analogues. The result is that biological or
physical anthropology
                          —"somatology" it is sometimes called in Anglo-Saxon
countries, and sometimes simply "anthropology" in continental Europe           —has in
part constituted a sort of specialization or sharpening of certain aspects of gen-
eral biology. It has become absorbed to a considerable degree in certain particular

phenomena, such as human species or subraces and methods of studying them,
4                            WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                           S 4

about which general biologists, physiologists, and students of medicine arc
usually but vaguely informed.



                        4.   SOCIOCULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY

      The sociocultural sciences, usually, but somewhat loosely, called the social
sciences, overlie the organic sciences.    Men's bodies and inborn equipment are
back of their deeds and accomphshments as shaped by tradition, and are primary
to their culture or civilization as well as to their aggregations in societies. The
relation of anthropology to sociocultural science has therefore      been in a sense
the opposite of its relation to biological science. Instead of specializing, anthro-
pology has been occupied with trying to generalize the findings of history. His-
torians can never experiment; sociologists, economists, and other social scientists
only rarely. Historians deal with the unique; for to a degree every historical or
social or cultural     event has something unparalleled about it. They do not lay
down laws, nor do they verify them by the artificial trials of experiment. But
anthropology looks for such general and recurrent processes as may occur in the
multifarious events of history and in the diverse societies, institutions, customs,
and beliefs of mankind. So far as such processes can be extricated or formulated,
they are generalizations.
      It has sometimes been said that social and cultural anthropology    —that part
of the subject which is concerned with the more-than-merely-organic aspects of
human behavior— seems preoccupied with ancient and savage and exotic and
              The cause is a desire to understand better all civilizations,
extinct peoples.
irrespective of time      and place, in the abstract, or as generalized principles if
possible. It   is   not that cave men are more illuminating than Romans, or flint
knives more interesting than fine porcelains or the art of printing, which has
led anthropology to bear heavily on the former, but the fact that it wanted to
know about cave men and flint knives, which no one else was studying, as well
as about the Romans and printing presses that history tells us about so fully.

It   would be arbitrary to prefer the exotic and remote to the familiar, and in
principle anthropology has never accepted the adjudication sometimes tacitly
rendered that its proper field should be restricted to the primitive as such. As
well might zoology confine its interest to eggs or to protozoans. It is probably
true that some researches into early and savage history, especially in the initial
stages of anthropology, have sprung from an emotional predilection for the for-
gotten or the neglected, the obscure and the strange, the unwonted and the
mysterious. But such occasional personal aesthetic trends cannot delimit the
range of a science or determine its aims and methods. Innumerable historians
have been inveterate gossips, but one does not therefore insist that the only
proper subject of history is backstairs intimacies.
      This, then, is the reason for the special development of those subdivisions of
anthropology known as archaeology, "the science of what is old" in the career
5 5              EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES                            5

of humanity, especially as revealed            by excavations of the      sites   of prehistoric
occupation, and ethnology, "the science of peoples" and their cultures and life
histories as groups, irrespective of their degree of advancement/



          5.   EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES
      In their more elementary aspects the two strands of the organic or heredi-
tary and the sociocultural or "environmental" run through all human life. They
are distinct as mechanisms, and their products are distinct. Thus a comparison
of the acquisition of the power of flight respectively by birds in their organic
development out of the ancestral reptile stem millions of years ago, and by men
as a result of cultural progress in the field of invention during the past genera-
tion, reveals at once the profound differences of process that inhere in the                am-
biguous concept of "evolution." The bird gave up a pair of walking limbs to
acquire wings. It added a new faculty by transforming part of an old one. The
sum total of its parts or organs was not greater than before. The change was
transmitted only to the blood descendants of the altered individuals. The reptile
line went on as it had been before, or if it altered, did so for causes unconnected
with the evolution of the birds. The airplane, on the contrary, gave men a new
faculty without diminishing or even impairing any of those they had previously
possessed. It led to no visible bodily changes, no alterations of mental capacity.
The invention has been transmitted to individuals and groups not derived by
descent from the inventors; in fact, it has already influenced the fortunes of all
of us. Theoretically, the invention is transmissible to ancestors if they happen to
be still living. In sum, it represents an accretion to the stock of existing civiliza-
tion rather than a transformation.
      Once the broad implications of the distinction which tiiis example illustrates
have been grasped, many common errors are guarded against. The program of
eugenics, for instance, loses much of its force. There is certainly much to be said
in favor of intelligence        and discrimination in mating, as in everything else.
There is need for the acquisition of more exact knowledge on human heredity.
But, in the main, the claims sometimes made that eugenics is necessary to pre-
serve civilization from dissolution, or to maintain the flourishing of this or that
nationality, rest on the fallacy of recognizing only organic causes as operative,
when sociocultural as well as organic ones are active — when indeed the super-
hereditary factors may be much the more powerful ones. So, in what are mis-
called race problems, the average thought of the               day still reasons confusedly
between sociocultural and organic causes and effects.^ Anthropology is not yet
      ^   Ethnography is sometimes separated, as more descriptive, from ethnology, as more
theoretically or more historically inclined.
      ^   An example is the still lingering fallacy that individual development of organs by use
somehow gets incorporated into the heredity of descendants. This fallacy rests on the mis-
application to organic situations of a valid sociocultural mechanism. An example in reverse
D                             WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                                   § 5


in a position always to state just           where the boundary Ues between the con-
tributing organic causes and the superorganic or "sociocultural" causes of such
phenomena. But it does hold to their fundamental distinctness and to the im-
portance of their distinction,        if   true understanding    is   the aim.   Without sure
grasp of this principle, many of the arguments and conclusions in the present
volume will lose their significance.
       Accordingly, a designation of anthropology as "the child of Darwin"                  is

misleading. Darwin's essential achievement was that he imagined, and sub-
stantiated by much indirect evidence, a mechanism through which organic evo-
lution appeared to be taking place. The whole history of man, however, being
much more than an organic matter, a merely or strictly Darwinian anthro-
pology would be largely misapplied biology. One might almost as justly speak
of a Copernican or a Newtonian anthropology.
    What has greatly influenced some of the earlier anthropology, mainly to its
damage, has been not Darwinism, but the vague idea of progress, to the organic
aspect of which Darwin happened incidentally to give such support and ap-
parent substance that the whole group of evolutionistic ideas, sound and unsound,
has luxuriated rankly ever since. It became common practice in the older an-
thropology to "explain" any part of human civilization by arranging its several
forms in an evolutionary sequence from lowest to highest and allowing each
successive stage to flow spontaneously, without specific cause, from the preceding
one. At bottom this logical procedure was astonishingly naive. In these schemes
we of our land and day stood at the summit of the ascent. Whatever seemed most
different from our customs          was therefore reckoned as earhest, and other phe-
nomena were disposed wherever they would best contribute to the straight even-
ness of the climb upward. The relative occurrence of phenomena in time and
space was disregarded in favor of their logical fitting into a plan. It was argued
that since we hold to definitely monogamous marriage, the beginnings of human
sexual union probably lay in the opposite condition of indiscriminate promis-
           we accord precedence to descent from the father, and generally
cuity. Since

know him, early society must have reckoned descent from the mother and no
one knew his own father. We abhor incest; therefore the most primitive men
normally married their          sisters.   These are fair samples of the conclusions or
assumptions of the classic evolutionistic school of anthropology of, say, i860 to
1890, which     still   believed that primal origins or ultimate causes could be deter-
mined, and that they could be discovered by speculative reasoning. The roster
of this evolutionistic-speculative school         was graced by some illustrious names.
Needless to say, these men tempered the basic crudity of their opinions by wide
knowledge, acuity or charm of presentation, and frequent insight and sound
sense in concrete particulars. In their day, two generations or three ago, under
the spell of the concept of evolution in           its first flush,   and of the postulate of

is   the ascription of environmentally or historically produced cultural backwardness to   or-

ganic and hereditary inferiority.
§ 6                                  SOCIETY AND CULTURE                                  7
progress at    its   strongest, such     methods of reasoning were almost       inevitable.
Today they are long since threadbare; they have descended to the level of news-
paper science or have become matter for idle amateur guessing. They are evi-
dence of a tendency toward the easy smugness of feeling oneself superior to all
the past. These ways of thought are mentioned here only as an example of the
beclouding that results from bad transference of biologically legitimate con-
cepts into the realm of the history of human society and culture, or viewing these
as unfolding according to a simple scheme of progress.



                                6.   SOCIETY AND CULTURE

      The relation between what is biological and what is sociocukural has just
been said to be a sort of central pivot of anthropology, from which the range of
the subject then extends outward on both sides, into the organic and into the
more-than-organic. It is now necessary to consider the more precise relation of
society and culture within the "organic-plus." In man, social           and cultural phe-
nomena normally occur associated much as the joint sociocukural phenomena
co-occur with the organic ones. Nevertheless, the social and the cultural aspects
within the larger sociocukural field can nearly always be distinguished.
      The Latin word socius denotes a companion or ally, and in their specific
sense the words "society"            and "social" refer to associations of individuals, to
group relations. When we speak of social structure, or the organization of
society, it is clear what is meant: the way a mass of people is constituted into

families, clans, tribes, states, classes, sets, clubs, communities, and the like. A
society is a group of interrelated individuals.
      But in a much wider sense the word "social" is also used, loosely, for what-
ever transcends the biological individual for what we have so far designated as
                                                  :




more-than-organic or sociocukural. Thus popular usage and imiversity curricula
recognize the physical, the biological, and the social sciences. The last-named
usually comprise history, government, economics, sociology, anthropology, hu-
man geography.' All these branches of study deal not only with man but with
men. In fact they deal primarily with the interrelations of men, or groups of
men.
      It so happens that       man is an essentially unique animal in that he possesses
speech faculty and the faculty of symbolizing, abstracting, or generalizing.
Through these two associated faculties he is able to commimicate his acquired
learning, his knowledge and accomplishments, to his fellows and his descendants
—in   fact, even to his ancestors, if they happen to be still alive and are willing to

listen to   him. So he transmits much of his ideas, habits, and achievements to
succeeding generations of men. This is something that no other animal can do,
at least    not to any significant degree. This special faculty is what was meant
      * Psychology   is   sometimes also partly included, sometimes reckoned rather with the
biological sciences.
8                         WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                               § ^


when someone called man the "time-binding" animal. He "binds" time by tran-
scending it, through influencing other generations by his actions.
    Now the mass of learned and transmitted motor reactions, habits, tech-
niques, ideas,                                              —
                  and values— and the behavior they induce is what constitutes
culture. Culture is the special  and exclusive product of men, and is their dis-
tinctive quality in the cosmos.
    Not only is culture a unique phenomenon, but it can be said to have a large
degree of influence. Of course culture can appear and go on only in and through
men, men in some kind of societies; without these it could not come into being
nor maintain itself. But, given a culture, the human beings that come under its
influence behave and operate quite differently from the way they would behave
under another culture, and still more diflferendy from the way they would act
under no culture. In the latter case they would be merely animals in their be-
havior. They are human beings precisely because they are animals plus a cul-
ture. Somehow human beings began long ago to produce culture and have con-

tinued ever since to produce it. In that sense culture derives wholly from men.
But the other side of the picture is that every human being is influenced by
other men who in turn have been influenced by still others in the direction of
maintaining and developing certain ideas, institutions, and standards.         And a
shorthand way of expressing this is to say that they are all influenced by the
culture they grow up in; in fact, in a broad way, they are dependent on it for
most of the specific things they do in their lives. Culture is therefore a powerful
                            —
force in human behavior in both individual and social behavior. Any given
form of culture, whether of the Eskimo or of our contemporary Western civi-
lization, has behind it a long history of other forms of culture by which it was
conditioned and from which it derives. And in turn each culture is changing and
shaping the forms of culture that will succeed it and which therefore more or
less depend on it. Culture thus is a factor that produces enormous effects, and as

such we study it.
    To be concrete, the reason our Louisiana Negro of a few pages back sings
the blues, goes to a Baptist church, and cultivates corn is that these things are
parts of American culture. If he had been reared in the Africa of some of his
forefathers, his dress, labor, food, religion, government, and amusements would
have been quite different, as well as his language. Such is what culture does to
men. And, as has been pointed out, the process of transmission, a process of
acquisition by learning by      which culture is perpetuated and operates on new
generations, is quite different from the process by which heredity    —another in-
dubitable force  —operates on them. Equally distinct are the   results.   No religion,
no tool, no idea was ever produced by heredity.
    Culture, then, is all those things about man that are more than just bio-
logical or organic, and are also more than merely psychological. It presupposes
bodies and personalities, as it presupposes men associated in groups, and it rests
upon them; but culture is something more than a sum of psychosomatic quali-
S 6                               SOCIETY AND CULTURE                                        9
ticsand actions. It is more than these in that its phenomena cannot be wholly
understood in terms of biology and psychology. Neither of these sciences claims
to be able to explain why there are axes and property laws and etiquettes and
prayers in the world, why they function and perpetuate as they do, and least
of all why these cultural things take the particular and highly variable forms or
expressions under which they appear. Culture thus is at one and the same time
the totality of products of social        men, and a tremendous force affecting all
human beings, socially and individually. And in this special but broad sense,
culture is universal for man.*       -'

    This brings us back to the relation of society and culture. Logically, the two
are separate, though they also coexist. Many animals are social. Ants and bees
and termites are very highly socialized, so much so that they can survive only in
societies. But they have no culture. There is no culture on the subhuman level.

Ants get along without culture because they are born with many highly specific
             men have only few and general instincts. Society without culture
instincts; but

exists on the subhuman level. But culture, which exists only through man,         who
is    also a social animal, presupposes society.     The speech faculty makes possible
the transmission and perpetuation of culture; and speech could evidently arise
only in a somewhat socially inclined species, though the most socialized animals,
the social insects, are held together by instinctive drives and do not need speech.
In man, however, language helps bind his societies successfully together. And
then culture, with its institutions and morals and values, binds each of them
together more and helps them to achieve more successful functioning.
        Human society and culture are thus perhaps best viewed as two intimately
intertwined aspects of a complex of phenomena that regularly occur only in
association;    whereas on the subhuman level,           societies    occur but there   is   no
significant culture.

        The occurrence of cultureless true societies among the insects makes it clear
that,    much as living bodies and "minds" underlie societies and cultures, and
precede them in evolution, so also, in turn, society precedes and underUes cul-
ture,    though in man the two always happen to come associated. At any rate,
society is a simpler and more obvious concept to grasp than is culture. That is
apparently why sociocultural phenomena— the phenomena of man's total history
in the broadest sense, which necessarily contain both social facts              and cultural
facts   —usually have their social aspects recognized       first.   The result has been that
       * Culture as dealt with by the anthropologist is obviously different from what is signi-

fied by speaking of "a   man of culture," or "a cultured person," in the popular sense, when
high culture, or special refinement of it, is meant. Similarly with the word "civilization."
When we ordinarily, as laymen, speak of "civilized" and "uncivilized" peoples, we mean,
more precisely, peoples of advanced and backward culture, respectively. By many anthro-
pologists, ever since Tylor, the words "civilization" and "culture" are often used to denote
the same thing; and always they denote only degrees of the same thing.
10                                WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                                          § 6


the social-plus<ultural combination  came at first to be called merely "social,"
and in popular and general use still carries that ambiguous name.
         For those who like their thinking concrete, it may help if they conceive the
sociocultural total in         man as similar to a sheet of carbon paper, of which the
fabric side represents society            and the coated side culture. It is obvious that to
use carbon paper effectively, we must distinguish the sides. And yet the sheet is
                                           when we are not concerned with
also a unit. Moreover, in certain respects, as
manifolding but only with some operation Uke sorting, counting, or packing, a
sheet of carbon paper is comparable to and is handled like a sheet of uncoated
paper      —
           which in turn would correspond to the cultureless animal societies. But
if    what we are interested in is the use of carbon paper, the impressions made by
it,   or if we wish to understand how it makes them, then it is the specific carbon
coating that we must examine, even though this comes only as a sort of dry-ink
film carried by paper of more or less ordinary cellulose fabric and texture. Like
all similes, this one has its limitations.          But it may be of help in extricating one-
self from       the confusing difficulty that the word "social" has acquired a precise
                              —
and limited meaning society as distinguishable from culture—in anthropology
                                                                  —
and sociology, while still having a shifting double meaning society including
or excluding culture         —in popular usage and in many general contexts.
        There is a real difficulty in the confusion that results from the varying usage
of the word "society." The difficulty is unfortunate; but it can be met by keeping
it    constandy in mind. In the present book, the effort is made to be consistent in
saying "culture" or "cultural" whenever anything cultural is referred to. "Social"
or "society" are used only with specific reference to the organization of indi-
viduals into a group and their resulting relations. Culture, on the contrary, what-
ever else it may also be        —such as a tremendous influence on human behavior—                     is

always first of all the product of men in groups: a set of ideas, attitudes, and
      —
habits "rules"         if   one will   —evolved by men to help them in their conduct of
life."


       *   A further complication arises from the fact that human societies are more than merely
innate or instinctual associations like beehives or anthills, but are also culturally shaped and
modeled. That is, the forms which human association takes             — into nations, tribes, sects, cult
groups, classes, castes, clans, and the like    —   all   these forms of social structure are as   much
the result of varying cultural influences as are the particular forms of economies, technol-
ogies, ideologies, arts, manners,       and morals at different times and     places. In short, specific
human societies arc more determined by culture than the reverse, even though some kind
of social life is a precondition of culture. And therewith social forms become part of culture!
This seemingly contradictory situation is intellectually diflBcult. It touches the heart of the
most fundamental social theorizing. A good many anthropologists and sociologists still
shrink from facing the problem or admitting the situation to be significant. The beginner
is    therefore advised not to try to master the difficulty at this stage, but to wait till he has
finished the book.      He will then presumably understand what the problem is and be in a
position cither to accept the solution suggested here, or to give his own answer. And if not
he will still be in the company of a lot of professional social scientists of good standing.
5 7                    ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES                          II



                7.   ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
      All the so-called social sciences deal with cultural as well as social data.
Caesar's reform of the calendar was a cultural innovation. His defeat of the sena-
torial party   was a social event, but it led to institutional and therefore cultural
changes, just as      it   affected thousands of individual lives for better or worse.
When a historian analyzes Caesar's character and motivation, he has in fact
gone beyond both society and culture and is operating in the field of informal,
biographical, individual psychology. In economics, a banking system, the gold
standard,    commerce by credit or barter, are institutions, and hence cultural
phenomena.
      Of all the social sciences, anthropology is perhaps the most distinctively
culture-conscious. It aims to investigate  human culture as such: at all times,
everywhere, in all its parts and aspects and workings. It looks for generalized
findings as to how culture operates     —         how human beings behave under
                                            literally,

given cultural conditions       —and for the major developments of the history of
culture.

      To this breadth of aim, one thing contributed. This was the early anthropo*
logical preoccupation with the very ancient and primitive and remote, which we

have already mentioned as a possible foible or drawback. Unlettered peoples
leave no biographies of their great men to distract one with personalities,         no
written histories of rulers and battles. The one thing we know about them is
their customs;       and customs are culture. The earliest men in fact have left us
evidence of just two things: parts of their organic bodies, as represented by their
bones; and, more abundantly, their culture, as represented by those of their
tools   and implements which happened to be of stone and imperishable, plus
such of their customs as may be inferable from these tools.
      Now while some of the interest of anthropology in its earlier stages was in
the exotic and the out-of-the-way, yet even this antiquarian motivation ulti-
mately contributed to a broader result. Anthropologists became aware of the
diversity of culture. They began to see the         tremendous range of its variations.
From that, they commenced to envisage it as a totality, as no historian of one
period or of a single people was ever Hkely to do, nor any analyst of his own
type of civilization alone. They became aware of culture as a "universe," or vast
field, in   which we of today and our own civilization occupy only one place of
many. The result was a widening of a fundamental point of view, a departure
from unconscious ethnocentricity toward relativity. This shift from naive self-
centeredness in one's own time and spot to a broader view based on objective
comparison is somewhat like the change from the original geocentric assump-
tion of astronomy to the Copernican interpretation of the solar system and the
subsequent still greater widening to a universe of galaxies.
12                           WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                              § 7


      A considerable differentiation of anthropology occurred on this point. The
other social sciences recognized culture in        its   specific manifestations as they
                                                             —
became aware of this or that fragment or aspect of it economic or juridical or
political or social. Anthropologists became aware of culture as such. From that

they went on to try to understand its generic features and processes and their
results.

      This is one of the few points that sets off from anthropology a science which
in the main is        almost a twin sister: sociology. Sociologists began mainly with
the analysis of our own civilization; they kept the exotic in its place. Therefore
as regards culture they tended to remain autocentric somewhat longer. Also, in
dealing with ourselves, they dealt mainly with the present, and from that they
went on to deal with the future, immediate and ultimate. This inevitably gave
to much of early sociology some reformist or ameliorative coloring, and often a

program for action. On the contrary, the reproach used to be directed at anthro-
pology that it did not concern itself with practical solutions, or aim at better-
ment. So far as this was true, it had at least the virtue of helping anthropology
to remain a general or fundamental science, undistracted by questions of appli-

cation from its search for basic findings and meanings. One other distinction
is that sociology has been more concerned with strictly social problems: the

relations of classes, the organization of family and society, the competitions of
individuals within a group. The names are indeed significant here: sociology
tends to be concerned with society, anthropology with anthropos, man, and his
specifically human product, culture.

      All in   all,   however, these are only differences of emphasis. In principle,
sociology and anthropology are hard to keep apart. Anthropologists rate Sumner
as one of the great names in the history of the study of man; and they feel they

stand on    common ground with American sociologists like Thomas, Ogburn,
Chapin, Sorokin, Wirth, Maclver, Parsons, and Lynd, to name only a few, and
with Britons and Frenchmen like Hobhouse, Ginsberg, Durkheim, and Mauss.
Sociologists on their side have been if anything even more hospitable. Almost to
a man they are culture-conscious, know anthropological literature well, and use
it   constantly.
      The relations of anthropology to psychology are obviously important. The
nature of human personality        —                                       —
                                or let us say simply human nature must enter
                man's social and cultural activity. However, the relations of
vitally into all of

anthropology and psychology are not easy to deal with. Psychologists began
by taking their own culture for granted, as if it were uniform and universal,
and then studying psychic behavior within it. Reciprocally, anthropologists
tend to take human nature for granted, as if it were uniform, and to study the
diverse cultures which rest upon it. In technical language, we have two variables,
"mind" and culture, and each science assumes that it can go ahead by treating
the other variable as if it were constant. All psychologists and anthropologists
now know that such constancy is not actual. But to deal with two variables, each
§ 7                ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES                          I3

highly complex, is difficult; and as for specific findings, only beginnings have
as yet been made. This whole set of problems of cultural psychology is taken up
in one of the later chapters of this book.
      The foregoing will make clear why anthropology is sometimes still regarded
as one of the newer subjects of study. As a distinct science, with a program of
its own, it is relatively recent, because it could hardly become well organized
until the biological  and the social sciences had both attained enough develop-
ment to specialize and become aware of the gap between themselves, and until
culture was recognized as a specific and distinctive field of inquiry.
     But as an unmethodical body of knowledge, as an interest, anthropology is
plainly one of the oldest of the sisterhood of sciences. It could not well be other-
wise than that men were at least as much interested in each other as in stars
and mountains and plants and animals. Every savage is a bit of an ethnolo-
gist about neighboring tribes and knows a legend of the origin of mankind.
Herodotus, the "father of history," devoted half of his nine books to pure
ethnology. Lucretius, a few centuries later, tried to solve by philosophical de-
duction and poetical imagination     many of the same problems that modern
anthropology is more cautiously attacking with concrete methods. Until nearly
two thousand years after these ancients, in neither chemistry nor geology noi
biology was so serious an interest developed as in anthropology.
                            CHAPTER SIX

                                   Language


93. LINGUISTIC   relationship: the speech family        94. CRITERIA     OF RELATIONSHIP
95. SOUND EQUIVALENCES    AND PHONETIC LAWS      96. THE PRINCIPAL SPEECH          FAMILIES

97. CLASSIFICATION OF LANGUAGES BY TYPES     98. PERMANENCE OF LANGUAGE AND RACE

99. THE BIOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL NATURES OF LANGUAGE                100. PROBLEMS OF THE

RELATION OF LANGUAGE AND CULTURE          lOI. PERIOD     OF THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE
102.   SPEECH, CULTURE, AND NATIONALITY       IO3. RELATIVE          WORTH OF LANGUAGES
104. SIZE OF VOCABULARY     IO5.   QUALITY OF SPEECH SOUNDS          I06. RAPIDITY   OF LIN-
GUISTIC CHANGE     107. SPEAKING AND WRITING     I08. DIFFUSION AND PARALLELISM IN

LANGUAGE AND CULTURE       IO9. CONVERGENT LANGUAGES         1 10.   UNCONSCIOUS FACTORS
IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE CHANGE          III. LINGUISTIC   AND CULTURAL STANDARDS


           93. LINGUISTIC    relationship: the speech family


THE          QUESTION that the historian and the anthropologist most frequently
          ask of the philologist is whether this and that language are or are not
         related. Relationship in such connection means descent from a             common
source, as two brothers are descended from the same father, or two cousins from
a common grandfather. If languages can be demonstrated to possess such com-
mon source, it is clear that the peoples who spoke them must at one time have
been in close contact, or perhaps have constituted a single people. If, on the other
hand, the languages of two peoples prove wholly dissimilar, though their racial
types and cultures be virtually identical, as indeed is sometimes found to be the
case   —witness the Hungarians and their neighbors—       it is   evident that an element
of discontinuous development must somewhere be reckoned with. Perhaps one
part of an originally single racial group gradually modified            its   speech beyond
recognition; or under the shock of conquest, migration, or other historical acci-
dent it may have entirely discarded its language in favor of a new and foreign
tongue. Or the opposite may be true: The two groups were originally wholly
separate   and distinct in many respects, but, being brought into contact, their
cultures interpenetrated, intermarriage followed,   and the two physical types
became assimilated into one while the languages remained dissimilar. In short,
if   one wishes full understanding of a people, one must take its language into
§94                          CRITERIA OF RELATIONSHIP                              I5

consideration. This means that the language must be classified. If a classification
is   to be more than merely logical or theoretical, if it is to be pragmatic and his-
torically significant, it must   have reference to relationship, development, origin.
In a word, it must be a genetic classification.
       The term used to indicate that two or more languages have a common
source but are unrelated to certain others, or seem so in the present state of
knowledge, is "linguistic family." "Linguistic stock" is frequendy used as a
synonym. This is the fundamental concept in the historical classification of
languages. Without a clear idea of its meaning one involves oneself in con-
fusion on attempting to use philology as an aid to other branches of          human
history.
       There is no abstract reason against referrring to a group of unrelated lan-
guages as a "family" because they are all spoken in one area, nor against de-
nominating as "families," as has sometimes been done, the major subdivisions
of a group of languages admittedly of common origin. Again, languages that
show certain similarities of type or structure, such as inflection, might con-
ceivably be put into one "family." But there is this objection to all such usages:
They do not commit themselves on the point of genetic relationship, or they
contradict it, or only partially exhaust it. Yet commonness of origin is so im-
portant in many connections that it is indispensable to have one term that de-
notes its ascertainable presence.    And for this quality there happens to be no
generally understood designation other than "linguistic family," or its synonym,
"linguistic stock." This phrase will therefore be used here strictly in the sense
of the whole of a group of languages sprung from a single source, and only in
that sense. Other groupings will be indicated by phrases like "languages of such
and such an area," "subfamily," "division of a family," or "unrelated languages
of similar type."



                        94. CRITERIA      OF RELATIONSHIP

      The question that first arises in regard to linguistic families is how the
relationship of their constituent idioms     is   determined. In brief, the method is
one of comparison. If a considerable proportion of the words and the gram-
matical forms of two languages are reasonably similar, similar         enough to in-
dicate that the resemblances cannot be due to mere accident, these similar words
and forms must go back to a common source; and if this source is not borrow-
ing by one language from another, the two tongues are related by descent from
a    common ancestor. If comparison fails to bring out any such degree of re-
semblance, the languages are classed in distinct families.
      Of course it is possible that the reason two languages seem unrelated is
not that they are really so, but that they have in the lapse of ages become so
much differentiated that one cannot any longer find resemblance between their
1                                      LANGUAGE                                 § 94


forms. In that event true relationship would be obscured by remoteness. Theo-
retically, there is   high probability that many families of languages customarily
regarded as totally distinct do go back in the far past to a common origin, and
that our ignorance of their history, or inability to analyze them deeply, prevents
recognition of their relationship. From time to time it happens that groups of
languages which at first seemed unrelated are shown by more intensive study
to possess     elements enough in     common to compel the recognition of their
original unity. In that case what were supposed to be several "families" become
merged in one. The scope of a particular family may be thus enlarged; but the
scope of the generic concept of "family" is not altered.
     Whether there is any hope that comparative philology may ultimately be
prosecuted with sufficient success to lead all the varied forms of human speech
back to a single origin is an interesting speculation. A fair statement is that such
a possibility, like any future event, cannot be absolutely denied, but that science
is still   extremely far from such a realization. Of more immediate concern is an
ordering and summarizing of the knowledge in hand with a view to such posi-
tive inferences as    can be drawn.
     In an estimate of the similarity of languages, items that count as evidence
must meet two requirements they must be alike, or traceably similar, or regu-
                                 :




larly   correspondent in sound; and they must be alike or similar or related in
meaning. This double requirement holds equally whether full words or sepa-
rable parts of words, roots, or grammatical       forms are compared. The English
word eel and the French ile, meaning island, are pronounced almost exactly
alike, yet their meaning is so different that no sane person would regard them

as sprung from the same origin. As a matter of fact ile is derived from Latin
insula, and is the source of the English isle, whereas eel has a cognate in German

aal. These prototypes insula and aal being as different in sound as they are in

meaning, any possibility that eel and ile might be related is easily disposed of.
Yet if the Latin and German cognates were lost, if nothing were known of the
history of the English and French languages, and if ile meant not island but, say,
fish or water sna\e, then it might be reasonable to think of a connection.

     Such doubtful cases, of which a certain proportion are likely to be adjudged
wrongly, are bound to come up in regard to the less well investigated languages,
particularly those of nations without writing, the earlier stages of whose speech
have perished without trace. In proportion as more is known of the history of
a language, or as careful analysis can reconstructmore of its past stages, the
number of such border-line cases obviously becomes fewer.
        Before genetic connection between two languages can be thought of, the
number of their elements similar in sound and sense must be reasonably large. An
isolated handful of resemblances obviously are either importations   —loan words
or the result of coincidence. Thus in the native Californian language known as
Yuki, \o means go, and l{om means come. Yet examination of Yuki reveals no
3 95                  SOUND EQUIVALENCES AND PHONETIC LAWS                           V]

further similarities. It would therefore be absurd to dream of a connection: one
swallow does not make a summer. This lone pair of resemblances means noth-
ing except that the mathematical law of probability has operated. Among the
thousands of words in one language, a number are likely to be similar in sound
to words of another language;       and of this number again a small fraction, per-
haps one or two or five in all, will happen to bear some resemblance in meaning
also.    In short, the similarities upon which a verdict of genetic relationship      is

based must be sufficiently numerous to fall well beyond the possibility of mere
coincidence; and it must also be possible to prove with reasonable certainty that
they are not the result of one language's borrowing words from another,              as,

for instance, EngHsh has borrowed from French and Latin.
        At the same time it is not necessary that the similarities extend to the point
of identity. In fact, too close a resemblance between part of the stock of        two
languages immediately raises a presumption of borrowing. For every language
is   continually changing, and once a mother tongue has split into several daugh-
ters, each of these goes on modifying its sounds, and gradually shifting the
meaning of its words, generation after generation. In short, where connection is
real, it must be veiled by a certain degree of change or distortion.

     Take the English word joot and the Latin word of the same meaning, pes.
To offhand inspection the sounds or forms of the two words do not seem similar.
The resemblance becomes more definite in other forms of pes, for instance the
genitive case ped-is or the accusative ped-em. Obviously the stem or elementary
portion of the Latin word is not pes but ped-; and the d is closer to the English
t of ^oot    than is the s of pes. The probability of relationship is increased by the
Greek word for foot, pons, whose stem proves to be pod-, with vowel closer to
that of English. Meanwhile, it would be recognized that there are English words
beginning with ped-, such as pedal, pedestrian, pedestal, all of which have a clear
association with the idea of foot. All these words however possess almost exact
equivalents in Latin. One would therefore be justified in concluding from these
facts what indeed the history of the languages proves     :   namely, that pedal, pedes-
trian, and pedestal are Latin words      taken over into English; whereas ]oot and
pes and pous, and for that matter German juss, are derivatives from a common
form that once existed in the now extinct mother tongue from which Greek and
Latin and English and German are derived.



               95.   SOUND EQUIVALENCES AND PHONETIC LAWS
        The question next arises whether it is possible to account for the distortions
that have modified the original word into joot, ped-, and so on. What has caused
the initial sound of this ancient word to become p in Latin and / in English,
and its last consonant to be d in Latin and Greek, t in English, and ss in Ger-
man? To answer this seemingly innocent question with accuracy for this one
1                                            LANGUAGE                                  § 95


word alone would involve a treatise on the whole group of languages in ques-
tion; and even then the causes, as causes, could hardly be set down with cer-
tainty. But it has proved possible to assemble a large number of instances of
parallel "distortion" in which Latin p corresponds to English /, or d to /. Evi-
dently philology has got hold of a generalized phenomenon here. Since father
corresponds to pater, full to pl-enus, for to pro, fish to piscis, and so on in case
after case, we are evidently face to face with a happening that has occurred with
regularity and to which the name "law" is therefore applicable.
        The / of foot and the p of pes are both lip sounds. They differ pre-emi-
nently in that / can be prolonged indefinitely, whereas     p is produced by a
momentary closure of the lips with stoppage of the breath. It is customary to
speak of sounds produced by a process like that for p as "stops." F, on the other
hand, is a "continuant," and more specifically a "fricative" or rubbing sound.
     The English word three begins with a sound which, although convention-
ally represented by the two letters M, is a simple sound and in a class with / in
being fricative. Th is formed by putting the tongue lightly across the teeth, just
as / is made by placing the lower lip against the edge of the upper teeth. In both
cases the breath is expelled with friction through a narrow passage.           Now if the
fricative / is represented in Latin          by the stop p, then, if regularity holds good,
the English fricative th ought to be represented in Latin by the stop sound in
the corresponding dental position; namely, /.             The Latin word for three is in
fact tres; for thin, ten-uis; for mother, mater; for thou, tu, and so on. The regu-

larity therefore     extends beyond the limits of the single labial class of sounds,
and applies with equal force to the dentals; and, it may be added, to the palatals
and gutturals as well.
        As one passes from English and Latin to German, one finds the initial sound
of the word meaning three, drei, to be somewhat different from th                and / but
still   clearly allied, since it also is   made by the tongue against the teeth. D is a
stop like t, but the vocal cords vibrate while it is being pronounced, whereas
in / the vocal cords are silent.    D   is   "voiced" or "sonant," t "unvoiced" or "surd."
Hence the formulation: Latin, surd stop; German, sonant stop; English, frica-
tive. This triple    equivalence can be substantiated in other words. For instance,
ten-uis, diinn, thin; tu, du, thou.

        If it is the English word that contains a surd stop, what will be the      equiva-
lent in Latin      and German? Compare ten, Latin decern, German zehn, pro-
nounced tsehn. Again the three classes of sounds run parallel; but the place of
their appearance in the three languages has shifted.
    The third possible placing of the three sounds in the three languages is
when English has the sonant stop d. By exclusion it might be predicted that
Latin should then show the fricative th and the German the surd stop /. The
word daughter confirms this. The German is tochter. Latin in this case fails us,
the original corresponding stem having gone out of use and been replaced by
§ 95                    SOUND EQUIVALENCES AND PHONETIC LAWS                             I9

the word filia. Hut CIrcek, whose sounds tend to             aHgn with those of Latin as
opposed to Enghsh and German, provides the th as expected: thygater.
       Let us bring together these results so that the eye may grasp them:


                                  SOUND EQUIVALENCES
              Latin, Greek       surd stop       sonant stop          fricative
              German             sonant stop     fricative            surd stop
              English            fricative       surd stop            sonant stop

              Latin, Greek       tres            duo                  thygater
              German             drci            zwei                 tochter
              English            three           two                  daughter


These relations apply not only to the dentals d, t, th          {s,   z),   which have been
chosen for illustration, but also to the labials p, b, f, and to the palatals ^, g,
h{gh,ch).
       It is evident   that most of the sounds occur in all three groups of languages,
but not in the same words. The sound t is common to English, Latin, and Ger-
man, but when it appears in a particular word in one of these languages it is
replaced by d and th in the two other languages. This replacing is known as a
"sound shift." The sound shifts just enumerated constitute the famous Grimm's
Law. This was the first important phonetic law or system of sound substitutions
discovered in any family. Yet it is only one of a number of shifts that have been
worked out for the Indo-European family of languages to which English, Ger-
man, and Latin belong. So far, only stopped and fricative consonants have been
reviewed here, and no vowels have been considered. Other languages, in the
Indo-European family and in other families, also show shifts, but often different
ones, as between / and «, or / and \, or p and ^.
       The significance of a shift lies in the fact that its regularity cannot easily be
explained on any other ground than that the words in which the law is operative
must originally have been the same. That is, Latin duo, German zwei, English
ttvo are all only variants of a word that meant "two" in the mother tongue from
which these three languages are descended. This example alone is of course
insufficient evidence for the existence of such a common mother tongue. But

that each of the shifts discussed     is substantiated by hundreds or thousands of

                                        —
words in which it holds true this fact puts the shift beyond possibihty of
mere accident: the explanation of coincidence is ruled out. The resemblances
therefore are both genuine and genetic. The conclusion becomes inevitable that
the languages thus linked are later modifications of a former single speech.
     It is in this way that linguistic relationship is determined. Where an ancient

sound shift, a law of phonetic change, can be established by a sufficient number
of cases, argument ceases. It is true that when most of a language has perished,
or when an unwritten language has been but fragmentarily recorded or its
analysis not carried far, a strong presumption of genetic unity may crowd in
20                                            LANGUAGE                                     § 95


on the investigator who is not yet in a position to present the evidence o£ laws.
The indications may be strong enough to warrant a tentative assumption of
relationship.       But the final   test is   always the establishment of laws of sound
equivalence that hold good with regularity
                                                      —part-for-part correspondence, the
biologist would say.



                        90.   THE PRINCIPAL SPEECH FAMILIES
     The number of linguistic families or stocks is not a matter of much theo-
                                                           ^



retical import.From what has already been said it appears that the number can
perhaps never be determined with absolute accuracy. As knowledge accumu-
lates and dissection is carried to greater refinements, new similarities will be

uncovered and will serve to unite what now seem to be separate stocks. Yet for
the practical purpose of classifying           and relating peoples the linguistic family
will       remain an indispensable     historical tool.   A rapid survey of the principal
families will therefore be given.
       In Asia and Europe, which must be considered a unit in this connection,
the number of linguistic stocks, according to conservative reckoning, does not
exceed twenty-five, and may be fewer. The most important of these, in point of
number of speakers, is the Indo-European or Indo-Germanic or Aryan family,
whose territory for several thousand years has comprised southwestern Asia and
the greater part, but by no means all, of Europe. The most populous branches
of the Indo-European family are the Indie, Slavic, Germanic, and Romance or
Latin. Others are Persian or Iranic, Armenian, Greek, Albanian, Baltic or
Lithuanian, and Keltic. From Europe various Indo-European languages, such
as English, Spanish,          French, Russian, have in recent centuries been carried to
other continents, until in some, such as the Americas and Australia, much the
greater area is now inhabited by peoples speaking Indo-European. (As the ac-
companying maps are intended to depict the historical or native distribution of
languages, they omit this recent diffusion, important as it is.)           It   will be noted
that the home distribution of Indo-European has the form of a long belt stretch-
ing from western Europe to northeastern India, with an interruption only in
Asia Minor (Fig. 14). Turkish peoples displaced Indo-Europeans there about a
thousand years ago, thus breaking the territorial continuity. It is probable that
another link between the western and eastern Indo-Europeans once stretched
around the north and east of the Caspian Sea. Here also there are Turks now.
       Almost equaling Indo-European in the number of its speakers is the Sinitic
family, which is generally held to include Chinese proper with its dialects; the
Tibeto-Burman branch; the T'ai or Shan-Siamese branch; and probably some
minor divisions.
       ^   "Linguistic family" and "linguistic stock" are used as synonyms in this book.   The
criterion of both is not the degree of similarity of the included languages, but the fact (or
presumptive fact) of relationship through common descent.
                 FIG. 14.         LINGUISTIC FAMILIES OF ASIA AND EUROPE
       Basque. 2, Indo-European. 3, Caucasian (perhaps two families). 4, Ural-Altaic (a,
      I,

Finno-Ugric; B, Samoyed; c, Turkish; d, Mongol; e, Tungus-Manchu) 5, Semitic. 6,                         .




Dravidian.        7,   Kolarian.       8,    Sinitic   (a,   Chinese;    b,   Shan-Siamese;   c,    Tibeto-Burman;      d,

Miao, Lolo, Moso,             etc.).    (9,   Khasi, belongs to 11.)           10,   Annamese.     11,   Mon-Khmer.    12,

Sakai.     13,    Semang.      14,     Andaman.        15,   Malayo-Polynesian or Austronesian.              16,   Korean.
17,   Japanese.        18,   Ainu.     19,    Ket or Yeniseian.         20,   Yukaghir. 21, Chukchi-Koryak-Kam-
chadal. 22, Eskimo.
22                                   LANGUAGE                                     § 9^


     In extent of territory occupied the Altaic stock rivals the Indo-European. Its
three main divisions, Turkish, Mongolian, and Tungus-Manchu, cover most of
northern and central Asia and some tracts in Europe. The Turks, as just noted,
are the only linguistic group that within the period of history has gained ap-
preciable territory at Indo-European expense. The Uralic or Finno-Ugric family
has eastern Europe and northwestern Asia as its home, with the Finns and the
Hungarian Magyars      as the   longest-civilized   and best-known   representatives.
This is a geographically scattered stock. Most scholars unite the three Altaic
divisions with Finno-Ugric and Samoyed into an even larger Ural-Altaic family
characterized by certain structural similarities; but some deny the reaUty of such
a Ural-Altaic family   on the ground that the       similarities are not original or

genetic.
   Of the Semitic family, Arabic is the chief living representative, with
Amharic and Tigre in Ethiopia as little-known African half-sisters. Arabic is
one of the most widely diffused of all languages, and as the orthodox vehicle of
Mohammedanism has served an important function as a culture-carrier. Several
great nations of ancient times also spoke Semitic tongues: Babylonians, As-
syrians, Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and    Hebrews.
     Southern India is Dravidian. While people of this family enter little into
our customary thoughts, they number over fifty millions. Japanese and Korean
also merit   mention as important stock tongues. Annamese, by some regarded
as a Sinitic offshoot, may constitute a separate stock. Several minor famiHes will

be found on the Asiatic map, most of them consisting of uncivilized peoples or
of those limited in their territory or the number of their speakers. Yet, so far
as can be judged from present knowledge, they form units of the same order of
independence as the great Indo-European, Semitic, and Ural-Altaic stocks.
     Language distributions in Africa are in the main simple         (Fig. 15).   The
whole of northern Africa this side of latitude 10° N., and parts of East Africa to
and beyond the equator, were at one time Hamitic. This is the family to which
the language of ancient Egypt belonged. Hamitic and Semitic, named after sons
of Noah, probably derive from a common source, in which case there would be
only the Hamitic-Semitic family to be reckoned with. Also, in that eventuality
the separation of the common mother tongue into the African Hamitic and the
Asiatic Semitic divisions must have occurred in very ancient times. In the past
thousand years Hamitic has yielded ground before Semitic, owing to the spread
of Arabic in Mohammedan Africa.
     Africa south of the equator is the home of the great Bantu family, except
in the extreme southwest of the continent.     There a tract of considerable area,
though of small populational density, was in the possession of the backward
Bushmen and Hottentots, distinctive in their physical types as well as their
languages.
     Between the equator and latitude 10° N., in the belt known as the Sudan,
there is much greater speech diversity than elsewhere in Africa. The languages
 ^9^                                THE PRINCIPAL SPEECH FAMILIES                                        23
 of the     Sudan     fall   into several families, perhaps into a fairly large                    number.
 Opinion conflicts or is unsettled as to their classification. They are, at
                                                                                                   least in
 the main, non-Hamitic and non-Bantu; but this negative fact
                                                                                  does not preclude
 their having had either a single or a dozen origins. It has
                                                             usually been easier to
 throw them all into a vague group designated as non-Hamitic and
                                                                         non-Bantu
 than to compare them in detail.
      In Oceania conditions are similar to those of Africa, in that
                                                                    there are a few
 great, widely branching stocks and one rather
                                                    small area, New Guinea, of
 astounding speech diversity. Indeed, superficially this variety is
                                                                                      the outstancling




                      FIG. 15-        LINGUISTIC FAMILIES OF AFRICA
    I,   Hamiuc. 2, Semitic (a, old; b, Arabic, intrusive in former Hamitic territory since
Mohammed).       3,   Bantu.   4,   Hottentot.   5,   Bushman, perhaps   related to   last.   6,   Malayo
Polynesian. X,   The Sudan, not consistently classified.
24                                     LANGUAGE                                        § 96


linguistic feature of   New Guinea. The hundreds of Papuan dialects of the island
look as if they might require twenty or more families to accommodate them.
However, it is inconceivable that so small a population should time and again
have evolved totally new forms of speech. It is much more likely that some-
thing in the mode of life or the habits of mind of the Papuans has favored the
breaking-up of their speech into local dialects and an unusually rapid modifi-
cation of these into markedly differentiated languages. What the circumstances
were that favored this tendency to segregation and change can be only conjec-
                New Guinea ranks with the Sudan, western North America,
tured. At any rate,
and the Amazonian region of South America as one of the areas of greatest
linguistic multiplicity.
     All the remainder of Oceania is either Australian or Malayo-Polynesian in
speech.The Australian idioms have been imperfectly recorded. They were
numerous and locally varied, but may derive from a single mother tongue.
   All the East Indies, including part of the Malay Peninsula, and all of the
island world of the Pacific    —Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia, always            ex-
cepting interior New Guinea     —are the habitat of the closely knit Malayo-Poly-
nesian or Austronesian family, whose unity was early recognized by philolo-
gists.   From Madagascar to Easter Island this speech stretches more than half-
way around our planet.
     North and South America, according to the usual reckoning, contain more
native families of speech than all the remainder of the world. The conventional
conservative classification allots forty or more families each to North and South
America. These families varied greatly in size at the time of discovery, some
being confined to a few hundred souls, whereas others stretched through tribe
after tribe over enormous areas. Their distribution is so irregular and their areas

so disproportionate as to be impossible of vivid representation except on a large-
scale    map in colors. The most important in extent of territory, number of
speakers, or the cultural importance of the nations adhering to them, in North
America are: Eskimo, Athabascan, Algonkin, Iroquoian, Muskogean, Siouan,"
Uto-Aztecan, Maya; and in South America: Chibcha, Quechua, Aymara, Arau-
canian, Arawak, Carib, Tupi, Ge. It will be seen on the maps (Figs. 16 and 17)
that these sixteen groups held much the greater part of the area of the double
continent, the remaining smaller areas being crowded with perhaps four times
as many stocks. Obviously, as in      New Guinea, such a multiplicity cannot well
have been original; in fact, recent studies are tending to consolidate the New
World families into fewer and fewer groups. But the evidence for such reduc-
tions is necessarily difficult to find and much of it is still incomplete. The large
stocks named above have been long determined an-d are universally accepted.

                                            4, 5, 6 of map 16) are often united with Hokan,
    2 Iroquoian, Siouan, Muskogean (nos.

                                                           —
Caddoan, and others into a Hokan-Siouan "superfamily" something like Ural-Altaic
which seems a probable historical unit in origin, but remains unproved as such.
            FIG. l6.         LINGUISTIC FAMILIES OF NORTH AMERICA
    I,   Eskimo.    2,   Athabascan.   3,   Algonkin.   4,                5, Siouan. 6, Muskogean. 7,
                                                                 Iroquoian.
Uto-Aztecan.   8,    Mayan. SAi, Arawak = No.                i    and SA8, Chibcha = No. 8 of South
American map        (Fig. 17).   The white areas are occupied by a greater number of smaller
families, according to the usual classification.
               FIG. 17.     LINGUISTIC FAMILIES OF SOUTH AMERICA
      I,   Arawak. 2, Carib. 3, Ge. 4, Tupi. 5, Araucanian. 6, Aymara.   7,   Quechua   (Inca).
8,   Chibcha. 9; Tucano.   10,   Pano.          Guaycuru. 13, Puelche. 14, Tehuelche.
                                         11, Diaguita.   12,
Smaller families in unnumbered areas. Nos. i and 2 extend into the West Indies, No. 8
into Central America. (After Chamberlain and Jimenez Moreno)
§ 97                    CLASSIFICATION OF LANGUAGES BY TYPES                                   27

     About a third of humanity today speaks some form of Indo-European.
Nearly a quarter talks some dialect of Sinitic stock. Semitic, Dravidian, Ural-
Altaic, Japanese, Malayo-Polynesian, Bantu have each from about 50 to 100
million speakers. The languages included in these eight families form the speech
of approximately 90 per cent of living human beings.



                   97. CLASSIFICATION OF            LANGUAGES BY TYPES

       A customary nongenetic classification groups languages or families accord-
ing to their structure into four main types: inflective, agglutinating, isolating,
and polysynthetic or incorporating. These classes are not logically co-ordinate.
    An inflecting or fusional language expresses relations or grammatical form
by adding prefixes or suffixes that cannot stand alone, or if they stood alone
would mean nothing, and which therefore can be considered as fused into the
word; or it expresses relations by internal modification of the stem. The -ing of
frilling is such an inflection; so are the vowel changes and the ending -en in the

conjugation write, wrote, written.
       An isolating language expresses relations by separate words or isolated
particles.   Words are always unexpanded, unaltered stems or radicals. English
heart of     man is isolating, where man's heart and Latin cor homin-is are in-
flective.

       An agglutinative language "glues together" into solid words, or juxtaposes,
elements for which a definite, exclusive, regular meaning of their own can be
traced or felt. English does not use this mechanism for purposes that are ordi-
narily reckoned as strictly grammatical, but does employ it for the related pur-
pose of derivation.           Under-ta\e,   rest-less,   fore-go,   moon-like,    are   examples;
qtiic\-ly, for quickjlike, is a border-line case.

       Polysynthetic languages are agglutinative ones carried to a high pitch, or
those which can unite words into equivalents of fair-sized sentences. Steam-boat-
propeller-blade might be called a polysynthetic form if we spoke or wrote it in
one word as modern German might. Incorporating languages are generally in-
cluded in polysynthetic ones: they embody the object noun, or the pronoun rep-
resenting    it,   into the   word that contains the verb stem. This construction is
totally foreign to English.^

       Each of these classes evidently defines one or more distinctive linguistic
processes. The mechanisms at work are different. But no one language operates
wholly with one process. The instances given show that English employs most
of them. Obviously, therefore, it would be arbitrary to classify English as being
outright of one type. This is also the situation for most other languages. There

    ^ Noun incorporation seems mostly to form compounds of nouns with verbs, or verbs

with verbs, to form verbs: "to rabbit-kill," "to run-kill," and so on. This construction
happens to be so alien to the genius of Indo-European that            it   has been singled out as
notable. Pronominal incorporation is discussed below, in § 108.
28                                         LANGUAGE                                         § 97


are in fact dozens and dozens of mechanisms by which languages operate, and
the combinations of these in particular languages are indefinitely numerous.
To force these many different actual structures into four classes may be con-
venient, but is logically roughshod.
      There are other difficulties. English, for instance, was mainly inflecting
fifteen  hundred years ago, but today more largely uses isolating processes. We
still say John's house, but we use heart of man perhaps more often than man's

heart; and house's top would strike a listener as so odd that he might think he
had misheard. Camest thou? for Did you come? would still be intelligible as
poetry, but in conversation it would be construed as a stilted attempt at a joke.
Which pigeonhole, inflecting or isolating, does modern English go into? And
how valid are compartments when languages can wriggle themselves like this
from one into another compartment in a fairly short span of their history.''
       Any classification into types is basically logical; whereas a genetic classi-
fication that reflects  development and relationship must be empirical. And the
only genetic classification yet devised for languages is based on the kind of com-
parisons described, and yields speech families              —   certain, probable, or possible
families, according as the data are more or less full, exact, and carefully analyzed.
       Also, the type classification started with the idea that Latin, Sanskrit, and
Hebrew were both inflecting and superior in kind. Chinese, whose literature is
also ancient, made the isolating class respectable; but the other types were con-
sidered inferior. These implications of better and worse have tended to remain
attached to the classification; and         it   is   obvious that such judgments have no
place in scientific analysis or description.*



                     98.   PERMANENCE OF LANGUAGE AND RACE
       It   is   sometimes thought that because a           new speech is readily learned,
especially in youth,        language is a relatively unstable factor in human history,
less   permanent than race. It is necessary to guard against two fallacies in this
connection. The first is to argue from individuals to societies; the second, to
believe that because change is possible, it normally takes place.
       As a matter of fact, languages often preserve their existence, and even their
territory,       with surprising tenacity in the face of conquest, new religions and
culture,     and the economic disadvantages of unintelligibility. Today, Breton, a
Keltic dialect, maintains itself in France as the everyday language of the people
in the isolated province of Brittany         —a sort of philological      fossil. It   has with-
stood the influence of two thousand years of contact with Latin, with Saxon and

       * Sapir   has proposed a structural type classification into Pure-relational and Mixed-
relational languages, each subdivided into Deriving or Complex and Nonderiving or Simple,
and then qualified by the concepts here discussed. But the scheme seems never to have been
applied in actual description; perhaps because the scale from concrete to relational values on
which the classification is based is sliding, and not easily defined objectively.
^   98                  l^ERMANtNCt Oh LANCUA(;E AND RACE                         29
Frankisli Cicriiian, with French. Its Welsh sister tongue flourishes in s[)ite of the
Anglo-Saxon speech of the remainder of Great Britain. Ancient Egypt was con-
quered by the Hyksos, the Assyrian, the Persian, the Macedonian, and the
Roman, but whatever the official speech of the ruling class, the people continued
to speak Egyptian. Finally, the     Arab came and brought with him a new re-
ligion,     which favored use of the Arabic language. After four thousand years,
Egypt at last became Arabic-speaking; but until a century or two ago the Coptic
language, the daughter of the ancient Egyptian tongue of five thousand years
ago, was kept alive by the native Christians along the Nile, and even today        it

survives in ritual. The boundary between French on the one side and German,
Dutch, and Flemish on the other has been accurately known for over six hun-
dred years. With all the wars and conquests back and forth across the speech
line,                            and cultural influences, this Hne has scarcely
          endless political changes
shifted     anywhere more than a few dozen miles, and in places has not moved
the distance of a comfortable afternoon's stroll.
         While populations can learn and unlearn languages, they tend to do so
with reluctance and infinite slowness, especially while they remain in their
inherited territories. Speech tends to be one of the most persistent populational
characters; and "ethnic" boundaries are most often speech boundaries.
         In general, where two populations mingle, the speech of the more numerous
most often prevails, even if it be that of the subject nationality. A wide gap in
culture may overcome the influence of the majority; yet the speech of even a
culturallymore active and advanced population ordinarily wrests permanent
                                    where there is an actual crowding-out or
territory to itself only slowly, except

numerical swamping of the natives. This explains the numerous survivals and
"islands" of speech: Keltic, Albanian, Basque, Caucasian, in Europe; Dravidian
and Kolarian in India; Nahuatl and Maya and many others in modern Mexico;
Quechua in Peru; Aymara in Bolivia; Tupi in Brazil. There are cases to the
contrary, like the rapid spread of Latin in most of Gaul after Caesar's conquest,
but they seem exceptional.
         As to the relative permanence of race and speech, everything depends on
the side     from which the question is approached. From the point of view of
hereditary strains, race  must be the more conservative, because it can change
rapidly only through admixture with another race, whereas a language may be
completely exchanged in a short time. From the point of view of history, how-
ever, which regards human actions within given territories, speech is often more
stable. Wars or trade or     migration may bring one racial element after another
into an area until the type has become altered or diluted, and yet the original
language, or one directly descended from it, remains. The introduction of the
Negro from Africa to America illustrates this distinction. From the point of
view of biology, the Negro has at least partially preserved his type, although
he has taken on a wholly new language. As a matter of history, the reverse is
30                                      LANGUAGE                                       § 9^


true: pure English continues to be the speech of the southern                United States,
whereas the population now consists of two races instead of one, and the Negro
element has been altered by the infusion of white blood. It is a fallacy to think
that because an individual can learn French or become a Christian and yet is
powerless to change his eye color or head shape, therefore the language or the
culture of large populations      is   necessarily less stable than race. Speech       and
culture have an existence and a continuity of their own, whose integrity does
not depend on hereditary integrity. The two may move together or separately.



     99.   THE BIOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL NATURES OF LANGUAGE
     It is a truism, but one   important never to forget in the study of man, that
the faculty of speech is innate, but that every language is wholly acquired. More-
over, the environment of which languages are the product is not a natural one
that is, geographic or climatic —but        All words and speech forms that are
                                         social.

learned    —and they constitute almost the complete mass of language—are imi-
tated directly from other human beings. Those new forms which from time to
time come into use rest on existing speech material, and are shaped according
to tendencies already operative although perhaps more or less hidden. The new
or changed forms cannot generally be attributed, as regards origin, to particular
individuals; in short, they present a history similar to that of inventions and
new institutions. Language thus is a superorganic product, which fact of course
does not contradict   —indeed implies—that         it   rests   on an organic basis.
    The "speech" of the animals other than man has something in common
with human languages. It consists of sounds produced by the body, accompanied
by certain mental activities or conditions, and capable of arousing certain definite
responses in other individuals of the species (§ 20). It differs from human speech
in several fundamental particulars. First of all, the cries and calls and murmurs
of the brutes appear to be wholly instinctive.      A fowl raised alone in an incubator
will peep and crow or cluck as it will scratch and peck.      A dog reared by a foster
cat will bark, or growl, or whine, or yelp         when he has attained the requisite
age and on application of the proper stimulus, as he will wag or crouch or hunt
or dig, and no differently from the dog brought up in association with other
dogs. By contrast, the Japanese infant turned over to American foster parents
never utters or knows a single Japanese word, learns only English, and learns
that as well as do his Caucasian stepbrothers. Evidently, then, animal speech is
to all intents wholly organic and not at all "social" in the sense of being super-
organic. If this summary is not absolutely exact, it departs from the truth only
infinitesimally.
     Further, animal speech has no "meaning," does not serve as a vehicle of
"communication."      The opposite is often assumed popularly, because we an-
thropomorphize. If it is said that a dog's growl "means" anger, and that his
§   100         PROBLEMS OF RELATION OF LANGUAGE AND CULTURE                     3I

bark "communicates" suspicion or excitement to his fellows, the words are used
in a sense different from their significance when we say that the term red
"means" the color at one end of the spectrum, or that a message of departure
"communicates" information. The animal sounds convey knowledge only of
subjective states. They "impart" the fact that the utterer feels anger, excitement,
fear, pain,    contentment, or some other affect. These are immediate reflex     re-

sponses to a feeling.  They may be "understood" in the sense that a sympa-
thetic feeling is evoked, or at any rate mobilized; and thereby they may lead
or tend to lead to action by the hearers. In the same way, any man instinctively
"understands" the moan of a fellow human being. But the moan does not tell
whether the pain is of a second's or a week's duration, caused by a blow or by
gas in the bowel, by an ulcerated tooth or by mental anguish. There        is no

communication of anything objective, of facts or ideas as distinct from feelings,
as when we say red or breal{ or up or water. Not one of these simple concepts
can be communicated as such by any brute speech.
      One consequence is the "arbitrariness" of human speech. Why should the
sound cluster red denote that particular color rather than green ? Why does the
same word often designate quite distinct ideas in different languages the ap-—
proximate sound combination lay meaning "milk" in French; lass "a girl" in
English, "tired" in French, "allow" in German? Such facts are physiologically
arbitrary; just as it is physiologically arbitrary and organically meaningless that
Americans live in a republic and Britons under a monarchy, or that they drive
respectively to the right   and the left on the road. Phenomena like these have
other cultural or superorganic phenomena as their immediate antecedents and
preconditions. In the light of these antecedents, viewed on the level of history,
they are intelligible:   we know why the United States is a republic, we can
trace the development of words like lay and lass. It is only    from the biological
plane that such facts seem nonsignificant or arbitrary.


    100.   PROBLEMS OF THE RELATION OF LANGUAGE AND CULTURE
      This association of language and civilization    —or   better, us say the
                                                                       let

linguistic    and nonlinguistic constituents of culture —brings up the problem
whether it would be possible for one to exist without the other. Actually, of
course,    no such case is known. Speculatively, different conclusions might be
reached. It is difficult to imagine any generalized thinking taking place without
words or symbols derived from words. Religious beliefs and certain phases of
social organization also seem dependent on speech: caste ranking, marriage regu-

lations, kinship recognition, law, and the like.   On the other hand, it is conceiv-
able that a considerable series of simple inventions      might be made, and the
applied arts might be developed in a fair measure by imitation, even among a
speechless people. Finally there seems no reason why certain elements of culture,
32                                    LANGUAGE                                      ^ 100


such as music, should not flourish as successfully in a society without as with
language.
    For the converse, a cultureless species of animal might conceivably develop
and use a form of true speech. Such communications as "The river is rising,"
"Bite it off," "What do you find inside.''" would be within the range of thought
of such a species. But the significant fact in this connection is that no non-
human animal possesses even traces of such power of communication. Why?
Possibly because such a language would lack survival value for the species, in
the absence of accompanying culture.
       On the whole, however, it would seem that language and culture rest, in a
way that is not yet fully understood, on the same set of faculties, and that these,
for some reason that is still more obscure, developed in the ancestors of man
while remaining in abeyance in other species. Even the anthropoid apes seem
virtually devoid of the impulse to communicate, as we have seen earUer (§29),
in spite of freely expressing their affective states of mind by voice, facial gesture,
and bodily movement. The most responsive to man of all species, the dog, learns
to accept a considerable stock of culture in the sense of fitting himself to it      :   he
develops conscience and manners, for example. Yet, however highly bred, he
does not hand on his accomplishments to his progeny, who again depend on
their human masters for what they acquire.    A group of the best-reared dogs left
to themselves for a    few years would lose all their politeness and revert to the
predomestic habits of their species. In short, the culture impulse is lacking in
the dog except so far as it is instilled by man and kept instilled by him; and in
most animals it can notoriously be instilled only to a very limited degree. In the
same way, the impulse toward communication can be said to be wanting. A
dog may understand a hundred words of command and express in his behavior
fifty shades of emotion; only rarely does he even seem to try to communicate

information of objective fact. Very likely we are only attributing to him in these
rare cases the impulse we should feel in the same situation. In the event of a
member of the family being injured or lost, it is certain that a good dog ex-
presses his agitation, uneasiness, disturbed attachment; but it is        much less cer-
tain that he intends to summon help, as we spontaneously incline to believe be-
cause such summoning would be our own reaction to the situation.
       The history and the causes of the development in incipient man of the group
of traits that may be called the faculties for speech and civihzation remain one
of the darkest areas in the field of knowledge. It        is   plain that these faculties
lie   essentially in the sphere of personality,   and therefore of the body. Yet men
and the apes are far more similar in their general physiques than they are in
the degree of their ability to use their physiques for superphysiological purposes.
Or, if the antithesis of physical and mental seems unfortunate, it might be said
that the growth of the faculties for speech and culture is connected more with
special developments of the central nervous system than           with those of the re-
mainder of the body.
§   102                     SPEECH, CULTURE, AND NATIONALITY
                                                                                    33

                      101. PERIOD OF     THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE
        Is, human language as old as culture? It is difficult to be positive,
              then,
because words perish like beliefs and institutions, whereas stone tools may
endure as direct evidence. On the whole, however, it would appear that the first
rudiments of what deserves to be called language are about as ancient as the
first   culture manifestations, mainly because of the theoretically close association
of the two.         The skull interiors of fossil men, which conform fairly closely to
the brain surface, have been construed by          some authorities as indicating that
the speech areas of the cortex were sufficiently developed, even in forms as old
as Sinanthropus, to suggest that these races talked.
        Such findings may be accepted as highly tentative. What is more to the
point, however, is that anthropologists are in general         agreement that language
grew up in correlation with culture, if indeed it was not its necessary antecedent.
Cultural activity, even of the siniplest kind, inevitably rests on ideas or gen-
eralizations; and such or any ideas, in turn, human minds seem to be able to
formulate and operate with and transmit only through speech. Nature consists
of an endless array of particular phenomena. To combine these particulars into
a generaUzation or an abstraction, such as passing from potential awareness of
the thousands of stones along a river bed into the idea of stone as a distinctive
material      —   this synthesis appears to require the   production of some kind of a
symbol, perhaps as a sort of psychological catalyzing agent or point of crystalli-
zation: a symbol such as the sounds that          make up the word stone. In short,
culture can probably function only          on the basis of abstractions, and these in
turn seem to be possible only through speech, or through a secondary substitute
for   spoken language such as writing, numeration, mathematical and chemical
notation, and the like. Culture, then, began when speech was present; and from
then on, the enrichment of either meant the further development of the other.
        This view is hardly demonstrable; but it seems pretty much to represent the
belief of such anthropologists as have grappled with the problem.



                      102. SPEECH,    CULTURE, AND NATIONALITY

    This assumption as to the rise of culture raises the question whether one
ought to speak of language and culture or rather of language as a part of culture.
So far as the process of their transmission is concerned, and the type of mech-
anism of their development, it is clear that language and culture are one. For
practical purposes it is generally convenient to keep them distinct. There is no
doubt that two peoples can share in what is substantially the same culture and
yet speak fundamentally different idioms          and therefore feel themselves to be
separate nationalities; for instance, the Finno-Ugric          Magyars or Hungarians
among the adjacent Slavs, Germans, and Latins of central Europe, who are all
34                                           LANGUAGE                                          5 I**^


Indo-Europeans. British and Americans speak the same standard language; they
are closely related, in fact derived, in culture;           and yet their geographical sepa-
ration has been followed by enough divergence of institutions and habits to have
led to political separation, which in turn induces both populations to feel them-
selves as distinct nationalities. In fact, nationality         is   essentially a feeling of dis-

tinctness or unity, of sense of demarcation              between in-group and out-group.
Thus the concept "nationality" is fundamentally subjective, whereas both lan-
guages and cultures are objectively alike or unlike, unitary or distinct.
       It is   therefore logically inadmissible and risky in practice to infer from na-
tionality to language or culture, or vice versa. It            is   unsound much as it is un-
sound to assume an identity of race, language, and culture for a given area, or to
argue from the prevalence of one to the other (§80).
    Nevertheless, speech and culture do tend to form something of a unit as
opposed to race. It is possible for a population to substitute a wholly new lan-
guage and type of civilization for the old ones, as the American Negro has done,
and yet to remain relatively unmodified racially, or at least to carry on its former
physical type unchanged in a large proportion of its members. On the other
hand, a decisive change of speech without some change of culture seems im-
possible. Certainly wherever Sumerian, Greek, Latin, Spanish, English, Arabic,
Sanskrit, Pali, and Chinese have penetrated as carriers of a religion, literacy, or
an associated culture, there have also been established new forms of civilization
(§ 169). In a lower degree, the same principle probably holds true of every gain
of one language at the expense of another, even                when the spreading idiom is
not associated with a great or an active culture.
       The linkage of speech and culture is further perceptible in the degree to
which they both tend to contribute, ultimately, to the formation of the idea of
nationality; and this in turn may contribute to a desire for a politically inde-
pendent state or nation. What chiefly marks off the French from the Italians,
the Dutch from the Germans, the Swedes from the Norwegians their respec-         —
tive       customs and ideals, or the language gap, or their political autonomy?                   It

would be difficult to say. The cultural differences tend to crystallize around
language differences, and then in turn are reinforced by language, so that the
two factors interact complexly.
    It is also important to recognize that nationality and nation are not neces-

sarily the same, although they sometimes coincide. Usually we think of a nation

as the population of a           wholly autonomous and supreme political unit                —what
Europeans used to call "the state." Politically, state and nation are one            :
                                                                                         ®   as when

       ^   While a political nation or body politic means a state in its most general and ordinary
sense, a special historical accident of our manner of growth has brought it about that in the
United States of America we call "national" whatever pertains to the total people and
government, and by "state" designate constituted parts thereof. This is an anomaly in
Western civilization. In our American term "Department of State," the word still has it?
original sense of referring to the whole body politic.
§   102                     SPEECH, CULTURE, AND NATIONALITY                               35
wc speak of the United Nations. But an essentially single nationality can com-
prise several states that in modern political terminology are called nations: such
as Australians,        New Zealandcrs, Canadians, and British. Or again a century ago
Germans formed as definite a nationality as they do now, with distinctive speech,
customs, temperament, and ideals, but were broken up into some thirty self-
governing units or wholly independent states or, technically in the political sense,
nations.      On the contrary, most large states, and especially empires, have com-
prised a variety of nationalities. Thus the mediaeval              Holy Roman Empire in-
cluded French, Dutch, Czechs, Slovenes, and Italians as well as Germans; and
the original Roman Empire, particularly in the times of its greatness and peace,
included still more nationalities, who became equal before its law in spite of their
diversity. The reason for this variability of usage          is   the ambiguity of the word
"nation." Its dictionary definition is double. First, nation denotes a people or-
ganized under one government, a "body politic." Second, a nation is a people
of common origin, tradition, and language.            Now the latter is just what a nation-
ality is, by universal consent; and it would be fine if everyone would always use

the   word "nationality" when that was the meaning, and if "nation" on the
contrary were restricted to denoting politically organized peoples.
    Here are some contemporary cases of political nations that include two or
more nationalities. Belgium is almost equally divided between Walloons speak-
ing a French dialect in their homes and Flemings speaking a variant of Dutch.
Switzerland       is   72 per cent German-speaking, 21 per cent French, 6 per cent
Italian, i per cent Romansh. Canada is one-third French, in origin and in speech.

The Union of South Africa has a white population that is part English-speaking
and part Afrikaans- or Dutch-speaking, plus the racially distinct Bantu Negro
natives. India in 1947 set up housekeeping on its own, as two independent politi-
cal nations, with dozens of nationalities and languages. Similarly in the Philip-
pines there are seven major and many minor tongues. In the U.S.S.R. there are
78 per cent Russians (Great, White, and Ukrainian), plus forty-six other recog-
nized nationalities. Some of these nationalities, such as Georgians, Armenians,
Uzbeks, Kazaks, Moldavians, and Lithuanians, as well                   as the three   Russian
groups, have union republics of their own. Formally, therefore, these constitute
          autonomous nations as well as centers of nationality, and three of
politically

them have been so recognized in the United Nations organization; whereas
the United States is reckoned as a single political nation, with its "states" mere
subsidiary divisions.
      It is   evident from these examples what diverse things "nation" and "na-
tionality" can         and do mean.   It   is   certainly clearest always to use the    term
"nationality" when the reference is ethnic, and to add the epithet "political" to
"nation," or to substitute "government," when that is the sense, unless the con-
text leaves no doubt as to meaning. Also it is clear that of the several objective
factors which operate to produce nationalities, language is on the             whole much
the most important. Without the free intercommunication that common speech
36                                    LANGUAGE                                     §   102

provides, it is very difficult for the "consciousness of kind" that is the subjective
or psychological precondition of nationality to arise. Cultural conditions can
either reinforce or thwart the effects of linguistic segregations, or be neutral.
Thus the French of Quebec are further set apart by their Catholicism in Protes-
tant Canada. In Switzerland, the Germans of some cantons are Catholics, of
others Lutheran Protestants; the French are mainly Calvinist Protestants; the
Italians, Catholics. There is a general understanding among the Swiss citizenry

that neither religion nor linguistic consideration is to serve as a basis for political
crystallization. In India, on the contrary, religious cleavage has proved a strong
obstacle to political unity in the formative period. Language diversity        was felt
to be much less of a bar, perhaps because of the          wide availability of English
speech on upper educational      levels.   Should    political intransigeance drive out
English, the diversity of nationalities kept separate by speech might become a
greater threat to the political cohesiveness of India.
     All in all, anthropology is more immediately concerned with nationaUties
than with nations, with ethnic than with political groupings. And in nationali-
ties and ethnic units, language is   always a factor, and often the basic one.


                  103.   RELATIVE WORTH OF LANGUAGES

     One respect in which languages differ from cultures is that they cannot, like
the latter, be rated as higher and lower. Of course, even as regards culture, such
rating is often a dubious procedure, meaning little more than that the person
making the comparison assumes his own culture to be the highest and estimates
other cultures low in proportion as they vary. Although this is a subjective and
uncritical procedure, nevertheless certain objective         comparisons are possible.
Some cultures surpass others in their quantitative content: they possess more
different arts, abilities, and items of knowledge. Also, some culture traits may
be considered intrinsically superior to others   :   metal tools against stone ones, for
instance, since metal is adopted by all stone-culture peoples       who can secure it,
whereas the reverse is not true. Further, in most cases a new addition does not
wholly obliterate an older element, this retaining a subsidiary place, or perhaps
serving some more special function than before. In this way some cultures be-
come richer and more differentiated. The old art may even attain a higher
degree of perfection than it had previously, as the finest polish was given to
stone implements in northern Europe after bronze was known. In general, ac-
cretion is the process typical of culture growth. Older elements come to function
in a more limited sphere as new ones are added, but are not extirpated by them.
Oars and sails remain as constituent parts of the stock of civilization after it has
added steamboats and motorboats. In the senses, then, that a culture has a larger
content of elements, that these elements are  more differentiated, and that a
greater proportion of these elements are of the kind that inherently tend to
supersede related elements, the culture may be considered superior.
§   '03                    RELATIVE WORTH OF LANGUAGES                           37
     As regards languages, there are also quantitative difTercnccs. Some contain
several times as many words as others. But vocabulary is largely a cultural
matter. A people that uses more materials, manufactures more objects, possesses
knowledge of a larger array of facts, and makes finer discriminations in thought,
must inevitably have more words. Yet even notable increases in size of speech
content appear not to be accompanied by appreciable changes in form. A larger
vocabulary does not mean a different type of structure. Grammar seems to be
little    influenced by culture status. No clear correspondence has yet been traced
between type or degree of civilization and structural type of language. Neither
the presence nor the absence of particular features of tense,      number, case, re-
duplication, or the like seems ever to have been of demonstrable advantage
toward the attainment of higher culture. The speech of the earlier and the
modern nations most active in the propagation of culture has been of quite
diverse types.    The languages of the Egyptians (Hamitic)     ;   Sumerians; Baby-
lonians  and Arabs (Semitic); Hindus and Greeks (ancient Indo-European);
Anglo-Saxons (modern Indo-European); Chinese; and Mayas are about as
different as any that exist. The Sumerian type of civilization was taken over
bodily and successfully by the Semitic Babylonians. The bulk of Japanese culture
is Chinese; yet Japanese speech is built on wholly different principles.

     Then, it is impossible to rate one speech trait or type as inherently or ob-
jectively superior to another on any basis like that which justifies the placing of
a   metal culture above a stone culture. If wealth of grammatical apparatus is a
criterion of superiority, Latinis a higher language than French, and Anglo-

Saxon than English. But if lack of declensions and conjugations is a virtue, then
Chinese surpasses English almost as much as English surpasses Latin. There is
no reason favoring one of these possible judgments rather than its opposite.
Amabo is no better or worse than / shall or will love as a means of expressing
the same idea. The one is more compact, the other more plastic. There are times
when compactness is a virtue, occasions when plasticity has advantages. By the
Latin or synthetic standard, the English expression is loose-jointed, lacking in
structure; by the English or analytic standard, the Latin form is overcondensed,
adhering unnecessarily to form. One cannot similarly balance the merits of a
steel and a flint knife, of a medical and a   shamanistic phase of society. The one
does really cut or cure better than does the other.
    So, from the point of view of civilization, language does not matter. Lan-
guage will always keep up with whatever pace culture sets it. If a new object is
invented or a new distinction of thought made, a word is coined or imported
or modified in meaning to express the new concept. If a thousand or ten thou-
sand new words are required, they get developed. When it desires to express
abstractions like futurity or plurality, any language is capable of doing so, even
if it    does not habitually express them. If a language is unprovided with formal
means for the purpose, such as a grammatical suffix, it falls back on content and
uses a word or a circumlocution. If the life of a people changes and comes to be
38                                     LANGUAGE                                  §   103

conducted along lines that render it frequently important to express an idea like
futurity to which previously little attention has been paid, the appropriate cir-
cumlocution soon becomes standardized, conveniently brief, and unambiguous,
like will in    He will come. In general, every language is capable of indefinite
modification and expansion and thereby         is   enabled to meet cultural demands
almost at once. This is shown by the fact that virtually anything spoken or
written can be translated into almost every other language without serious im-
pairment of substance. The aesthetic charm of the original may be lost in the
translation; the    new forms coined in the receiving language are likely at first
to seem awkward; but the meaning, the business of speech, gets expressed.



                             104. SIZE   OF VOCABULARY

        The tendency is so instinctive in us to presuppose and therefore to find
qualities of inferiority, poverty, or incompleteness in the speech of populations
of more backward culture than our own, that a widespread, though unfounded,
belief has grown up that the languages of savages and barbarians are extremely
limited quantitatively   — in the range of their vocabulary. Similar misconceptions
are current as to the      number of words actually used by single individuals of
civilized communities. It is true that no one, not even the most learned and pro-
lific   writer, uses all the words of the English language as they are found in      an
unabridged dictionary. All of us understand many words that we habitually
encounter in reading and may even hear frequently spoken, but of which our
utterance faculties for some reason have not made us master. In short, a lan-
guage, being the property and the product of a community, possesses more
words than can ever be used by a single individual, the sum total of whose ideas
is necessarily less than   that of his group. Added to this are a certain mental slug-
gishness, which restricts most of us to a greater or less degree, and the force of
habit. Having spoken a certain word a number of times, our brain becomes ac-
customed to it and we are likely to employ it to the exclusion of its synonyms or
in place of words of related but distinguishable meaning.
        The degree to which all this affects the speech of the normal man has, how-
ever, been greatly exaggerated.      Because there are, all told, including technical
terms, some hundred thousands of words in our dictionaries, and because Shake-
speare in his writings is said to have used 24,000 different words, Milton in his
poems 17,000, and the English Bible contains 7200, it has been concluded that
the average man, whose range of thought and power of expression are so much
less, must use an enormously smaller vocabulary. It has been stated that many

a peasant goes through life without using more than 300 or 400 words, that the
vocabulary of Italian grand opera is about 600, and that he is a person above the
average who employs more than 3000 to 4000 words. If such were the case it
would be natural that uncivilized men, whose life is simpler, and whose knowl-
edge is more confined, should be content with an exceedingly small vocabulary.
§   '05                           QUALITY OF SPEECH SOUNDS
                                                                                           39
      But it    is   certain that the figures just cited arc erroneous. If       anyone who
considers himself an average person will take the trouble to make a list of his
speaking vocabulary, he will quickly discover that he knows, and on occasion
uses, the names of at least 1000 to 2000 different things. That           is,   his vocabulary
contains so many concrete nouns. To these must be added the abstract nouns,
the verbs, adjectives, pronouns, and the other parts of speech, the short and
familiar words that are indispensable to communication in any language. It may
thus be safely estimated that it is an exceptionally ignorant and stupid person
in a civilized country who has not at his command a vocabulary of several thou-
sand words.
     Test counts based on dictionaries show, for people of bookish tastes, a
knowledge of about 30,000 to 35,000 words. Most of these would perhaps never
be spoken by the individuals tested, would not be at their actual command, but
it seems that at least 10,000 would be so controlled. The carefully counted vo-

cabulary of a five-and-a-half-year-old American boy comprised 1528 understand-
ingly used words, besides participles and other inflected forms. Two boys be-
tween two and three years used 642 and 677 different words.
      It is   therefore likely that statements as to the paucity of the speech of un-
lettered peoples are equally exaggerated.           He who professes to declare on the
strength of his observation that a native language consists of only a few hundred
terms displays chiefly his ignorance.          He has either not taken the trouble to
exhaust the vocabulary or has not known,              how to do so. It is true that the
traveler or the settler can usually converse with natives to the satisfaction of
his own needs with a few hundred words. Even the missionary can do a great
deal with this stock, if it is properly chosen. But it does not follow that because
a civilized person has not learned more of a language, there is no more.              On this
point the testimony of the student is the evidence to be considered.
     Dictionaries compiled by missionaries or philologists of languages previ-
ously unwritten run to surprising figures. Thus, the number of words recorded
in Klamath, the speech of a culturally rude American Indian tribe, is 7000; in
Navaho, 11,000; in Zulu, 17,000; in Dakota, 19,000; in Maya, 20,000; in Nahuad,
27,000. It may safely be estimated that every existing language, no matter               how
backward its speakers are in their general civilization, possesses a vocabulary of
at least 5000 to 10,000 words.^



                           105.   QUALITY OF SPEECH SOUNDS
     Another mistaken assumption which is frequently made is that the speech
of nonliterary peoples is harsh, its pronunciation more difficult than ours. This
belief is purely subjective.      When one has heard and uttered a language all one's
     ^ Jespersen,    who allows 20,000 words to Shakespeare and 8000 'to Milton, cites 26,000
as the vocabulary of Swedish peasants.
40                                    LANGUAGE                                     §   105

life, its   sounds come to one's mouth with a minimum of effort; but unfamiliar
vowels and consonants are formed awkwardly and inaccurately.                  No adult
reared in an Anglo-Saxon community finds th difficult. Nor does a French or a
German child, whose speech habits are still plastic, find long difficulty in master-
ing the particular tongue control necessary to the production of the th sound.
But the adult Frenchman or German, whose muscular habits have settled in
other lines, tries and tries and falls back on s or t.   h Castilian, however, would
agree with the Anglo-Saxon as to the ease and "naturalness" of th. Conversely,
the "rough" ch flows spontaneously out of the mouth of a German or a Scotch-
man, whereas English, French, and Italians have to struggle long to master it,
and are tempted to substitute ^. German 6 and French u trouble us; our "short"
u is equally resistant to Continental tongues.
     Even a novel position can make a familiar sound strange and forbidding.
Most Anglo-Saxons fail on the first try to say ngis; many give up and declare
it beyond their capacity to learn. Yet it is only sing pronounced backward.

English uses ng finally and medially in words, not initially. Any English
speaker can quickly acquire its use in the new position if, to keep from being
disconcerted, he foUowings some such sequence as sing, singing, stinging, ring-
ing, inging, nging, ngis.
     So with surd /   —Welsh —which
                               //          is   ordinary / minus the accompaniment
of vocal-cord vibrations.   A little practice makes possible the throwing on or off
                                 and "unvoicing" of speech, for any sound,
of these vibrations, the "voicing"
with as much ease as one would turn a faucet on or off. Surd / thereupon flows
with the same readiness as sonant /. As a matter of fact we often pronounce it
unconsciously at the end of words like little. When it comes at the beginning,
however, as in the tribal name usually written Tlingit, Americans tend to sub-
stitute   something more habitual, such as \l, which is familiar from clip, clean,
clear, close, clam, and many other words. The        simple surd / has even been re-
peatedly described quite inappropriately as a "click," which          is   about as far
from picturing it with correctness as calling it a thump or a sigh; all because
its "unvoicing" comes in an unaccustomed position.

     Combinations of sounds, especially of consonants, are indeed of variable
difficulty for anatomical reasons. Some, like nd and ts and pf, have their com-

ponents telescope or join naturally through being formed in the same part of
the mouth. Others, like }{w {qu), have the two elements articulated widely
apart, but for that reason the elements can easily be formed simultaneously.
Still others, like kt and ths, are intrinsically difficult, because the elements differ

in place of production but are alike in method, and therefore come under the
operation of the generic rule that similar sounds require more effort to join and
yet discriminate than dissimilar ones, for much the same reason that it is on
the whole easier to acquire the pronunciation of a wholly new type of sound
than of one that differs subtly from one already known. Yet in these matters
too, habit rather than anatomical    functioning determines the reaction. German
§   lo6                       RAPIDITY OF LINGUISTIC CHANGE                                4I

pf comes hard to adult Anglo-Saxons, English l{tv and ths to Germans. So far
as degree of accumulation of consonants             is   concerned, English   is   one of the
cxtremcst of      all    languages. Monosyllables like tract, stripped (stripd), sixths
(si/^^sths),   must seem irremediably hard to most speakers of other idioms.
      Children's speech in all languages shows that certain sounds are, as a rule,
learned earlier than others, and are therefore presumably                somewhat       easier

physiologically.        Sounds like p and t, which are formed with the mobile lips
and the front of the tongue, normally precede back-tongue sounds like ^. B, d,
                                                                          mo-
g, which are voiced like vowels, tend to precede voiceless p, t, ^. Stops or
mentary sounds, such as b, d, g, p, t, {, generally come earlier than the fricative
continuants /, v, th, s, z, which require a delicate adjustment of lip or tongue
close proximity         without firm contact   — whereas the stops involve only making
and breaking a jerky contact. But so slight are the differences of effort or skill
in all these cases that as a rule only a few months separate the learning of the
easier from that of the more difficult sounds; and adults no longer feel the
differences.

                        106. RAPIDITY     OF LINGUISTIC CHANGE

      The rate of change in language remains a somewhat obscure subject.                  The
opinion often held that unwritten languages necessarily alter faster than written
ones, or that those of savages are less stable than the tongues of civilized men, is
mainly a naive reflection of our sense of superiority. It contravenes the principles
just referred to        and is not supported by evidence. Occasional          stories   that a
primitive tribe after a generation or two was found speaking an almost made-
over language are unconscious fabrications due to preconception and supported
by hasty acquaintance, faulty records, misunderstanding, or perhaps change of
inhabitants. Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, has probably changed less in
four hundred years than Spanish; Quechua, that of the Incas, no more. English
has apparently altered more than any of the three in the same period. Dozens
of native tongues, some of them from wholly rude peoples, were written down
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by Spanish            and other priests, and in
most instances the grammars and dictionaries are usable today.
    Cultural alteration would appear to work toward speech change chiefly in
the following way:         New things need new names; new acts mean new thoughts
and new ideas require new words. These may be imported; or they may be
made out of elements already in the language; or old words may undergo a
shift of meaning. In any event, the change is mainly            on the side of vocabulary.
The sounds of a language are generally much less affected, its plan of structure
least of all. The introduction of a new religion or the development of a new

form of government among a people need not be accompanied by changes in
the grammar of their speech, and usually are not, as abundant historical
examples prove.
42                                   LANGUAGE                                     §   lo6

     While the causes of grammatical innovation are far from clear, contact with
alien tongues is certainly a factor in some degree. An isolated offshoot of a
linguistic group is generally more specialized, and therefore presumably more
altered, than the main body of dialects of the family. The reason is that the
latter, maintaining abundant reciprocal contact, tend to steady one another, or

if they swerve, to do so in the same direction. The speakers of the branch that

is geographically detached, however, come to know quite different grammars so

far as they learn languages other than their native one, and such knowledge
seems to act as an unconscious stimulus toward the growth of new forms and
uses. It is not that grammatical concepts are often imitated outright or gram-
matical elements borrowed. Acquaintance with a language of different type
seems rather to act as a ferment that sets new processes going.
     It is in the nature of the case that direct specific evidence   of changes of this
character is hard to secure. But comparison of related languages or dialects with
reference to their location frequently shows that the dialects         which are geo-
graphically situated among strange languages are the most differentiated. This
holds of Amharic in the Semitic family, of Singhalese in the Indie branch of
Indo-European, of Hopi in Shoshonean, of Arapaho in Algonkin, of Huastec in
Mayan.
     But it is also likely that languages differ among each other in their suscepti-
bility to change, and that the same    language differs in successive periods of its
history. It is rather to be anticipated that a language may be in a phase now of
rapid and then of retarded metabolism, so to speak; that at one stage its tendency
may be toward breaking-down and absorption, at another toward a more rigid
setting of its forms. Similarly, there is reason to believe that languages of certain
types of structure are inherently   more plastic than others. At any rate, actual
differences in rate ofchange are known. The Indo-European languages, for
instance, have perhaps without exception altered more in the three thousand
years of historical record than the Semitic ones. And so in native America, while
contemporary documentary record is of course wanting, the degree of differ-
entiation within the two stocks suggests strongly that Athabascan is more tena-
ciously conservative than Siouan.
     There are also notable differences in the readiness to borrow words ready-
made. English is distinctly more hospitable in this regard than German, which
tends rather to express a new concept by a new formation of old elements. Cer-
tain South American languages appear to have borrowed more words from one
another than have any of those of North America. In this matter the type of
language is probably of some influence, yet on the whole cultural factors perhaps
predominate. The direction and degree of cultural absorption seem to deter-
mine the absorption of words to a considerable measure. Here writing is cer-
tainly potent. The Latin and French elements in English, the Sanskrit and
Arabic elements in the Malaysian languages, were brought in to a large extent
by writing, and were fixed by being written. They would probably have re-
§    107                             SPEAKING AND WRITING                                    43
mained smaller     if   the historical contacts had been wholly oral. This          is   perhaps
an important way         in   which writing exerts influence on     the   development of
spoken language, an influence that in other respects is often overestimated.


                              107.   SPEAKING AND WRITING

       Learning our mother tongue is a largely unconscious process which goes
on     until control has      become automatic. The process or     act of acquisition         is

imitative, and it fades quickly from our memories. Learning to read and write,
on the contrary, is at least started by teaching, comes later in life, and is a con-
scious process. Writing of course is a secondary symbol system serving as a
surrogate for the primary symbol system of spoken language;                    it   has certain
special    purposes such as distant or anonymous communication, permanent
record,    and the like. By one method or another, and more or less accurately,
the visible symbols stand for the audible ones. Their reconversion into audible
symbols, or into actually silent but potentially audible ones,            is   what we call
reading. This writing-reading process comes so much later than speech-learning
in the life histories of each of us      —as well as in the history of the species—that
itremains much less automatic and much more in our awareness. Consequently
we tend often to think and express ourselves in terms of writing-reading when
we mean speaking. The common term "word" is ambiguous: it denotes both an
element of audible utterance that we feel as having a certain isolable identity,
and an element of writing or printing to which we give a formal identity by
spacing it apart from others. But a "letter" is merely a visible silent sign for an
audible sound.     It   belongs to a writing system, as sounds belong to a speech
system.    To say therefore that such and such a language lacks the letter / i5
undiscriminating nonsense, especially if the language is an unwritten one. Such
a language does lack the sound which in writing English             we represent by the
character /. It is not so long ago that even writers of grammars made this con-
fusion.    Some educated and intelligent people who have never given much
thought to linguistics still make it. If we are not on intellectual guard, this preva-
lent nondiscrimination tends to color all our thinking            on   linguistic matters.

Popularly, we "speak" English spontaneously, but "language" is something for-
eign we are taught after we can read and write. Most language instructors still
misplace the emphasis on writing and reading of, for example, French, instead
of on hearing and pronouncing             it   and remembering it kinaesthetically with
ear and tongue.
   That the basic component always is the actually spoken or "living" speech is
shown by the fact that spoken languages change in essentially the same way
and at about the same jate, apparently, whether they are also written or un-
written. Speech alters; writingmay or may not conform for a while. If the
writing, through blind habit persistence or prestige of the past, refuses to
44                                                 LANGUAGE                                           §   1
                                                                                                              07

change, the actual speech may alter and alter until it has become really a new
and distinct language before an adjustment is made.
          After Caesar's conquest, the Gauls of France rapidly gave up their Keltic
speech and learned Latin instead. This was not the highbrow Latin that Cicero
wrote and perhaps actually spoke in his orations, but the "vulgar Latin" which
legionaries and nonliterary people spoke in their daily                   life.   With the centuries
this Latin progressively changed. In part it altered provincially, with the growth

of Gallic peculiarities; in part, through the development of new features com-
mon to all late local Latins, in Italy and Spain as well as in France, such as the
well-attested growth of articles alongside the shrinkage of inflections (§108).
Also, with the centuries sliding into the Dark Ages, fewer and fewer people
learned to write; but those who did spelled words as they used to be spelled in
hterary Latin, not as rewritten to conform to the contemporary pronunciation.
Gradually the spoken language changed so much that it, and the Latin used to
represent it in writing, had only very partial similarity. People probably still
thought that they were dealing with only one language when they were really
already speaking French but still writing Latin. Then suddenly the two pulled
apart with a jerk. In the Strasbourg Oaths of the grandsons of Charlemagne in
842, we have the actual spoken French of the time written as French                        —very Old
French, to be sure, but indubitable French, and no longer spelled at all as the
Latin originals of the words were spelled. The document marks the birth of the
French daughter of the Latin mother— as a written language. But for spoken
French, who can set a birthday? It had been changing continuously through the
nine hundred years since Caesar. This typical continuity of change                               is   what
characterizes        spoken languages              as   being natural,   spontaneous,      underlying
growths, in contrast with their superimposed and more                             "artificial"   writing
systems, which quickly tend to crystallize. The difficulty with any spo\en lan-
guage is to keep it the same; with its written expression, it is to keep it plastic.
The writing will set and finally break in a sort of revolution, but it has great
difficulty in conforming and adapting. Written languages that have survived for

millennia, like Latin and Sanskrit, are dead as spoken languages.''
          This relation results in revivals of dead or dying languages, such as the
attempted revival of Gaelic and Hebrew (§ 181), which seem somewhat uncer-
tain as regards successful outcome, though of extraordinary theoretical interest.
These present revivals are highly original and conscious experiments, if senti-
mental ones, being made in the laboratory of history. Whatever the final results,
they will illuminate our understanding of the nature of language, by establish-
ing new principles or confirming old ones.
    It would be going too far to say that writing is unable to react on speech

and to influence it. For instance, we have taken from French the word niche,
      ^   Classical Arabic is a thousand years younger than Latin and Sanskrit, but the relation
to   it   of its living provincial dialects   is   beginning to approach the relation of French and
Spanish to Latin around 800.
§   107                            SPEAKING AND WRITING                          45
and pronounce it cither "necsh" if we follow the original sound or "nich" i{
we follow spelling. Those who know French, and that the word is French, are
likely to say the former; those who do not, the latter. That dictionaries "allow"
us choice in such cases means only that there is not yet a decisive majority of
quantity or quality lined up on either side. More recent but probably more often
used in English is the French chic, which those who know French, or who asso-
ciate with those that have heard how the magic word is pronounced in France,
pronounce as "shick" (or "sheek," if very ultra), while the unilinguals, who
perhaps learned the word from reading clothing advertisements in the news-
papers, say "chick." Here the issue is between the socially more and less ad-
vantaged; between prestige and numbers. Silo comes to us from Spanish, where
of course it is spoken "seelo," just as our pronunciation of it would be "sailo"
in   Mexican or Spanish. Interlanguage transfers are perhaps the most common
cause of changes of this type. The written form of a word penetrates farther, is
learned first by the majority, and its pronunciation is then adapted to the spell-
ing as if this were native. The slightly varying pronunciations current for the
names Illinois, Chicago, St. Louis, Des Moines, reflect greater or smaller degrees
of attempted adhesion to the original French pronunciation, though they all
deviate from it.
    These examples suggest minutiae, or special points. And that is what on
the whole the influence of writing on speech is a very partial reaction. This we
                                                      :




might expect from the fact that speech comes first, is spontaneous and auto-
matic, and has less of the conventional about it, less of the arbitrarily agreed
upon (§ 204), than writing.
    The strength and independence of writing are at their maximum where
                                                           —
the system is primarily ideographic by word units "logographic" and is     —
phonetic only in supplementary degree. Chinese is the important living example.
Here writing is essentially a self-sufficient code rather than a script of spoken
and heard sounds. In consequence, North and South Chinese will read off the
same passage of writing with so much dialect difference of utterance as to be
mutually unintelligible. In fact, an old-fashioned Chinese scholar wants to read
his classic poetry      by himself. If he listens to it read aloud, even by a fellow
scholar,      he is disturbed by the possible ambiguities in the   many homonyms.
This is because in the historical development of the Chinese language many
words that were once spoken differently are now spoken alike, so that there
»emain far fewer distinct sound words than there are distinct word characters.
The apparatus of the written language has remained rich, though the spoken
language has shrunk.
      Still   more different are the pronunciations of Chinese® taken over along
with the system of written characters centuries ago by Koreans, Japanese, and
Annamese. These were somewhat mispronounced by the foreign learners to
      * Called   Sino-Japanese. Sino-Annamese, etc.
46                                    LANGUAGE                                  § 1 07


begin with, and are more so now. In fact, wholly different-sounding words of
pure Japanese origin, often polysyllabic, can be spoken for some of the written
characters, which also have their imported imitation-Chinese "pronunciation."
This is as if we used both the English word five and the French word cinq as
alternative-choice words expressing the number and visible symbol 5.
       All this development in the Sinitic sphere is obviously an illustration of the
degree to which writing can become autonomous of spoken language            —rather
than being an example of its normal reflex action on speech. Indeed, as has been
said, the actualpronunciations of all the East Asiatic languages have altered
through the centuries while the script system maintained its crystallized iden-
tity   or even grew. For that matter, it would be theoretically possible to divorce
the Chinese writing     from Chinese speech, marry it to a new set of English
words, and have it function with reasonable adequacy. Or, going still farther,
it could be successfully used, with certain extensions, as the ready-made core of

an international or universal code "translatable" into any spoken language.


  108.    DIFFUSION AND PARALLELISM IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE

     A phenomenon that language shows more conspicuously than culture, or
which is more readily demonstrated in it, is parallel or convergent development,
the repeated, independent growth of a trait (§ 223).
     Thus sex gender is an old part of Indo-European structure. In English, by
the way, it has wholly disappeared, so far as formal expression goes, from
noun, adjective, and demonstrative and interrogative pronoun. It lingers only
in the personal pronoun of the third person singular he, she, it. A grammar of
living English that was genuinely practical and unbound by tradition would
never mention gender except in discussing these three little words. That our
grammars specify man as a masculine and woman as a feminine noun is due
merely to the fact that in Latin the corresponding words vir and jemina possess
endings that are recognized as generally masculine and feminine, and that an
adjective associated with ends respectively in masculine -us        and feminine -a.
These are distinctions of form for which English possesses no equivalents. The
survival of distinction between he, she, and it, while this and that and which
have become alike irrespective of the sex of the person or thing they denote, is
therefore historically significant. It points back to the past and to surviving Indo-
European languages.
     Besides, Indo-European, Semitic and Hamitic also express sex by gram-
matical forms, although like French and Spanish and Italian, they know only
two genders, the neuter being unrepresented. These three are the only large
language stocks in which sex gender finds expression. Ural-Altaic, Chinese, Japa-
nese, Dravidian, Malayo-Polynesian, Bantu, and in general the language families
of Asia, Africa, and the Americas do without, although a number of languages
make other "gender" classifications, as of animate and inanimate, personal and
§   Io8      DIFFUSION AND PARALLELISM IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE                          47
impersonal, superior and inferior, intelligent and unintelligent. Sex gender how-
ever reapjKars in Hottentot of South Africa and in the             Chinook and Coast
Salish and Porno languages of the Pacific coast of North America.
        How is this distribution to be accounted for? Indo-European, Semitic, and
Hamitic occupy contiguous territory, in fact surround the Mediterranean over
a tract largely coextensive with the Caucasian area. Could they in the remote
past have influenced one another? That is, could grammatical sex gender have
been invented, so to speak, by one of them, and borrowed by the others, as we
know that cultural inventions are constantly diffused? Not many philologists
would grant this to be Hkely: there are relatively few authenticated cases of
formal elements or concepts having been disseminated between unrelated lan-
guages (though see § 109). Is it then possible that our three stocks are at bottom
related and one? Sex gender in that case would be part of their common in-
heritance. For Semitic and Hamitic, a number of specialists have accepted a
common origin on other grounds. But for Semitic and Indo-European, many
linguists remain dubious: positive evidence is still scant. Nevertheless, the terri-
torial continuity of the three   speech groups possessing the trait       is   difficult to

accept as mere coincidence. In a parallel case in the realm of culture history a
common source would be accepted as probable. Even Hottentot has been con-
sidered a remote Semitic-Hamitic of?shoot, largely,      it   is   true, because of the

very fact that it expresses gender. Linguists, accordingly, may consider the case
still   open; but it is at least conceivable that the phenomenon goes back to a
single origin in these four Old World stocks.
        Yet no stretch will account for sex gender in the three native American
languages as due to contact influence or diffusion, nor relate these tongues to
the Old     World ones. Clearly, here is a case of independent origin or parallel
"invention." Chinook and Coast Salish, indeed, are in contiguity, and one may
therefore have taken up the trait in imitation of the other. But Pomo lies well
to the south    and its affiliations run still farther south. Here sex gender is ob-
viously an independent, secondary, and presumably rather recent growth in the
grammar. The application of the category in Pomo is limited as narrowly ai
possible: to human beings; whereas in Chinook, as in older Indo-European, alJ
nouns are given a gender, usually "artificial."
    In short, it remains doubtful whether sex gender originated three or four
or five or six times among these seven language stocks; but it evidently did
originate repeatedly.
    Other traits crop out the world over in much the same manner. A dual
number, for instance, is found in Indo-European, Malayo-Polynesian, Eskimo,
and several American languages. The distinction between inclusive and exclu-
sive we   —between yoii-and-l and he-and-l— made in Malayo-Polynesian, Hot-
                                               is

tentot, Iroquois, Uto-Aztecan.

        A true nominative case-ending, such as Latin and other early varieties of
Indo-European evince, is an exceedingly specialized and rare formation; yet is
                                        LANGUAGE                                        §IC

found in the Maidu language of California. Articles, in regard to which Indo-
European varies, Latin for instance being without while its Romance daughter
tongues have developed them, recur in Semitic, in Polynesian, and in several
groups of American languages, such as Siouan and Hokan. The growth in
Romance is significant because of its historicity. That is, French developed its
articles   independently and secondarily, a fact which makes            it   probable that
many languages in other parts of the world, whose history we do not know, also
developed theirs instead of inheriting them
                                                 —"invented" them, in short, although
unconsciously.
     A trait found in a considerable proportion of the American languages is
the so-called incorporation of the object pronoun (§ 97). The objective pronoun,
or an element representing it, is prefixed or suffixed to the verb, is made a part
of it. The process is familiar enough to us        from Indo-European so far as the
subject is concerned: in the Latin ama-s, ama-t, ama-nt, the suffixes express "you,
he, they," and independent pronouns comparable to the English ones are usually
omitted. The -s in he loves is the sole survival of this same process in modern
English.    None of the older Indo-European tongues however showed an in-
clination to affix similar elements to the verb for its object, although there are
some approaches in a few recent languages of the family Spanish diga-me, "tell
                                                                 :



me," and mata-le, "kill him," for instance; or French je le vols, "I see him," pro-
nounced as one word, "zhlvwa." Semitic, on the other hand, and Basque, do
"incorporate" objective elements, whereas most Asiatic and some American lan-
guages do not. Many other instances of parallel or convergent traits could be
cited.

    That frequency of parallel developments is greater in language than in
culture is perhaps in part due to easier demonstrability in the field of speech.
But in the main the high frequency seems real. Two reasons for the higher fre-
quency of parallel developments in language suggest themselves.
    First, the   number of possibilities is small in language, so far as form or
structure is concerned. The categories or concepts used for classifying and for
the indication of relations are limited, and so are the means of expression. The
distinctions expressed   by gender, for instance, may refer to sex, animateness,
personality, worth, shape, position, or possibly two or three other qualities; but
there they end. If a language recognizes gender at all, it must have gender of
one of these few types. Consequently there is some probability of several un-
connected languages sooner or later happening upon the same type of gender.
Similarly for the kinds of number (singular, dual, trial, plural, collective, dis-
tributive), or of case, or of person expressed.         And these categories, such as
gender and number and case, are themselves not numerous. Then too, the means
of expressing the categories are limited. Of such mechanisms there are           :   position
or relative order of words;       compounding of them; accretions of elements to
stems    —namely, prefixes,   infixes, and suffixes; reduplication, the repetition of part
^   1   08     DIIKUSION AND PARALLKLISM IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE                           49
or the       whole of words; iiucrnal changes by     shift of   vowel or accent within
words; and therewith the types of grammatical means are about exhausted.
Again the number of possible choices is so small that accidental probability
must cause some languages to hit upon the same devices.
         A second reason for the greater frequency of parallelism or independent
reinvention in language is that structural traits     —that     is,   grammars   —appear to
resist diffusion by imitation to a considerable degree.    Words are borrowed, some-
times freely, almost always to some degree, between contiguous languages;
sounds considerably       less so;   grammar least of all. That is, linguistic content
lends itself to diffusion readily, linguistic pattern with more difficulty.
         At bottom, it is true, the same holds of culture in some degree. Specific
elements of culture, or groups of such elements, diffuse very widely                at   times
and may be said to be always tending to diffuse the wheel, for instance, smelt-
                                                       :




ing of metals, the crown as a symbol of royalty, battleships, Buddhism. The
relations of elements among themselves, on the other hand, tend to change by
internal growth rather than by external imitation. Of this sort are the relations
of the classes and members of societies, the fervor with which religion is felt, the
esteem accorded to learning or wealth or tradition, the inclination toward this
or that avenue of subsistence or economic development. By conquest or peaceful
pressure or penetration one people may shatter the political structure or social
fabric of another,      may undermine its conservatism, may swerve its economic
habits.But it is more difficult to find cases of one people voluntarily adopting
such tendencies or schemes of cultural organization in mere imitation of the ex-
                                                                        —
ample of another than of its adopting specific culture content the wheel or the
                         —
crown or Buddhism from outside. The result is that culture relations or pat-
terns develop spontaneously or from within probably more frequently than as
a result of direct taking-over. Also, the types of culture forms            being limited in
number, the same type is frequently evolved independently. Thus monarchical
and democratic societies, feudal or caste-divided ones, priest-ridden and rela-
tively irreligious ones,     expansive and mercantile or    self-sufficient     and agricul-
tural nations, evolve over and over again.       On the whole, therefore, actual com-
parative culture history more often deals with the specific contents of civiliza-
tion. In part, also, this is true because events like the spread of an invention

can usually be traced more exactly than the complex evolutions of, say, two
feudal systems can be compared. The result, at any rate, is that specific diffusions
seem to outnumber precise and sure parallels in culture, as is set forth in several
of the chapters that follow(Twelve to Fourteen).
         In general linguistics, on the contrary, interest inclines to the side of pat-
tern rather than content; hence it is the parallelisms or convergences, the inde-
pendent similarities, that stand out conspicuously. If as much attention were
generally given to words and their meanings as to grammar, and if they could
be traced in their prehistoric or unrecorded wanderings as reliably as many cul-
5°                                        LANGUAGE                                      §    Io8

ture traits have been,      it is   probable that diffusion would loom larger than            it

now does as a principle shaping human speech. There are words that have
traveled almost as far as the objects they denote: tobacco and maize, for example.
And the absorption of words of Latin origin into English was as extensive as
the absorption for over a thousand years of Latin, Christian, and Mediterranean
culture by the English people       —in   fact, went on as its accompaniment and result.




                            109.    CONVERGENT LANGUAGES
       Parallel   development in speech      is   not restricted to special   traits like sex

gender and object incorporation. It may affect whole languages in their types.
Chinese a long time ago became an extremely analytical or "isolating" language.
That is, it lost all affixes and internal change. Each word element or item became
an unalterable unit. Sentences are built up by putting together these atoms.
Grammatical relations are expressed by the order of words: the subject precedes
the predicate, for instance. Other ideas that in many languages are treated
formally, such as the plural or person, are expressed by content elements; that
is,   by other words: many for the plural, separate pronouns instead of affixes for
person, and so on. The now uniformly monosyllabic stems of Chinese accen-
tuate this isolating character, which however does not depend intrinsically upon
monosyllabism. In the Indo-European family, as already mentioned, for over
two thousand years there has been a drift toward something of the Chinese
type of structure. This drift toward loss of formal mechanisms and toward the
expression of grammar by material elements, or by their position only, has been
evident in all branches of Indo-European, but has been most marked in English.
The chief remnants of the older inflectional processes in spoken English today
are four verb endings, -s, -ed, -ing, -en; three          noun endings, the possessive -s
and the plurals -s and -en, the latter rare; the case ending -m in whom, them;
a few vowel changes for plurals, as in man            —             —
                                                 men, goose geese; and perhaps
two hundred vowel changes in verbs, such as sing, sang, sung. Compared with
Latin, Sanskrit, or even primitive Germanic, this brief Hst represents a survival
of possibly a tenth of the original synthetic inflectional apparatus. That is, Eng-
lish has gone approximately nine-tenths of the way toward attaining a grammar

of the Chinese type.       A third language of independent origin, Polynesian, has
traveled about the       same distance in the same direction. Superficially it is less
like    Chinese in that it remains prevailingly polysyllabic, but more like             it    in

having undergone heavy phonetic attrition. This then is a clear case of entire
languages converging toward a similar type.
       It is   further remarkable that this change, from a complex, close-knit, "syn-
thetic" type of structure to a simple, loose -jointed, "analytic" one, occurs through-
out Indo-European, though it has been carried somewhat the farthest in Eng-
lish. The same kind of form reduction took place in Latin as it transformed into
 §   109                       CONVERGENT LANGUAGES                             5I

 French or Spanish; between classical and contemporary Greek; between ancient
and modern Persian; between Sanskrit and Hindi: it can be traced in every
Indo-European branch language of which our historical record is long enough.
Most of these languages have not been in contact with each other for the one
to three thousand years that the change has been going on. Change by influence

of one on the other, leading to imitation, is therefore excluded. In the first edi-
tion of this book, the phenomenon was called "secondary parallelism"; that is.
parallelism of change of type in the same direction, persisting subsequent to and
during the increasing diversification of the languages in content and      specific
form. Sapir has made the situation famous by citing it as "linguistic drift," a
sort of "slope" or long-range secular trend;   but he has not been able to put his
finger on a cause. Possibly the change toward looser structure got under      way
                 Indo-European, before this stock had branched out into its
early, in original

daughter languages, and the impulse persisted in the latter in greater or less
strength. That would make the process carry on by momentum from the past.
Whatever the cause, the breadth of the continuous drift or trend over thousands
of miles and thousands of years makes the phenomenon impressive.
    Another instance of convergence or superficial secondary assimilation of
form in originally wholly separate and diverse languages is found in the re-
markable resemblances in plan of structure of Indo-European, especially in its
older forms, and the Penutian group of languages in native California. Common
to these two families are an apparatus of similar cases, including accusative,

genitive, locative, ablative, instrumental,   sometimes even a true nominative;
plural by suffix; vowel changes in the verb according to tense      and mode; a
passive and several participles and modal forms expressed by suffixes;  and pro-
nouns either separate or expressed by endings fused with the tense-modal suf-
fixes.     Thus, the processes that make English sing, sang, sung, song, or bind,
bound, band, bond, are formally similar to those which have produced            in
Penutian Yokuts such forms as sho\ud, pierce, shukid-p, pierced, sho\od, per-
foration or hole, shikjd, piercer or arrow. In short, many of the traits usually
thought to characterize Indo-European as typically inflectional reappear in
Penutian; and of course they appear there quite independently as regards their
origin and history.
      These are linguistic phenomena comparable in kind to the growth of feudal-
ism in China more than a thousand years earlier than in Europe, or the ap-
pearance of a great centrally governed empire in Peru similar to the ancient
monarchies of the Orient.
      We have seen that while words can diffuse freely from one language to
another when social pressures are set in that direction, grammars have much
greater difficulty in diffusing. Forms and relations as such are not easily taken
over by the stranger. Either he keeps his own, or he accepts the whole of the
impinging other language, word content along with grammar. There are in-
52                                       LANGUAGE                                 § 1 09


numerable cases of one language replacing another in a given society; but there
is   very   little   evidence of a population accepting any considerable part of the
grammar of another language to embody in their own. That is why we can
speak so confidently of linguistic parallels, convergences, and joint         drifts.   If
there were free imitation, borrowing, and diffusion of structural form, the cases
we have discussed might just as well be attributable to that process.
    Yet to a limited extent, alien influence on structural form can now and then
be established, as distinct from word-borrowing. There      is a Balkan instance

where several Slavic, Albanian, and Latin languages have taken over a series
of grammatical and idiomatic traits from Greek, which as the old language of
religion and higher civilization long enjoyed a prestige priority. Some of these
features due to Greek influence are articles, which the Slavic and Latin tongues
                                          :




did not originally have; disuse of the infinitive: give me that I drin\ instead of
give me to drin\; genitive case including the dative; suffixion of an unaccented
pronoun, like daughter-mine; double pronoun on the plan of me-seems to me;
similar tautology of pronoun and clause, as she believed him that he was her
brother; substitution of co-ordinate for subordinate conjunction: hardly I escape
and I meet another; and idioms like he was of twenty years (that is, old), and
he saw how fifty (for about fifty). These Greek idioms and structure features
recur in Latin-derived Rumanian and with equal frequency in Slavic Bul-
garian; Serbian, which is also Slavic but more distant, has adopted about half
of them. Most of the same features have been accepted also in Albanian, but
more in the nearer southern dialect than in remoter North Albanian.
     Herewith the principle is established that structural form can be taken ovei
by one language from another. However, the dozen formal traits involved here
constitute only a minute fraction of the total grammar and idiom of the Balkan
languages. The amount or degree of grammatical imitation or diffusion in
fluence is therefore small. This limitation seems to hold in other instances also
A general "wave theory" evolved by certain Indo-Europeanists maintains that
a trait —even a new sound—which originates in one          dialect^ language, or group

of languages tends to be propagated to other related ones, or at least to be
diffusible. In proportion as this       wave theory holds true, it tends logically to
vitiate the evidence of phonetic law      and comparability on which linguists have
built their family trees       and classifications of relationship during the past cen-
tury and a half of study. This is because genetic descent is intrinsically a process
of diversification, whereas wave influence leads to assimilation. The wave theory
must unquestionably be accepted as true to some extent; but the extent is minor.
Internal change of related languages away from one another appears to be much
the more prevalent process. Assimilation by imitation in waves, convergent re-
semblances developing independent of relationship, are occasional secondary
crosscutting influences. The wave principle has a certain theoretical interest be-
cause it establishes to some extent for language a factor or force which as dif-
fusion by imitation is extremely influential in the development of culture.
SIIO            UNCONSCIOUS FACTORS IN LANGUACt ANU CULTURE CHANCE                     53


     I   10.   UNCONSCIOUS FACTORS IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE CHANGE

          The unceasing processes of change in language are mainly unconscious or
covert, or at least implicit. The results of the change may come to be recognized
by speakers of the changing language; the gradual act of change, and especially
the causes, mostly happen without the speakers' being aware of them. This prin-
ciple holds for all departments of language: the sounds, the structural form, even
the meaning of words. When a change has begun to creep in, it may be tacitly
accepted or it may be observed and consciously resisted on the ground of being
incorrect or vulgar or foreign. But the underlying motives of the objectors and
the impulses of the innovator are likely to be equally unknown to themselves.
          If this view seem extreme, it can easily be   shown that the great bulk of any
language as it is, apart from any question of change, is employed unconsciously.
An illiterate person will use such forms as child, child's, children, children's with
the same "correctness" as a philologist, yet without being able to give an explana-
tion of the involved grammatical ideas of singularity and plurality, absoluteness
and possession, or to lay down rules as to the manner of expression of these
ideas in English. Grammar, in short, exists before grammarians, whose legiti-
mate business is to uncover such rules as are already there. It is an obviously
hasty thought that because grammar happens to be taught in schools, speech
can be grammatical only through schooling. The Sanskrit and Greek and Latin
languages had their declensions and conjugations before Hindu and Greek and
Roman scholars first analyzed and described them. The languages of primitive
peoples frequently        abound with complicated forms and mechanisms that are
used consistently and are applied without suspicion of their existence. It is much
as the blood went round in our bodies quite healthily before Harvey's discovery
of its circulation.
          The quality of unconsciousness seems to be a trait not specifically limited to
linguistic causes and processes, but to       hold in principle of culture generally. It
is   only that the unconsciousness pervades speech farther.A custom, a belief, an
art, however deep down its springs, sooner or later rises into social conscious-
ness. It then seems deliberate, planned, willed, and is construed as arising from

conscious motives and developing through conscious channels. But many social
phenomena can be led back only to nonrational and obscure motives            :   the wear-
ing of silk hats, for instance. The whole class of changes in dress styles springs
from unconscious causes. Sleeves and skirts lengthen or shorten, trousers flare
or tighten, and who can say why It is perhaps possible to trace a new fashion
                                        .''




to Paris or London, and to a particular stratum of society there. But what is it
                                                                    —
that in the winter of a particular year makes every woman or man of a cer-   —
tain social group wear, let us say, a high-collared coat, or a shoe that does not
come above the ankle, and the next year, or the tenth after, the reverse.'' It is
insufficient to say that this is imitation of a leader of fashion, of a professional
54                                         LANGUAGE                                  §110

creator of style.    Why does the group follow him, and think the innovation
attractive   and correct? A decade earlier the same innovation would have ap-
peared senseless or extravagant to the same group. A decade after, it appeals as
belated and ridiculous, and everyone wonders that style was so tasteless so short
a time ago.
      Evidently the aesthetic emotions evoked by fashions are largely beyond the
control of both individuals and groups. It is difficult to say where the creative
                                                    —
and imitative impulses of fashion come from which, inasmuch as the impulses
obviously reside somewhere in human minds, means that they spring from the
unconscious portions of the mind. Evidently, then, our justification of the dress
styles we happen at any time to be following, our pronouncing them artistic or

comfortable or sensible or what not, is secondary. A low shoe may be more con-
venient   —or inconvenient—than a high one, a brown one more or              less practical

than a black or a white one. That that is not the reason which determines the
wearing of low brown shoes when they are customarily worn is shown by the
fact that at other times high black ones are put on by everyone. The reasons that
can be and are given are so changeable and inconsistent that they evidently are
not the real reasons, but are the false secondary reasons which are best distin-
guished as rationahzations. Excuses,          we should call them with reference to
individual conduct.
    What applies to fashion holds also of manners, of morals, and of many
                     Why we defer to women by rising in their presence and
religious observances.
passing through a door behind them; why we refrain from eating fish with a
knife or drinking soup out of a two-handled cup, though drinking it from a
single-handled one is legitimate; why we do not marry close kin;
                                                               why we re-
move our hats in the presence of the deity or his emblems but would feel it
impious to pull off our shoes    —   all   the thousands of prescriptions and taboos of
which these are examples possess an unconscious motivation.
    Such cases are also illustrations of what is known as the relativity of morals
(§ ii6). The Jew sets his hat on to worship, the Oriental punctiliously slips out
of his shoes. Some people forbid the marriage of the most remote relatives, others
encourage that of first cousins, still others permit the union of uncle and niece.
It   would seem that all sociocultural phenomena which can be brought under
this principle of relativity of standard are unconsciously grounded. This in turn

implies the unconscious causation of the mores, those products of the social en-
vironment in which one is reared and which one accepts as the ultimate au-
thority of conduct. As mores are those folkways or customs to    which an emo-
tional coloring has     become attached, so that adherence to the custom or de-
parture from    it   arouses a feeling respectively of approval of disapproval,       it   is

evident that the origin of folkways generally           is   also unconscious, since there
seems no reason why the emotions or the ethical affect enveloping a customary
action should incline more than the custom itself to spring up unconsciously.
§   I'O     UNCONSCIOUS FACTORS IN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE CHANGE                       55
      It   has long since been recognized that the average man's convictions on
social matters remote    from him are not developed through examination of evi-
dence and exercise of reason, but are taken over, by means of what used to be
denominated tlie herd instinct and is now called social suggestion, from the
society or period in which he happens to have been born and nurtured. His
belief in democracy, in monotheism, in his right to charge profit and his freedom
to change residence or occupation, have such origin. In many instances it is easy
to render striking proof of the proposition     —as in the problems of high   tariff, or

the Athanasian creed, or vitamin deficiencies, which are so technical as to their
evidence or so intricate in their argument as to be impossible of independent
solution by the majority of men. Time alone         would forbid; we should starve
while making the necessary research. And the difference between the average
man's attitude on such difficult points and the highly gifted individual's attitude
toward them, or even toward simpler problems, would seem to be one of degree
only.
      Even on the material sides of culture, undesigned motivation plays a part.
In the propulsion of ships, oars and sails fluctuate as the prevalent means down
almost to the period of steam vessels. It would be impossible to say that one
method was logically superior to the other, that it was recognized as such and
then rationally adhered to. The history of warfare shows similar changes be-
tween throwing and thrusting spears, stabbing and hewing swords, light and
heavy armor. The Greeks and the Macedonians in the days of their military
superiority lengthened their lances and held them. It no doubt seemed for a
time that a definitive superiority had been proved for this type of weapon over
the shorter, hurled javelin. Then the Romans, as part of their legionary tactics,
reverted to the javelin and broke the Macedonian phalanx with their pilum. By
the end of the Roman Empire, the infantry legion had yielded to heavy cavalry
as the most effective military     arm. After about nine centuries, around 1300, in-
fantry began once more to     come into its own, and then to dominate. Armor
reached its perfection after gunpowder had begun to come into use; but firearms
finally crowded armor out altogether. Yet the last few decades have brought the

rebirth of che helmet.
   These fashions in tools and practical appliances do not alter as fast as
modern dress styles, and some of their causes can often be recognized. Yet as
regards consciousness or intent there seems no essential difference between the
fluctuation of fashions in      weapons   —or in navigation or cooking or travel or
house-building   —and,   let   us say, the fluctuation of mode between soft and stiff
hats or high and low shoes. It may have been the open array of the legion that
led to the pilum, ever more rapidly fired bullets that induced the abandonment
of the breastplate, shrapnel and the machine gun that caused the reintroduction
of the helmet.    But these initiating factors were not deliberate as regards the
effects that came in their train; and in their turn they themselves were the
effects of more remote causes, such as improvements in general metallurgical
56                                      LANGUAGE                                      §110

arts.The whole chain of development in such cases is intricate and branching,
unforeseen, mainly unforeseeable. At most there is recognition of what is hap-
pening; in general the recognition seems to become full only after the change in
tool or weapon or industrial process has become complete and is perhaps already
being undermined once more.
        Of course purely stylistic alterations   —and linguistic Innovations—also pos-
sess their causes.      When the derby hat or the pronoun thou becomes obsolete,
there is a reason; only, we generally cannot cite a really convincing specific cause.
        The common causal element in all these changes may be called a shift in
social values, in attitudes, or in the configuration of the total culture; often
perhaps a change in some other and remote part of the culture             —or language.
Perhaps practical chemical experience has grown, and gunpowder explodes more
satisfactorily; or an economic readjustment has made it possible to equip            more
soldiers with guns. The first result is a greater frequency of bullet penetrations
in battle; the next, the abandonment of the breastplate as          hampering and use-
less.   Increasing wealth or schooling or city residence or class differentiation
makes indiscriminate familiarity        of   manners seem less     desirable than at an
earlier period: brusque thou begins to yield to indirect plural you. Or again, new
verbs, all of regular conjugation like love, loved, are formed in English, or im-
ported from French, until their number outweighs that of the ancient irregular
ones like sing, sang.      A standardizing tendency     thereby
                                                       is
                                                                        —
                                                                  going "analogiz-
                                                                   set

ing"     is   the technical term of the philologist  —which begins to turn irregular
verbs into regular ones: shaped replaces shopen, just as lenger becomes longer
and toon becomes toes. Or, conversely, the analogy of write-wrote, drive-drove,
ride-rode, causes dived to tend to be replaced by "colloquial" dove.      There is
much the same sort of causality in one of these phenomena as in another. The
individual or community that leaves off the breastplate or the stiff hat may more
likely be aware that it is making the change than the one that leaves off saying
toon or thou. But there does not seem to be an essential difference of process.
Linguistic and aesthetic changes may be most fully unconscious, social ones next,
material and economic ones perhaps least so. But normally, change or innova-
tion is       accompanied by a shift of values that are broader than the single phe-
nomenon in question, and that are held to impulsively far more often than they
are deliberately planned.       That is why all social creations   —institutions,   beliefs,

codes, styles, grammars      —prove on impartial analysis to be    full of inconsistencies

and irrationalities. They have sprung not from a premeditated system of weighed
or reasoned choices but from impulsive desires, from emotionally colored habits,
or from "accidents" happening in some other part of the culture.


   The foregoing discussion may be summarized as follows. Linguistic phe-
nomena and processes are on the whole less conscious than cultural ones, with-
out however differing in principle. In both language and culture, content                 is

more readily imparted and assimilated than form, and it enters farther into
§   "I                    LINGUISTIC AND CULTURAL STANDARDS
                                                                                         57
consciousness. Organization or structure in both cases takes place according to
unconscious or covert or implicit patterns, such as grammatical categories, social
standards, political or economic points of view, religious or intellectual assump-
tions.      These patterns tend to attain recognition only in a last or sophisticated
stage of their development, and even then continue to alter further even without
the exercise of conscious control. The number of such linguistic and social pat-
terns or forms being limited, there        is   some tendency for them to repeat in dif-
ferent cultures with a degree of similarity, though without historical connection
or without attaining actual identity. Partially similar combinations of such pat-
terns sometimes recur, producing languages or cultures of roughly similar type.
But established patterns of form, and still more their combinations, replace each
other with difficulty. Their spread therefore takes place mostly though the
integral substitution of one language or culture for another, rather than                by
piecemeal absorption. This        is   in contrast to the specific content elements of
which language and culture consist         —individual words, mechanical devices, in-
stitutional symbols, particular religious ideas or actions, and the like. These ele-
ments absorb and diffuse readily. They are therefore imitated and imported
more often than they are reinvented. But, as if in compensation, Hnguistic and
cultural patterns or structures growing up spontaneously           may acquire, through
the accidents of convergence, considerable resemblance of general form that is
not dependent on historical connection or spread.



                   III. LINGUISTIC       AND CULTURAL STANDARDS
       It   does not follow that because social usages largely     fail   to spring   out of
purposive and deliberate reasoning, they are therefore unworthy of being fol-
lowed, or that standards of conduct need be renounced because they are rela-
  —that is, unconsciously founded and changing. The natural incHnation of
tive

men being to regard their standards of taste, behavior, and social arrangement
as reasonable, perfect, and fixed, there follows a first inclination to regard these
standards as devalued as soon as their emotionality and variability have been
recognized. Such a negative reaction is disappointing: it is a further result of
the illusion. Once the fundamental and automatic assumption of fixity and in-
herent value of social patterns has been given up, and it is recognized that the
chief motive power of behavior in man as in the other animals is afifective and
unconscious, there is nothing in institutions and codes to quarrel with. They
are neither despicable nor glorious;       no more deserving, in virtue of their exist-
ence, to be uprooted and demolished than to be defended as absolute and eternal.
In some form or other, they are inevitable; and the particular form they take at
thistime or that place is always tolerably well founded, in the sense of being
adapted with fair success, or having been but recently well adapted, to the con-
ditions of the natural       and social environment of the group which holds the
institution, code, or standard.
    That this is a sane attitude is sometimes more easily shown in the field of
language than of culture. This is because language is primarily a mechanism
or means, whereas in culture ends or purposes obtrude more. It             is   thus easier
to view linguistic   phenomena dispassionately. Grammars and dictionaries, for
instance, are evidently the result of self-consciousness arising about speech which
has previously been mainly unconscious.       They may be roughly compared to
social formulations like law codes or written constitutions or philosophical sys-

tems or religious dogmas, which typically begin also as representations of usages
or beliefs already in existence.    When moralists about language stigmatize ex-
pressions like ain't or them   cows or he don't as "wrong," they are judging an
innovation, or one of several established but conflicting usages, by a standard of
correctness that seems to    them absolute and permanent, but which is               really
only the hallmark of a class or a locality to which they choose to give priority.
As a matter of actuality, the condemned form may or may not succeed in be-
coming established. He don't, for example, might in time attain to "correctness"
—                               —
  meaning social reputability although ain't is perhaps less likely to become
legitimized, and them cows, though old, to have still smaller prospect of ultimate
general recognition. That a form departs from the canon of today of course no
more proves that it will be accepted in future than that it will not. What is
certain is that if it wins sufficient usage by the right people, it will also win
sanction, and will become part of the standard of its time.
    Linguistic instances like these differ    little   if   at all in principle, in their

involved psychology, from the finding of the Supreme Court that a certain
legislative   enactment is unconstitutional and therefore void, or from the de-
cision of a religious sect that  Sunday baseball is wicked. The chief point of
divergence would seem to be that a court is a constituted body endowed with an
authority that is not paralleled on the linguistic side, at any rate in Anglo-Saxon
countries; although the Latin nations possess Academies whose dicta on correct-
ness of speech enjoy a moral authority      —though a sanctionless one—approxi-
mating the verdicts of a high court. And it is notorious that courts and religious
denominations, like speech purists, may begin by condemning and yet end by
tolerating or even accepting innovations, after actual usage of the times has
drifted far enough. Witness the fates of the      American income tax, Methodist
dancing, and the rule that prepositions are not words to end sentences with!
    It is also of interest to remember that the power of nullifying legislation

was not specifically granted the Supreme Court by the Constitution of the
United States, but that the practice grew up gradually, quite like a speech in-
novation that becomes established. Certain elements in the American population
look upon this power as undesirable and therefore take satisfaction in pointing
out its unsanctioned origin. The majority, on the other hand, feel that the sit-
uation on the whole works out well, and that a Supreme Court with its present
powers is better than the risk of a Supreme Court without power. Still, it re-
mains curiously illogical that the preservation of the Constitution should take
§111                    LINGUISTIC AND CULTURAL STANDARDS                       59
place partly through the cxtraconstitutional functioning of a constitutional body.
In principle such a case is similar to that of grammarians who at the same time
lay down a "rule" and exceptions to the rule, because the contradictory usages
happen to be actually established.
     Codes, dogmas, and grammars are thus normally reflections, secondary
rather than primary causes. Such influence as they have is mainly in outward
crystallization. They produce an appearance of permanence. In the field of
speech, it is easy to recognize that it is not grammarians that make languages,
but languages that make grammarians. The analogous process evidently holds
for culture. Lawgivers, statesmen, religious leaders, discoverers, inventors   seem
to shape civilization when actually they much more express it. The complex and
often obscure forces that shape culture also mold the so-called creative leaders of
society as essentially as they   mold the mass of humanity. Progress, so far as it
                can be construed as something that happens rather than as
exists objectively,

something we make as we set out to make it. Our frequent assumption to the
contrary   is   probably the result of a reluctance to realize our individual near-
impotence as regards remodeling the culture we live in, as contrasted with the
overpowering molding we receive from it. But how much does any one of us
create or shape or alter his language? Culture no doubt is a bit more malleable;
but the comparison with speech should make us cautious not to overrate our
capacity for initiative.
    Undoubtedly we do have social influence as individuals. It is an influence on
the fortune and the careers of other individuals, sometimes on larger segments of
society, and it is concerned largely with aims of personal security, relative domi-

nance, or affection     among ourselves. We also have many choices among the
alternatives contained in our culture and in our speech. To some extent we can
manipulate certain alternatives and ambiguities of the culture in our personal
favor, or in the direction of our ideals.   Now and then, perhaps, we succeed in
establishing, with the support of others, some altered behavior or idea or idiom,
some novel twist of custom or phrase. That seems to describe the range of our
exertion of influence on the form or content of those mass products and mass
influences which we call civilization and language.
                           CHAPTER SEVEN

                     The Nature of Culture

112.   WHAT CULTURE IS      1
                                1
                                    3.   COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE            II 4.   ORGANIC DIVERSITY,
CULTURAL HYBRIDITY        II5. THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                    I16. FOLKWAYS AND THE

RELATIVITY OF MORALS        II7.         CULTURE AND SOCIETY        II 8.    INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF
SOCIETY     119.   SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES             120.   NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARA-
SITIC CULTURES       121. RURAL AND URBAN        —FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                    122. IN-

TEGRATION   —INHERENT OR INDUCED               I23.   MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL                 I24. PARTICI-

PATION      125.   CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS VALUES     :                    I26.   MATERIAL AND
NONMATERIAL CULTURE             1 27.    THE IDEA OF PROGRESS        1 28.    MORE ABOUT PROGRESS
129.   FUNCTION      130. PURPOSE AND NEED



                                    112.    WHAT CULTURE IS

WHAT               CULTURE is can be better -understood from knowledge of what
            forms it takes and how it works than by a definition. Culture is in
            this respect like life or matter: it is the total of their varied phenomena

that is more significant than a concentrated phrase about them. And again as
with life and with matter, it is true that when we are dealing with the actual
manifestations we are less often in doubt as to whether a phenomenon is or is
not cultural than we are in deciding on what is includable in the concept of
culture when we reason abstractly about it. Nevertheless, it will be worth while
to consider some definitions briefly.

    Tylor says that "culture or civilization is that complex whole which includes
knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, customs, and any other capabilities and hab-
its   acquired by man as a member of society." Linton equates culture with "social
heredity." Lowie calls it "the whole of social tradition." All three statements use
the term "social" or "society," but in an attributive or qualifying sense.                       We can
accept this: society and culture, social and cultural, are closely related concepts.
There can obviously be no culture without a society              —much as there can be no
society without individuals. The converse             —no society without culture—holds for
man: no cultureless human society is known; it would even be hard to imagine.
But it does not hold on the subhuman level. As we have seen (§ 6, 20), ants and
bees do have genuine societies without culture, as well as without speech. Less
§   112                               WHAT CULTURE IS                                       6l

integrated and simpler associations arc frequent            among animals. Even a pair
of nesting birds rearing their         young constitute a society, though a small and
temporary one. Accordingly, so far as              man is concerned, culture always has
society as a counterpart;     it   rests on, and is carried by, society.   Beyond the range
of man there are societies, but no cultures. Cultural phenomena thus characterize
man more specifically than his social manifestations characterize him, for these
latter he shares with vertebrate and invertebrate animals.

       Roughly, then, we can approximate what culture is by saying it is that which
the human species has and other social species lack. This would include speech,
knowledge, beliefs, customs, arts and technologies, ideals and rules. That, in
short, is what we learn from other men, from our elders or the past, plus what
we may add to it. That is why Tylor speaks of "capabilities and habits acquired
by man," and what Lowie means when he says "the whole of social tradition,"
or Linton by "social heredity." The last term is unfortunate because heredity
now denotes in biology precisely what is received organically or genetically to
the exclusion of what is acquired socially or culturally. But if we substitute for
"heredity" the more noncommittal near-synonym "inheritance," the phrase then
conveys much the same meaning as Lowie's "social tradition."
       The terms "social inheritance" or "tradition" put the emphasis on how
culture is acquired rather than on what it consists of. Yet a naming of all the
kinds of things that we receive by tradition—speech, knowledges,             activities, rules,

and the rest   —runs into quite an enumeration. We have already seen in               § 2   that

things so diverse as hoeing corn, singing the blues, wearing a shirt, speaking
English, and being a Baptist are involved. Perhaps a shorter way of designating
the content of culture is the negative way of telling what is excluded from it.
Put this way around, culture might be defined as all the activities and non-
physiological products of human personalities that are not automatically reflex
or instinctive. That in turn means, in biological and psychological parlance, that
culture consists of conditioned or learned activities (plus the manufactured re-
               and the idea of learning brings us back again to what is socially
sults of these) ;

transmitted, what is received from tradition, what "is acquired by man as a
member of societies." So perhaps hotv it comes to be is really more distinctive of
culture than what it is. It certainly is more easily expressed specifically.
    In one sense culture is both superindividual and superorganic. But it is
necessary to know what is meant by these terms so as not to misunderstand their
implications. "Superorganic" does not mean nonorganic, or free of organic in-
fluence and causation; nor does           it   mean that culture is an entity independent
of organic    life   in the sense that    some theologians might assert that there is a
soul   which is or can become independent of the living body. "Superorganic"
means simply that when we consider culture we are dealing with something
that is organic but which must also be viewed as something more than organic
if it is to be fully intelligible to us. In the same way when we say that plants

and animals are "organic" we do not thereby try to place them outside the laws
62                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                   §   "2
of matter and energy in general.   We only affirm that fully to understand organic
beings and how they behave, we have to recognize certain kinds of phenomena
or properties   —
              such as the powers of reproduction, assimilation, irritability—as
added to those which we encounter in inorganic substances. Just so, there are
certain properties of   culture— such as transmissibiUty, high variability, cumu-
lativeness, value standards, influence on individuals      —which   it is   difficult to ex-

plain, or to see much significance in, strictly in terms of the organic composition
of personahties or individuals. These properties or qualities of culture evidently
attach not to the organic individual man as such, but to the actions and the be-
havior products of societies of men   —that   is,   to culture.
      In short, culture is superorganic and superindividual in that, although car-
ried, participated in, and produced by organic individuals, it is acquired;          and it
is   acquired by learning. What is learned is the existent culture. The content of
this is transmitted   between individuals without becoming a part of their in-
herent endowment. The mass or body of culture, the institutions and practices
and ideas constituting it, have a persistence and can be conceived as going on
their slowly changing way "above" or outside the societies that support them.
They are "above" them in that a particular culture, a particular set of institu-
tions, can pass to other societies; also in that the culture continuously influences

or conditions the members of the underlying society or societies      — indeed, largely
determines the content of their lives. Further, particular manifestations of cul-
tures find their primary significance in other cultural manifestations,            and can
be most fully understood in terms of these manifestations; whereas they cannot
be specifically explained from the generic organic endowment of the human
personality, even though cultural phenomena must always conform to the frame
of this endowment.
      An illustration may make this superorganic quality more vivid. A religion,
say Roman Catholicism or Mohammedanism, is of course a piece of culture, and
a typical piece or sample. Obviously Catholicism exists only in so far as there
are Cathohcs; that is, when and where there are human individuals                who have
acquired the faith. Once established, however, the Catholic hierarchy, beliefs,
rituals, habits,and attitudes can also be viewed as going on century after cen-
tury. Popes, bishops,   communicants succeed one another; the church persists.
It certainly possesses a continuity and an influence of its own: it affects not only

its adherents but the   course of history. On a smaller scale, or for shorter periods,
the                                                           —
     same thing holds for smaller segments of culture institutions, beliefs, or
customs down to short-lived trivialities of fashion and etiquette. On a larger
and more general scale, the same holds for the totality of human culture since
it first began to develop. Big or little, then, culture affects human action. It is

the accident of what culture happens to be in Occidental countries toward the
middle of the twentieth century which determines that when I get up in the
morning I put on a shirt and pants and not a chlamys or a toga or just a breech-
clout. Can we call this contemporary Western culture the cause of my shirt-
§ 112                             WHAT CULTURE IS                                   63
wearing? In ordinary parlance, we might; the specific custom can certainly not
be derived from anything in human hereditary constitution. Dialcctically, the
cultural causation    might be challenged;   it   depends on logical definitions. But
everyone will agree at     least that the concrete cultural    fact of habitual shirt-

wearing is specifically related to or conditioned by other cultural facts, such as
antecedent dress styles, manners, laws, or religion.
       Again, the English language is a piece of culture. The faculty of speaking
and understanding some or any language is organic: it is a faculty of the human
species. The sounds of words are of course made by individual men and women,

and are understood and reacted to by individuals, not by the species. But the
total aggregation of words, forms, grammar, and meanings which constitute the

English language are the cumulative and joint product of millions of individuals
for many centuries past.    No one of us creates or invents for himself the English
he speaks.     He talks it as it comes to him, ready-made, from his millions of
predecessors    and from his elders and age mates. English is obviously super-
individual in the sense that it is something enormously bigger and more signifi-
cant than the speech of any individual man, and in that it influences his speak-
ing infinitely more than his speaking can hope to contribute to or influence the
English language. And English is superorganic in that its words and meanings
are not direct outflows or consequences of men's being human organisms          — else

allmen would spontaneously talk as much alike as they walk alike. Instead, how
they talk depends overwhelmingly on how the societies in which they were
raised talked before.
       A piece of culture such as the English language is therefore a historical
phenomenon. This means that its specific features cannot be adequately ex-
                                                  —             —
plained by the organic features of our species nor of a race ^but are most intel-
ligible in the light of the long, complex, and locally varied history of the insti-

tution we call English speech. In short, a cultural fact is always a historical fact;
and its most immediate understanding, and usually the fullest understanding
of it to which we can attain, is a historical one. To a large degree calling culture
superorganic or superindividual means that it yields more readily to historical
interpretation than to organic or psychosomatic explanations.
       A simile that may further help the realization of what culture is and how
it   works is that of a coral reef. Such a reef may be miles long and inhabited by
billions of tiny polyp animals. The firm, solid part of the reef consists of calcium
carbonate produced by the secretions of these animals over thousands of years
a product at once cumulative and communal and therefore social. What is aUve
and organic in the reef is these innumerable little animals on its ocean-fronting
surface.   Without their ancestors, there would have been no reef. But the reef
now exists independently of the living polyps, and would long continue to en-
dure even if every polyp were kiUed by, say, a change in ocean temperature or
          would still break the surf, would now and then wreck ships, and
salinity. It

would bar off quiet water behind. While a coral reef is the accumulated pre-
64                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               §"2
cipitate of dead polyps, it is also a phenomenon affording to millions of living
polyps a base and a foothold, and a place to thrive.
     This parallel is incomplete. It breaks down in that a reef is actual physical
matter, whereas only the artifacts and the manufactures of culture are material
or physical, most of culture consisting of ideas and behaviors. Also, a reef deter-
mines that and where new polyps are to live, but not how they will Uve, not
the specific way of many possible ways in which they will function, which on the
contrary is just what culture does largely determine for men. Yet the simile is
valid and suggestive on one point: the minute role played by the individual
polyp or human being in proportion, respectively, to the mass of reef or of cul-
ture.Each of us undoubtedly contributes something to the slowly but ever
changing culture in which we live, as each coral contributes his gram or two of
lime to the Great Barrier Reef. In the main, though, it is our culture that directs
and outlines the kind of life we can lead. There is left to our individual gifts
and temperaments the relative success and happiness we attain in life; and to
our own volition, the alternative choices provided by our culture     —the choice,
perhaps, between being doctor, lawyer, or merchant chief; or whether our next
drink shall be water, beer, tea, or milk. Even this last set of choices would not
be wholly free to the individual if he were a participant in strict Methodist or
Mohammedan culture; and in old China the beer would not be available and
the milk considered too nasty to want.
     At any rate, the comparison may be of aid toward seeing things in per-
spective; with a consequence, perhaps, of somewhat deepened personal humiUty
in the face of the larger world and human history.



                       113.   COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE

     One general characteristic of culture is what may be called its openness, its
receptivity. The culture of today is always largely received from yesterday   :   that
is what tradition or transmission means; it is a passing or sending along, a
"handing-through" from one generation to another. Even in times of the most
radical change and innovation there are probably several times as many items
of culture being transmitted from the past as there are being newly devised.
Historians would be unanimous, for instance, that with all the important
changes produced by the great French Revolution, France of 1780 and France
of 1820 nevertheless still were far more alike than different. It would take a
series of revolutions, or a quite   long series of generations, before the changes
equaled the persistences. Even French culture of 1520 would almost certainly
be rated as more like than unlike that of 1820.     We might have to go back to
A.D. 820,   or even to a.d. 220, before the alterations could safely be estimated as
surpassing the transmissions. This does not        mean merely that mankind         is

generally hidebound and unimaginative, and that its cultures are therefore in-
clined to be persistent. It means also, put in terms of process or dynamics, that
§   113                          COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE                                      65

on the whole the passive or receptive faculties of culture tend to be considerably
stronger than its active or innovating faculties. This is something that seems to
be pretty deeply ingrained in the nature of culture because it is deeply ingrained
in the nature of man, something without which it would lose its continuity, and
therewith    its   stability.   And most participants in most cultures— most human
beings, in short    —seem to want a pretty high degree of social          stability on account

of the security      and repose it gives them. A culture that was so unstable and
novelty-mongcring that           it   could continually reverse   its   religion,   government,
social classification, property, food habits, manners, and ethics, or could basically

alter them   within each lifetime— such a culture can be imagined. But it would
scarcely seem attractive to live under, to most men             and women; and it would
presumably not survive very long in comparison or competition with more stable
cultures, through lacking the necessary continuity. If what was on today were
mostly off tomorrow, there would be little chance for institutions or sets of habit
to be carried on long enough to develop to their most successful fruition. There
would be conflicting ideas, ideals, and aims, in place of the at least partly co-
herent ideology which characterizes most actual cultures; and along with them,
confusion, indecision, and a constant starting all over again.- In short, we can
see that it is profitable for cultures to carry a considerable degree of ballast in
the shape of consistency              and continuity, and   that those     which have        fallen

markedly short in these qualities have soon disintegrated and perished; quite
likely that is why they are so inconspicuous in history. But to maintain a real
continuity, a culture must put a genuine value on what each generation hands
on to its children; it must, in short, be receptive to its own past, or at least
largely acquiescent to it.
      Now allied to this receptivity of its own past is a receptivity that every cul-
ture shows toward cultural material worked out by other cultures. Such accept-
ance of foreign elements and systems of course constitutes a geographical spread;
and the designation most in use for it is "diffusion" (§ 171). Such spreads oc-
casionally are rapid, but often they require a considerable time interval. Accord-
ingly, much of what is acquired by diffusion from outside-also has its origin in
the past, much as what a culture receives by internal handing-on of traditions;
but the characteristic of diffusion, the emphasis of the process, is on transmission
in space.   The amount of diffusion which is constantly going on between cul-
tures that have contacts is impressive, and the             amount of cultural material or
content of foreign origin which gradually accumulates within any one culture
may fairly be said to be normally greater than what is originated within it. Also,
an integrating process, discussed again in § 122 and 171, brings it about that as
soon as a culture has accepted a new item, it tends to lose interest in the foreign-
ness of origin of this item, as against the fact that the item is now functioning
within the culture. One might say that once acceptance is made, the source is
played down and forgotten as soon as possible. So it comes about that a large
proportion of every culture was not spontaneously developed by                       it,   but was
66                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                   §   "3
introduced from outside and fitted into it, after which the people of the culture
were no longer much concerned about the fact of introduction. Probably the
greater part of every culture has percolated into it.
       We do not think of our American civilization as something that          is   particu-
larly discordant or ill-assembled. Yet we          speak an Anglo-Saxon form of a Ger-
manic language that contains more original Latin than English words. Our
religion is Palestinian, with    its   specific   formulations into denominations made
chiefly in Rome, Germany, England, Scotland, and Holland. Our Bible is trans-
lated partly from Hebrew, partly from Greek.             We drink coffee first grown in
Ethiopia and adopted in Arabia, tea discovered in China, beer               first   brewed
in ancient Mesopotamia or Egypt,           hard liquor invented in mediaeval Europe.
Our bread, beef, and other meats are from plants and animals first domesticated
in Asia; our potatoes, corn, tomatoes, and beans were first used by the American
Indians; likewise tobacco. We write an Etruscan-Roman variant of a Greek
form of an alphabet invented in or near Phoenicia by a Semitic people on the
basis of nonalphabetic writing in still more ancient cultures; its first printing
took place in Germany, on paper devised in China. It is needless to extend the
catalogue. We no longer feel these things of foreign origin as being foreign; they
have become an integral part of our culture. It is only when we pause for scien-
tific analysis, for historical retrospect, that we become aware of their alien or

remote source. They are a part of our culture, and are used as such.
      This is not because modern American civilization is particularly polyglot,
but because so far as we can tell such a condition is typical of all cultures. If
ancient Egypt, Sumer, India, or China seems less flooded with import and more
original, it is only because historical record fails,     and we get no more than oc-
casional indications of the alien and still more ancient sources of their culture
content.
       This is not to say that there are no resistances, strains, and dislocations when
particular culture import takes place.        They may or may not occur; they fre-
quently do.     We shall consider some of these resistances later (§172, 176). But in
spite of them, in the long pull, absorptions          and assimilations continue to take
place.     How far such assimilation is also an integration, or how far       it    may be
simply a collocation of things that are treated as if they were functionally fitted
together even though they are not— this is a complicating problem whose con-
sideration we must also defer. But it is a fair question:        Why is cultural recep-
tivity so high, and the amount of diffusion and absorption so great.?

       There are several reasons. A steel knife or ax just is physically more effec-
tive   than a stone one; a motortruck more so than a freight wagon. In other
words, in the sphere of practical, mechanical things, there are objective superi-
orities,   and the invention of a superior artifact in one culture anywhere tends
to start the process of its adoption by other cultures as soon as they learn about
it.   Then, whatever comes from a society that is stronger, wealthier, cleverer, or
has greater prestige comes with a favorable recommendation. Missionization
§   114                   ORGANIC DIVERSITY, CULTURAL HYBRIDITY                            (f]


may accentuate this process; and there often is conscious missionization for
products and brands, for poUtical and social ideas, as well as for religions.
Finally, man is an animal who has a great faculty for getting bored, and many
things are taken up just because they are new and different. Some of these will
be dropped again for the same reason; but others will stick. There probably arc
still   other factors at work; but those mentioned may suffice to make it reason-
able that there should be so          much cultural receptivity, diffusion, assimilation,
and compositeness.


                   114.   ORGANIC DIVERSITY, CULTURAL HYBRIDITY

        It is a   striking fact that on the organic level there is nothing parallel to this
cultural assimilativeness. Animals and plants absorb and assimilate their food
note the identity of the words, but with the metaphorical connotation quite
different    —but they do so by breaking    down. It is no longer grass or seed or
                                               it

flesh; it has become muscle or blood or bone in a  new organism. But Christianity
and the Roman alphabet are still Christianity and the alphabet after our culture,
or that of our ancestors or successors, has taken them in, has "absorbed" them.
The counterpart of course is that no part of Christianity is destroyed or made
over into something radically different on being taken into a new culture, as
food is in the body. There simply is more Christianity in the world than there
was before, instead of less. This is one way in which culture may be said to work
cumulatively, in comparison with organisms.
   Another comparison, or rather contrast, with the organic may be made, A
cow and a bison can, with some difficulty, be crossed or hybridized, so that an
intermediate form results. This is because they are both of the family Bovidae;
that is, sprung from common ancestors from whom they have not yet diverged
very far.     A horse and a donkey will hybridize, but the offspring          is   sterile. It

seems impossible to produce a self-perpetuating species of mules. If the di-
vergence is a little greater, there will not even be offspring. Cows and horses
simply cannot be amalgamated. In other words, the organic process, while it
allows enormous persistences, is also, so far as its general or longer course is
concerned, both diversifying and irretraceable. Once the genetic diversification
or "evolution" has gone beyond a certain quite narrow^ degree, there is no more
possibility of reversal and assimilation.
        By contrast, cultures can blend to almost any degree and not only thrive but
perpetuate themselves. Classic Greek civilization was a mixture of primitive
Greek, Minoan, Egyptian, and Asiatic elements. Of the Asiatic elements, the
alphabet, the zodiac, and the system of weights (§ 191, 208, 229) are only a
few examples. Japanese civilization is partly autochthonous, whence its god-
descended Emperor and Shinto ritual; partly Chinese, such as its writing and
philosophy; Indian in its prevalent Buddhism; Western in its factories, export
trade, telephones, and movies. It is needless to pile up examples: as has already
68                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 §114

been said, the greater part of the content of every culture is probably of foreign
origin, although assimilated into a whole that works more or less coherently and
is felt   as a unit. However diversified or specialized a culture grows in its devel-
opment, it can therefore always largely retrace its course; and it does normally
do so, by absorbing more generalized content from other cultures, and thereby
assimilating not only to them but to the totality or the average of human cul-
tures. Cultures are       always tending to equate themselves by imparting their
characteristics to one another, even while another set of impulses pushes each
of them toward particularistic peculiarity.
      It is   as if, let us say, a rabbit could graft into itself the   ruminant digestive
system of a sheep, the breathing gills of a fish, the claws and teeth of a cat, some
of the tentacles of an octopus, and an assortment of other odd organs from else-
where in the animal kingdom; and then not only survive, but perpetuate its new
type and flourish. Organically, this is of course sheer nonsense; but in culture, it
is   a near-enough figure of what happens.
      A result of this difference is that the course of organic evolution can be
portrayed properly as a tree of life, as Darwin has called it, with trunk, limbs,
branches, and twigs. The course of development of human culture in history
cannot be so described, even metaphorically. There is a constant branching-out,
but the branches also grow together again, wholly or partially,              all   the time.
Culture diverges, but it syncretizes and anastomoses too. Life really does nothing
but diverge: its occasional convergences are superficial resemblances, not a join-
ing or a reabsorption.     A branch on the tree of life may approach another branch;




                 THE TREE OF LIFE AND THE TREE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF
                GOOD AND EVIL    THAT IS, OF HUMAN CULTURE
§    115                         THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                                    69

it will not normally coalesce with it. The tree of culture, on the contrary, is a

ramification of such coalescences, assimilations, or acculturations. The schematic
diagram in Figure 18 visualizes this contrast.
     It is true that no figure of speech or of drawing will really prove a point

like this. Nevertheless the illustration, both in words and in diagram, does

validly represent something significant: that the specific processes of life and
the specific processes of culture are drastically different.



                          115.   THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE
     This unlimited receptivity and assimilativeness of culture make the totality
of culture a continuum: the parts merge into each other without definite breaks.
            assumed that all life is also a continuum; but the continuity of life
It is generally

              by going back in its history and then reascending other branches.
is traceable only

One moral of our diagram is precisely that culture is a far more closely and
frequently interconnected continuum, in space and time as well as in develop-
mental relations.
       Perhaps this is why we have only the one word "culture," or its equivalent,
"civilization," for its broadest as well as its narrowest exemplifications.               We use
the same term for the totality of human culture considered philosophically, and
for the specific and distinctive culture of a little tribe of a hundred souls. This
is    because the English language, like other            modern languages, has not yet
evolved distinct terms for the big and the              little,   the general   and the special
aspects of culture. Nor have anthropologists and other social students managed
to agree       on any technical terms to help out the distinction         —which     is   perhaps
just as well, since sharper terms might help, but once the process of free coining

starts, everyone prefers his      own words and there are endless quarrels about them.
But it is interesting to note how different this condition is from what we have
                —
in biology even in popular biology. Everyone knows that life falls into two
primary divisions, animals and plants, which can nearly always be distinguished
without difficulty. The animals fall into phyla, of which the vertebrates are one,^
among which the mammals constitute a class, and so on down the line to
                                        Homo sapiens or Equus caballus; and
orders, families, genera, and species, like
the species may have subspecies, and within these we get the near-repetitive in-
dividuals with only their individual or personal peculiarities.       To all these dif-
ferent ranks of manifestation of life            we have scarcely a counterpart in the
terminology for culture. Such distinctions as are made are expressed in terms
of societies or areas, such as tribal versus national, or local, provincial, national,
and continental; and even these concepts intergrade somewhat in actual prac-
tice, precisely because their cultures intergrade.

       ^   Popularly speaking; technically, of course, the vertebrates are only the largest and
most important subphylum of the chordates (§9).
yO                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 § 1 15


        Let us run down an example. It needs no proof that total human culture
shows a number of well-marked varieties, such as contemporary Western or
Occidental or Eur-American civilization; the East Asiatic, the Indian, and the
Islamic civihzations; and a     number of cultures that are possessed by smaller
societies   and are often labeled "primitive" or "savage." Within each of these,
subvarieties are recognizable without difficulty, such as Chinese      and Japanese
within East Asiatic. From the point of view of the outsider, Japanese culture is
still very similar to Chinese culture, because   so much of it has been derived from
the Chinese or through the Chinese. Yet recent Japanese culture contained a
native cult religion, Shinto, that was without counterpart in China; but Japan
lacked any Taoist establishment. It provided for a ruler who was also a god
an institution lacking in Chinese culture; but it never accepted the women's
foot-binding or men's queues which so long characterized the latter. And so
on. Deviations of a roughly similar degree separate the       main areas or nations
within Occidental civiHzation: Italian from German,          German from French,
French from British, American from British, in ways that are familiar. Some-
what lesser are the differentiations v/e generally call regional: as of Bavaria
within Germany, the Midi in France, Scotland in Great Britain. To the for-
eigner, these regional peculiarities   may be a bit elusive, but a native is likely
to be oriented about them.    He will know roughly how New England and the
South or the Middle West diverge in denominational and party affiliation, in
degree of industrialization or agrarianism, in manners, temperament, and dia-
lect.   A step lower, and we come to what is usually called provincial distinc-
tiveness, as of   Normandy from Brittany. To this there might correspond the
differentiation   between North and South Carolina. Beyond         this,   there   is   the
cantonal or local   —Swiss Geneva being Calvinist, watchmaking, and interna-
tional-minded; but Swiss Schwyz, Catholic, agricultural, home-centered. It was
on this level that until recently peasant costumes and folk dances varied from
valley to valley, or even from village to village, in much of Europe. At present
in Europe, and almost from the first in historically shallow-rooted America and
Australia, differences of the scope of these cantonal cultures are more likely to
be expressed between economic classes or professions than locally; as between,
say, doctors, barbers, printers, railroad men, and ministers, rather
                                                                   than between
counties.    There is no doubt that, quite apart from their vocational skills, the
average culture of these professional groups differs slightly in dress, manners,
standards, tastes, knowledge, habits, and amusements.      We might call them pro-
fessional subcultures or sub-subcultures.
        This example shows how the same term is actually applied to the important
                                                  and to their more transient
cultures of great societies spread over large areas
                         There even seems to be a degree of good reason for
local or divisional phases.

applying the same term. Occidental civilization no doubt represents something
more generic and more important than the subculture of Midwestern clergy-
men. But it cannot possibly be defined as rigorously as the latter, because it
 §    "5                      THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                                    7I
 is   itself only   a composite, a common denominator, of innumerable such phases,
which have the greater dehnitencss. That is to say, it is the subcultures of clerical,
sporting, transjwrtational, and other such groups, and the Southern,          New Eng-
land, Midwest, Pacific-coast variants of these,          which possess the sharper char-
acterization, as against      which     total   "American" culture is a slightly blurred
composite or average. On the other hand, these local and divisional phases die
out, merge, or get absorbed, like the cantonal cultures characterized by costume
and dance. They are being obliterated by the spread of communications, by the
rise   of syndicated newspapers, by radio and films, and by ready-made-clothing
factories.    While the larger cultures are therefore less easily definable in terms
of precise combinations of the traits characterizing them, they tend to be more
durable in their main aggregations. There is thus a continuous transition from
the greater to the minutest manifestations of cultures, with corresponding varia-
tion from more permanence to more precision; but all of them are significant.
    Similarly, where sessile primitive populations live in small groups, it has
been found that their local cultures vary almost exactly in proportion to dis-
tance.     Thus the Pomo Indians of California lived in independent groups or
tribelets of   perhaps two hundred, each owning a tract of land and a main
settlement. These settlements averaged possibly ten miles apart.             A careful esti-
mate, based on count of culture traits found present and absent, has shown that
adjacent communities shared about 95 per cent of their culture, and that each
was likely to have evolved perhaps i per cent of innovations or specific orig-
inalities.   The other 4 per cent of their cultures consisted of a border zone of
traits     known to both communities but used by one only, or practiced by one
for the other. In this cultural transition there might fall a ritual performed only
by tribelet A but attended by B; a fishing harpoon known to all communities in
the area and used by B but not used by            A because the streams in A's territory
were too small for fish of harpoonable size; and so on. Tribelet C            —say twenty
miles from A, beyond   B— would differ from A more than B differed from A,
but by the same ratio; D      more; and so on; the process continuing in all
                                still

directions until perhaps a       mountain range or an uninhabited tract, a radical
change of speech, or some not too ancient movement of people or other accident
of history, produced a slightly greater jump in the continuity. Where the situa-
tion of the tribelets or     communities was linear, as along the coast from Cali-
fornia to Alaska, the gradualness of the change             is   particularly striking,   and
renders it quite difficult to decide, except on the basis of speech, where one cul-
ture type ended and another began. Surprisingly, it seems to have               made little
difference whether adjacent communities were prevailingly friendly or hostile.
All this seems very much like the locally variant forms of culture in Europe,
especially rural Europe, of only a century or two ago.
       A moment's reflection will show that a well-known historical phenomenon,
the continuity of history, parallels in time this continuity of culture in space.
72                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                §   "5
The fall of Rome did not mean that a former culture was completely obliterated
in A.D. 476, or that a new kind of history first began then; it is just a convenient
landmark. Culture in Western Europe, even in the city of Rome itself, almost
certainly changed less in the decade enclosing 476        —say from 470 to 480—than
in the two decades before or the two after        —say from 450 to 470, and from 480 to
500. At any rate historians would say that this is a fair example of normal his-
torical change.     The same thing is involved in what we have already seen in
regard to cultural changeability (§ 113)      :   while cultures practically cannot stand
wholly still and do always alter, their prevailing behavior is one of inclination
toward dominant stability, so that their normal change is gradual.
     It is just   that we are more familiar with the principle of continuity in his-
torical time than    we are with that in geographic space. Country L is red on the
map, country      M blue. Their speech,     at least the   standard or official language,
changes abruptly at the frontier. The inhabitants pay taxes, in different cur-
rencies, to a     nominal King directed by a prime minister in one capital, to a
republican President in the other. The two states are sometimes at war, and in
between times erect tariff barriers and require passports. The whole setup is cal-
culated to emphasize the thoroughness of the break at a political frontier. Con-
temporary governments usually do their best to emphasize it; national preju-
dices often reinforce it; and finally the colors on the maps rub in an equally
false visual image of it. There    is   never as great a uniformity within a national
frontier as is aimed at or pretended, nor as deep a change across            it.


     The upshot of all of which is that human culture is a continuum or con-
tinuity,   but a continuity gradually changing, and changing equally as              it   is

followed through space and through time.            We recognize, and for convenience
label, culture periods like the Periclean age, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment

or the Rococo in Europe, the Colonial period in America.                We recognize also
culture areas, such as the Occident, the Far East, India, the Nearer or Moham-
medan East. Ethnologists recognize a good many more for illiterate native
peoples outside the scope of documentary history; such as the Southwest of the
United States, the United States Plains, the Arctic coast of America (again in-
cluded in a larger Circumpolar Zone), Andean South America, western Poly-
nesia, Congo-West African coast.        An accidental difference is that culture periods
are often named after something cultural that           happened within them, such as
reformation, enlightenment, exploration, colonization, increase of ignorance and
rudeness; whereas culture areas are mostly named geographically. Nevertheless,
they also really denote a particular culture rather than          its   mere geographical
frame. "Southwestern" culture primarily refers to peaceful, maize-farming, heav-
ily ritualistic Indians living in storied stone     communal houses, only incidentally
to the area this type of culture covered in       New Mexico and Arizona.
     Context alone, then, decides whether the word "culture" refers to a culture,
a particular larger form or manifestation of   it, such as Southwest Indian or
§   "6                 FOLKWAYS AND THE RELATIVITY OF MORALS                        73
Korean; or to a subdivision thereof, such as Zuni; or to all culture seen as a
whole, as a generalization, as when we say that culture is carried by society, or
that it tends to change gradually.



             1 1 6.    FOLKWAYS AND THE RELATIVITY OF MORALS
    In the eighteenth century o£ the "Enlightenment" in Europe .t began to be
widely recognized that the variety of national and tribal customs the world
over was not merely a lot of strange oddities, but had certain significances. If
Huron "savages" took their family line from their mothers, and if "Esquimaux"
felt it their duty to dispatch their aged   parents, this might well have some bear-
ing on original man, as contrasted with members of the highly "polished" so-
cieties of   western Europe. This original or "natural"       man proved to be an
effective club       with which to pound contemporary civilization for its departure
or corruption from an imagined condition of primeval purity. The motivation
was variously anticlerical, antireligious, nostalgically daydreaming, or idealisti-
cally imaginative.

       The nineteenth century came to adhere more and more passionately to the
idea of progress. This idea forbade any looking backward and up to the "noble
savage," but it was favorable to attitudes of relativity, instead of fixity or a per-
fection already achieved.       There was accordingly a growing realization among
intellectuals, during the latter part of that century, of what came to be called the

relativity of morals.      The Eskimo custom which obligated killing off one's old
father was part of an ethical code as genuine as ours. If, in reverse of our way,
the Jew put on his hat and the Moslem took off his shoes on entering a house
of worship, that did not prove        them "wrong," but did prove that there were
many and even opposite ways of showing respect. The diversity in fact sug-
gested that probably there was no absolute right or wrong in such matters: it
was clear that the Arab and the Jew were as convinced as the Christian that they
were doing right by doing the opposite from him.
    Moreover, as soon as people were opposed, pressed, or cross-questioned on
customs of this sort, they manifested resentment: it was evident that they held
to their rules of       conduct with emotion. When asked as to the reason for the
observance, they either had none beyond the allegation that that was the way
it   had always been done (which belief could often be proved erroneous)    ;   or they
gave a mythological justification that was obvious fantasy. All in all, compara-
tive studies not only revealed great diversity, but showed that moral codes were
essentially mere group habits or customs. They were nonrational, though often
falsely rationalized;      and they were emotionally charged. Moreover, the customs
were "blind" those who followed them might be unconscious of them until the
                 :




customs suffered infraction; and the followers were usually unconscious of any
 larger system of principles uniting the customs, or of partial contradictions of
    logic between customs.
74                                  THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            §"6
       The general effect of these nineteenth-century recognitions of course was in
favor of tolerance and in diminution of ethnocentrism          —that tendency   to assume
the universe as pivoted around one's particular people and to see one's in-group
as always right and all out-groups as wrong wherever they differ.             The realiza-
tion that every culture is more or less right in its ways when judged in terms of
its   own premises, and that no culture is provably more right than others in the
abstract, was achieved by a much wider circle of minds than the scattering an-
thropologists of the later nineteenth century. But anthropologists, being in most
continuous contact with a wide series of highly divergent cultures, were perhaps
most consistently impressed, and they came to take the principle for granted
as underlying their work.
     The most eloquent exposition in English of the point of view is Sumner's
Fol\ways of 1906. A somewhat heterodox sociologist and economist freely using
ethnographic and historical data, Sumner wrote brilliantly and exemplified
vividly and abundantly. To him, folkways are ways of the folk, of the un-
sophisticated, unanalytic mass of mankind. They are, in short, customs, held to
with much momentum but with incomplete rationality; and crossing them may
cause a flare-up of fear or anger. They grow unconsciously; they are not crea-
tions of purpose; but they are basic societal forces. Mores," Latin for            customs
and the origin of our word "morals," is a somewhat more special concept that
Sumner helped to establish in nontechnical English usage. Mores are folkways
which include a belief that they are desirable for social welfare and which people
insist that their fellows conform to, though the mores are not derived from

politically constituted authority. They are not laws, though they may produce

laws, just as they result in taboos. "Folkways whose ethical sanctions have risen
into consciousness" might be a fair definition of mores.
     Similar ideas as to the nonrational and unconscious elements in culture were
widely diffused throughout the field of later nineteenth-century social thought
and studies. Marx, for instance, was certainly convinced that he knew the right
understanding of past history as well as the solution of the problems of the
future. Yet his economic determinism is tempered by considerable reahzation of
the unconsciousness of social forces.           He holds that it is not consciousness or
purpose but methods of material production which determine the social, politi-
cal,   and spiritual processes of life— in other words, the noneconomic culture;
and then, in turn, this socio-politico-spiritual culture "determines" or produces
consciousness or recognition of itself.
       Psychology has arrived at much the same basic concepts, largely by a route
of its     own—a route of reaction in some ways. Formally, psychology began as a
branch of philosophy after this had become preoccupied with the problem of
how we know things and what knowledge is valid. The early psychology was
introspective, self-conscious,         and rational. As it drifted, in the later nineteenth
       ^   The little-used singular is mos.
§   117                              CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                 75

century, from philosciphical and deductive affiliations into inductive and explora-
tory aims, it worked on the one hand into objective experiment and test; on the
other, into the liclds of the nonraiional, the emotions              and the subconscious,
where     direct introspection prettymuch breaks down. Psychoanalysis is one
special manifestation of this general psychological trend. The realm of the non-
rational    is   also the realm of   custom and morals, analytically viewed; and cul-
tural, social,    and psychological thinking have more and more approached and
                                                      new culture making a
reinforced one another. The element of relativity, of a
new environment for the individual, came into psychology latest, because there
was nothing in the antecedents of psychology to suggest that differences of cul-
ture had much significance. Introspection in its nature emphasizes the ego and
underemphasizes environment, social or other. Also, the philosophy in which
psychology had its root was so completely concerned with universals and con-
stants that it gave little notice to relativities and differences. Recent decades how-
ever have seen a thorough swing-over of psychology;                 and while as a science
directed at the individual  must operate quite differently from anthropology,
                                it

whose central concern is the superindividual aspect called culture, the two ap-
proaches now make essentially the same basic assumptions as to the relations of
individual and culture. They may therefore be said to be attacking the same set
of problems each from its own side         —each in     its   own proper way, but with co-
operative understanding.



                             117.    CULTURE AND SOCIETY
      Cultures are products of human societies operating under the influence of
cultures handed down to them from earlier societies. This description illustrates
the close relation of culture and society     :   they are counterparts, like the two faces
of a sheet of paper. To each distinctive culture there corresponds, necessarily and
automatically, a particular society: to Hottentot culture, the Hottentot nation-
ality, to   Chinese civilization, the Chinese people. It is rather futile to discuss
which of the two phases or aspects is primary. It is obvious that if there were
no people and therefore no societies, there could be no cultures. But equally, if
there were no cultures, humanity would be merely another species of brute
animals.     We should in fact in that event probably not even be organized in
tight societies like the ants, bees,      and termites, because of lack of the highly
specific instinctual faculties of these animals,       and of their altruistic devotion
to the hive.

      Occasionally someone or other still attempts to assert that culture           is   sec-

ondary to society and therefore relatively negligible; or that within culture the
domain of social relations is primary over the fields of economics, technology,
knowledge, and belief. We have already seen (§6) that the first of these
opinions is arbitrary. The second is equally so. It is true that social structure of
some sort cannot be dispensed with in any culture. But neither can a sub-
7^                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                §   "7
sistcnce economy be dispensed with.          And it is clear that the threats as well as
the final victories of nations and cultures in the two World Wars depended on
their technological capacities, which in turn are parts of their bodies of knowl-
edge. And as to beliefs      —                             —
                          ideologies and standards how can these be relegated
io a  humble secondary place when they permeate and express all of human
living? It is fair enough to select one aspect of this human living as a personal
interest or for special study; but it is unwarranted to insist on its superior
importance.
   As a matter of fact, culture and society are so interwoven as actual phe-
nomena that they are often quite difficult to disentangle. An upper class is
certainly a significant feature of the structure of any society in which it occurs.
Yet it is also a feature of the culture      —an overt feature    if    the aristocracy has
privileges in its      own name; an implicit but perhaps no less important trait if
the de-facto class is unavowed. There is a social and there is a cultural aspect to
a situation like this, undoubtedly; but the phenomena actually constitute but a
single cluster or nexus of facts.
    When the philosopher Comte, "the father of sociology," coined its name
more than a century ago, he appeared to be emphasizing the function of society.
But as soon as he classified societies according to the "stage" they had attained,
                                                                  —
he rated them as mythological, metaphysical, and positive in other words, ac-
cording to their beliefs or type of thought; which is certainly first of all a cul-
tural criterion, and not a societal one.
       Conversely, it is impossible to give an adequate picture of any culture with-
out including an account of its social structure, which almost inevitably ramifies
into economics,         government, law,   religion, art—in fact touches almost every
department of the culture.
       It is   customary to speak of social solidarity but cultural integration. The
two are related, but not quite the same thing. A society can lack solidarity yet
retain a fairly integrated culture.        France during the Great Revolution        is   an
example. England is socially a more class-conscious and class-observing country
than the United States, but most non-Anglo-Saxons would probably agree that
its   culture    is   somewhat more stable and     better-integrated.   American    culture
is    perhaps less differentiated, but the British differentiations seem more tied
together and adjusted, probably because England has had longer to shake itself
down.
    Nevertheless, social solidarity and cultural integration tend to go together;
and there is nothing against turning the terminology around, and speaking of
social integration or even cultural soUdarity.

       It is obvious that each class in a society will possess a slightly   different phase
of the same culture, just as each regional section or district will have one (§ 1x5).
The speech may differ a little, manners and dress are even more likely to, in-
comes and occupations almost inevitably will. Mediaeval Europe and East Asia
had sumptuary laws to enforce class distinctions of dress. We do not usually
^    117                        CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                       77
consider class cultures as actual cultures, because they are parts of "one society"
and this tends to correspond in modern life with the larger political unit of the
nation, and it is to this that we are wont to consider a type of civilization as
attaching. But if there is any need for it, it is just as legitimate intellectually
to speak of "lower-middle-class English culture" as of French culture: the one
is   part of all-class English culture and shades off into it; the other, of western-
European culture. For that matter, a class has as much right to be considered "a
society," at any rate within one locality, as has the total population of a country.

It is more homogeneous, can function more easily as a unit, may or may not

have more solidarity. But it is also a lesser thing, and normally of less signifi-
cance. In short, what has already been said about the range of inclusiveness of
the word "culture," of its being determined by the context, holds equally for
society.

       In the United States, classes theoretically differ less than in most Occidental
national societies. People do differ in income, but that is not supposed to put
them into separate classes. In part this condition is actual, having been initiated
by the newness of the country and the once nearly equal opportunities of start
for everyone. But in part it is an unreal condition   :   social classes exist in America,

yet our basic national ideology disapproves of them.          Hence we disavow them
as much as we can, or fail to be frank in admitting their existence. Our formal
institutions    have certainly long been geared against class segregation: for in-
stance, the franchise and the public school   —state-provided education for        all.   As
if   in conformity with the institutions and the ideals, a rather unusual degree of
outward class uniformity has been achieved in America. This means relative
cultural uniformity between the classes, or relatively similar participation of all
strata and occupations in the benefits and pleasures held out by the culture.

Owning cars, eating steaks, seeing films, and reading the funnies are more
widely shared than in other countries, except perhaps New Zealand and Aus-
tralia.    Actually, the American standard of living certainly has a lot to do with
this: the    standard is high enough to enable more of the population to partici-
pate regularly in these desirables. Nevertheless, the range of American culture
does get narrowed by the uniformizing, and the spread between our actual social
classes is obscured by our approval of uniformity.
       An interesting result of the American inclination to ignore or deny such
social stratification as exists is that social anthropology took a particular turn in

the United States under Warner.    He set out to show that classes exist among
us, how they are characterized, and how people operate in staying in their class
or getting out of it into a higher or a lower one. The classification is basically
in terms of the old common-knowledge recognition of upper, middle, and lower

classes,    more or less corresponding to the aristocracy, bourgeoisie, and prole-
tariat of    Marxian ideology. Following the suggestion given by the familial
British phrase "lower middle class" with its very definite connotations, each of
the three levels is further subdivided, in the     Warner scheme, into upper and
78                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            §   "7
lower. Individuals are put into the subclass to      which the community assigns
them: mostly, anyone in the community that knows a given individual agrees
pretty well with everyone else as to his place in the scale. In an old but smallish
New England town thinly disguised as "Yankee City," the percentage strength
of the six classes from Upper Upper to Lower Lower is:         1.5, 1.5, 10, 28, 33, 25,

with I per cent unknown. In this New England community the classes are also
very well characterized culturally, by what clubs or organizations their members
belong to, denominational affiliation, type of magazines read, and so forth; and
social mobiUty   —social climbing— low and slow.
                                      is

     It remains to be seen   how far this scheme is of general utility, even in other
American situations. It is of course possible to slice any population into three
or six levels; the question is:    How far will these levels represent natural segre-
gations, distinctions, existing de facto in the society and culture ? It seems doubt-
ful how far the seven million people of      New York City could be easily allocated
to the   same six levels; or for that matter the members of a prosperous rural
community in Iowa; and if it turned out that they could somehow be allocated,
it is certain that the cultural criterion of each class would be very different. For

instance, "Cottonville" in the Deep South proved no longer to contain any
Upper Upper old aristocracy, though it was still definitely under the influence
of the ideals and standards of that class. This recognition of a class existing out-
side the community would indicate that Cottonville was not a society complete
in itself; that its culture is only part of a larger culture (§ 119). At the other end
of the scale, its "poor whites" are set off as an essentially unitary Lower class;
and everything in between them and the nonpresent aristocracy, from Lower
Upper to Lower Middle, also seems remarkably homogeneous. All this is for
                             :                                      —
Caucasians in Cottonville the Negroes form a separate "caste" really therefore
a separate though interlocked society      —
                                      with its own social classes. Of these the
Upper, containing 5 per cent of the Negroes, is determined by sex morality,
education, and professional occupation rather than by income.
     "Plainville," as described     by West, is an agricultural Missouri community
with a small-town center. Just about half the population tends to describe itself
as "good, self-respecting, average people," less frequently as "better,"       "middle
class," "all right,"   or occasionally even as "upper class." This half would seem
to correspond objectively more or less to Warner's Middle Class, probably Lower
Middle. A few families among them are somewhat more prosperous and                    in-

fluential than the rest, and are occasionally referred to as "upper crust," "rich,"

or "think they're better." However, they do not differ in manners or in pro-
fessed social claims, and West refrains from designating them as a distinct
group. The whole upper half of Plainville lives overwhelmingly on prairie
land, the lower half, on hill land. Of this lower half, somewhat more than the
         —
majority say around 30 per cent of the total population— is described by the
upper half as "good lower class." The remaining 20 per cent or so segregate in
a ratio of about two to one respectively into "the lower element" and "people
§   117                       CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                79
who live like animals"— these last not only poor but without pride, ignorant,
and apparently often subnormal in intelligence. Both the groups above these
two lowest groups are in full agreement as to which families are to be assigned
there. The two lowest subgroups together would correspond roughly to Warner's
Lower Lower; the 30 per cent above them, to his Upper Lower. Here we have
another example of a community without an upper class within itself: if it has
a top, that exists elsewhere, in the larger national society. In other    words, the
community is not self-sufficient, nor is the culture wholly intelligible in terms
of community structure as such. This condition is probably true in some degree
even of fairly large communities, but is increasingly conspicuous as their size is
smaller.
    Plainville also agrees with our previous American examples in that the
bottom stratum is less numerous than those above it. The social classes do not
form a broad-based pyramid, as social theorists have often proclaimed or as-
          —
sumed and as may have been true until recently in countries of mediaeval
retardation like China, Czarist Russia, and parts of Latin America. The better
diagrammatic representation of social stratification in the United States is evi-
dently by the figure of a lozenge or diamond stood on end, as West employs it
for Plainville.
      Religion was still socially significant in Plainville as of 1941.   Nonchurch
people easily outnumbered any one sect, but the five denominations together had
perhaps twice as many adherents as there were nonchurch people. These de-
nominations would probably have been somewhat different in the next town,
but in Plainville they happened to be, in order of their strength: Baptist, next
Holiness, then Christian and Methodist about even, and          Dunkard last. The
distribution in terms of social rank    is   however quite uneven. Membership in
the Holiness Church is a full 95 per cent Lower Class. Dunkards are about half
and half, and Baptist somewhat more Middle. Neither of these sects includes
persons from the very apex of the local social structure; but Christians and
Methodists do. Both these denominations, and especially the Christian, also
penetrate only very slightly into the lower half of the society. By contrast, the
nonchurch contingent reaches all the way up and down the Plainville social
                                   Middle Class apex, but a decreasing propor-
scale. It includes nearly half of the

tion as    one descends the Middle ranks. Then it increases again toward the
Middle border line and throughout the Lower half, finally taking in most of
"the lower element" and nearly all of the "live-like-animals" segment. It is evi-
dent that the church denominations serve as symbols and instruments of social
hierarchy, but that the distribution of the nonchurch population is due to other
and less obvious factors.
      In "Small Town," of less than 1000 souls in eastern   New York, Hicks found
only two classes, the upper one nearly twice as large as the lower. There is con-
siderable difficulty in defining criteria of distinction between the classes, but no
difficulty in assigning any resident to his class.   Public opinion seems spontane-
8o                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             §   "7
ously unanimous on that. In fact, the largest factor in determining class affilia-
tion in   Small   Town seems to be subjective admission of belonging. Some
accept lower-class affiliation with a dour sense of frustration, but   more do so
with a sense of relief at being able to let themselves go instead of having to live
up to responsibilities and standards.
    Obviously there is no one class pattern that can be applied everywhere.
Conversely, some class segregation can be expected in practically all societies
except the smallest and poorest in culture. The most important effect of the
Yankee City school of social anthropology is probably to prove to us that we
Americans too are socially stratified in spite of wanting to believe that we are
not. If the stratification proves to be locally variable, that only makes it so much
the more interesting.
     The trick of professing one thing and doing another is no doubt common
to all societies. They vary chiefly in what they are inconsistent about. The habit
of rationahzation has been discussed (§ 8i) and will be referred to again (§ 216).
One need not feel too harsh about it. Professions after all mean standards and
ideals; and it may be better for societies to have standards and fall short of them
than not to have them. Obviously, the important thing intellectually is to recog-
nize whatever discrepancy there is, instead of covering up to produce a sensitive
blind spot.

                    118.   INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF SOCIETY
     It has long been recognized that the size of a society can be expected to exert

certain effects on its culture. This influence appears to be most marked in the
periods   when higher civilizations first take shape. While reasoning on this
matter is somewhat a priori, the drift of history and archaeology confirms it.
     Assume a given population in a given area, but divided into a hundred
tribes,each owning a territory yielding it subsistence, each independent, each
jealous and suspicious of its neighbors. With a million people in the area, the
tribes would average 10,000 souls. There might be a council or a chief or a

kinglet to govern each of these tribes. There might be in each tribe some sort
of a central settlement or market or town, but nothing like a real city, nor any
serious accumulation of wealth. Most of the tribal members would be scattered
over the land getting their subsistence.      As in our wholly rural sections until
quite lately, every man would be something of a jack-of-all-trades, able to farm,
clear, build, fell, repair, or fight; his   women would know how to cook, spin,
weave, sew, milk, and thresh, or the equivalents of these in the local form of
culture. There would be little need for writing or records, hence limited learn-

ing. Arts would    most likely be home crafts. The priest and the doctor might
function as such mainly in their spare time after making a living; a smith or
                                                           —
two perhaps would work full time and professionally if iron and tools were
abundant enough to keep him busy. In short, the smallness of the social group
§   n8                     INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF SOCIETY                           8

would tend to keep it undifTerentiated in its activities, and therefore culturally
undeveloped.
       Now let our hundred little tribes be united into one society acknowledging
its   unity   —whether by voluntary conglomeration or by the conquests of one
leader.    The hundred councils or chiefs are replaced by a central government.
The seat of this would tend to become a city; its house, the largest in the coun-
try, would now be a palace of sorts; its shrine, a national temple. To tend the

shrine there might follow full-time priests, who would leave their offices to their
descendants or to trained successors. Revenues and trade would flow into the
capital;   craftsmen could now expect steady custom and could become         skilled.

The ruler's resources and inclination toward show might lead to patronage
which in turn would encourage the arts; the lifelong priests might pile up ob-
servations leading to the devising of a regulated calendar. All in all, the mere
size of the society, now a hundredfold greater and with its parts in closer inter-
                               —                            —
communication than before at least toward its center would trend toward
professional differentiation, accumulation of skills, new inventions, and an up-
surge of cultural content.
       To a greater or less degree this is what appears actually to have happened in
ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, China and Japan, Mexico and Peru, and again,
with intensification, in Western civilization since 1650. The period was by or
before 3000 b.c. in Egypt and Mesopotamia (§286); perhaps a thousand years
later in China (§ 299);    during the Christian era in the other countries. In each
case there  was more political unity than there had previously been, rulers of
greater authority and sometimes with attribution of divinity, the beginnings of
cities, development of metallurgical and other arts, and usually the formulation

or the introduction of systems of writing and calendars. Any one of these ad-
vances tended to bring advancement in others. For instance, city life meant that
there were classes no longer working the soil themselves: rulers, or craftsmen, or
merchants, or priests. Wealth could accumulate; and temples or palaces called
for new architectural endeavors. Similarly, writing opened a variety of new
avenues: bookkeeping for taxes, history on behalf of the reigning dynasty, more
exactly transmitted rituals, records for the calendar-framers. The entire complex
process of forward     movement may have been actually initiated by any one of
its   interwoven components, for all we know   —by urbanization, or by metallurgy,
writing, the divinity ascribed to rulers, or by some other factor. But the distinc-
tive accompaniment in any one of these cases was the political unification.

     That meant there was a much larger society, which could now diversify
into a variety of classes and professions instead of being broken up quantita-
tively into a series of nearly uniform tribal units. And of course a society di-
versified qualitatively means a richer culture instead of a repetitively narrow
one.
       This summary of what actually happened in the protohistoric period in
several parts of the world should not be construed as a universal "must."       The
82                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              §"8
successful development of Greek culture in a period of         autonomous tiny city-
states is enough to show that. Emphatically, the richness of civilizations      cannot
be measured in the abstract by the size of their societies. All that can be main-
tained is that, other things being equal, an integrated society large enough to be
socially diversified has a better chance to produce a richly diversified culture than

an equally large population broken up into many small units each with less
diversification. This seems especially true at a certain level or stage; namely,

after agriculture has made concentration of numbers possible, and          when tribal,
oral, folk culture   is   about to begin to convert into urban and Hterate culture.
The Greek states remained minute in the period of their cultural efflorescence;
but they were urban, and they had recently become literate.
    Also, it is possible for a society to attain new peaks in       its   culture while
many of its members are worse off than before through not sharing in the new
attainments. This is a price that tends to be paid for the gains of specialization;
and it can become fatal. This counterpart is discussed below under Participa-
tion in § 124.



                  119.     SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES

      We have seen how each class in a society exhibits a more or less distinct
phase, a subculture, of the total culture carried by the society; just as geographi-
cal   segments of the society manifest regional aspects of the culture. This prin-
ciple extends farther: to age levels and the sexes.   Men do not practice the specific
habits of the women in their culture, and vice versa. And though both sexes are
generically oriented about these habits   —they always know that certain peculiarly
feminine (or masculine) activities exist   —they may be so hazily informed about
them that they could not adequately practice diem or transmit them in their
entirety if they would. At the same time these sex phases are never felt as con-
stituting more than a side or an aspect of the culture    —
                                                        nor, indeed, do they con-
stitute more. A unisexual society could no more exist among human beings than

could a unisexual race; and neither are there unisexual cultures. The feminine
component is always a complement of the masculine: the culture is not felt as
complete, and is not complete, without both components. The same things holds,
incidentally, for the class phases, and often for the regional phases, of well-
integrated cultures. Scavengers and bankers will be recognized in such cultures
as quite properly following diverse strains of life and making diverse contribu-
tions, but their coherence within the body politic of culture and society is felt

to outweigh the separateness. They are both organs within the same body, like
the patricians and the plebeians in the old Roman fable about the stomach and
the limbs.
    The cultural differences between age levels within a society follow a some-
what different pattern. The ages are inevitably continuous and overlapping, as
sexes and many classes are not. Culture phases associated with age may be
§119                                SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES                             83

assumed to correspond to changes taking place in the culture, rather than to
-eflect chronic or static lines of segregation like those between social classes.

Individuals above               fifty   will largely be trying to practice   and maintain their
established habits and status, and therewith a phase of culture                  some of which
is   just   beginning to pass; those under thirty will be interested in the phase that
is   trying to arrive.
        It is    now well recognized that in contemporary civilization adolescents in
the larger sense         — the individuals between dependent childhood and       ma-   full

turity with social responsibility      — learn more about many things from age mates
or near-age mates than from their elders. At any rate, they learn more willingly,
often eagerly, from age mates, and are more conditioned socially by them. As
for the effect of this fact               on culture, that is an intriguing and little-explored
problem. However, it seems that the constant change which is normal in every
culture is chiefly initiated not by its adolescents, but by its mature individuals,
especially by the younger half of these                mature individuals.
       What then do adolescents teach each other? It appears to be little in the
way of substantial cultural content. This substantial content, if well estabUshed
in the culture, would come of itself from the parental generation; if new, from
the younger or more progressive section of the adult population as a whole.
What adolescents impart to one another seems chiefly to be accepted cultural
content         stylistically    modified as to its manner or form. This means fashions,
mannerisms, ways of speaking,                    sitting,   dancing, or reacting, and the like:
special brands of slang, for instance, or of slouches and other postures; modi-
fications of existing traits, in short, rather than brand-new elements of culture.
The subadult age class goes in for certain choices among existing types of
clothes, such as low flat shoes and sweaters for coeds, or even only a certain way
of pushing the sleeves back; they do not ordinarily invent a new garment. This
example seems typical of adolescent culture. Its quality is a special twist given
to the standard culture; a conscious departure from some elements of it, or
a sort of deliberately distorted reflection. Ordinarily there is no real revolt, no
seeking a reform, but a basic conformity with the existing order, accentuated by
an assertion of age-class independence at points of no great moment. By the
time full social maturity is entered, most of the twists are abandoned by each
individual.         The whole phenomenon may be compared to the slight wave or
bulge of water that the bow of a moving ship keeps pushing just ahead of it.
    It must also be remembered that this kind of adolescent-culture phase is

specially characteristic of modern city life                and the leisure of prolonged educa-
tion.    In cultures or classes where economic responsibility is assumed early, the
more usual adolescent urge seems to be toward acquisition of adult status and
privilege in normal form.
       It also      seems possible that in our contemporary society the urge of each
adolescent generation to set itself off as an age class is an unconscious compensa-
tion for the relative lack of sharp demarcation of overt social levels.
84                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 § 1 19


     A particular kind of class   is   caste. Castes are closed classes.   Individual mo-
bility from one into    another class is forbidden by the larger society. Naturally,
each caste reflects one particular facet of a larger culture. This is true even where,
as in    most of the United States, the basic doctrine of democratic equality sets
limits to the functioning of caste. American Negro culture may aim at being
an integration into white culture or a repetition of it, but actually it is a variant
and not a duplication. In a country like India, differentiations are so intensive,
and so firmly entrenched, that the more extreme castes might almost be ac-
credited as following distinct cultures, so much do they differ       —not only in oc-
cupation and rank, but in food, manners, internal laws, education, amusements,
worship, and standards. Essentially it is the less extreme intervening castes, plus
intercaste community of regional speech, which succeed in holding the top and
bottom levels within the frame of one society and one culture in India.
    India is almost perversely unique in the degree to which it is caste-ridden,
and the American color situation carries a high-voltage charge of emotion, so it
may be well to examine a case that does not involve either race or a wholesale
caste system.    Through much of North Africa and Arabia smiths form an
in-marrying profession. They may be respected, despised, or feared, but are set
apart.    Among the camel-breeding Beduin of northern Arabia, such as the
Ruwala, smiths and the Negro slaves form the only separate castes not marry-
ing with the main population. The smiths alone know how to shoe horses, repair
guns, and the Hke, and get paid for their work, with which income they pur-
chase their food and living, instead of raising camels as do the rest of the Beduin.
They are uninvolved in the touchy honor system, vendettas, and raids of their
tribes. If   by oversight a smith is pillaged, the smiths in the raiding group ar-
range for his property to be returned to him. On the other hand, though they
do not fight, smiths receive what may be described as a small fixed percentage
of the spoils taken in battle. It is evident that the social and prestige system as
well as the occupational and economic activities of the smiths is wholly distinct
from those of the main body of the Ruwala Beduin. Yet the two form parts of
one society. The Ruwala would be paralyzed without their smiths, and the
latter of course could not exist at all without the Ruwala.



              120.   NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES

    Much the same sort of relation holds, on a larger scale, between the Beduin
and the neighboring settled Arabs. The livelihood of the nomads is in their
camels, whose milk is their main food, whose herds are their wealth and their
only salable produce (§ 165). Each midsummer when the water holes of the
steppe and the desert go dry, it is with their camels that they buy, in the settled
country, all their clothing and black tents, their carpets, their weapons and iron
pans, barley to feed their prized brood mares, and virtually all their own non-
             —
milk food wheat, rice, dates, and coffee. The very poor may have to do without
§    120                NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES                             85
this bought food;       but the reasonably prosperous consume close to a pound of it
a day per capita. Meat is too valuable to eat, ordinarily; a butchered camel is so

much capital eaten up. It is clear that without what they secure from the towns
and traders of the farming country, the Beduin would have so one-sided a cul-
ture that they could not survive by it: no clothing, shelter, weapons, few utensils,
limited diet. In one sense, accordingly, their own culture is no more than a half-
culture. At least they can produce only half of it, and are dependent on the
Hadhar, the "dwellers in brick," for the other half. Yet the Beduin are not a
mere occupational subgroup, nor a caste like the smiths. They are a full-fledged
society, or series of tribal societies, independent, autonomous, each owning terri-

tory, waging war.

     To some extent, this condition of possessing a "half-culture" holds for most
nomads. Their range is from Arabia westward across Africa through and south
of the Sahara; and eastward through Iran, Soviet Turkestan, Chinese Turkestan
                                                                  —
and Tibet, North China and Mongolia, to Manchuria the great transconti-
nental arid belt of Africa-Asia. With insignificant exceptions          it   is   only in this
belt that true pastoral      nomads occur: peoples making their living wholly off
their flocks without settling down to plant. Alongside them, however, in rainier
tracts and oases or on irrigated land within the belt, there normally are farmers,

and often towns or cities. These agricultural populations are frequently the more
numerous, though the herders loom large on the map because they need and
have more of the low-grade land. In some areas the herding people are politi-
cally dominant, like the Masai and Bahima and Banyankole in East Africa, and

the Fulah in West Africa. Elsewhere, the settled people are more often on top,
though it may be difficult, or not very worth while, for them to control the
roamers in the steppe. Jenghis Khan was a pastoral nomad Mongol when he
and his sons and grandsons in the 1200's conquered out from Central Asia as far
as to include Russia and China. But by 1600 Mongolia was again dominated by
China. Nomads in general feel free, are proud, and look down on the sedentary
groups, though they are fewer, poorer, and envious of the latters' luxury and
wealth. The roaming life in the desert largely colored early Arabic poetry; but
Mohammed, who launched the Arabs and their culture to greatness, was a
townsman and a trader. Lattimore has even advanced a theory that East Asiatic
nomadism developed secondarily out of the mixed farming and stockbreeding
of China when increase of population began to push this mixed method of Uve-
lihood northward and inland into marginal steppe and then into submarginal
desert. After a certain point was reached, it proved more profitable to renounce
planting altogether in favor of wide herd range and human mobility. This is
suggested as having begun to happen on the North China frontier only shortly
before the Christian era; whereupon the power of the Hiung-Nu arose as the
first of a succession of transient pastoral-nomadic states of which the Mongol

finally became the greatest. This interpretation still remains hypothetical; but

it   is    interesting because   it   does recognize pure pastoralism as a specialty      sec-
86                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                  §   120

ondarily segregated out of a     more balanced economy by accentuation of one
part.
      In passing, it may be mentioned that the view of a succession of stages of
human-culture evolution from hunting to herding to farming is now considered
a completely antiquated theory. It was a pseudo-philosophical guess aiming to
supersede actual history, and there are masses of scholarly and scientific evidence
to the contrary. In fact, the theory has been traced back in its germs to specula-
tions made by the Sumerians of lower Mesopotamia five thousand years ago.
      All in all, while it would be an exaggeration to say that all pastoral nomad
cultures would perish if they tried to become wholly self-sufficient in isolation,
yet it is clear that they are particularly one-sided and limited, and tend to stand
in a relation of complement to the richer and more varied cultures of adjacent
or interspersed sedentary societies. This is what is meant here by calling them
half-cultures or part-cultures. They   would not have been able to specialize to
the same degree if they were wholly isolated and independent.     They exist in
some degree of cultural and social symbiosis.
    Our cowboy world of Western fiction and films is much the same sort of
thing on a fantasy level. On that level, attention is directed toward romance, and
away from the fact that this appealing world of the Bar-X ranch would collapse,
or at least squalidly deteriorate, if it were really cut ofJ from the rest of the
United States. Riding range in actual life is just one occupation of many in our
economy, and in everything else the cowpuncher is a participant in American
culture and only in that. If he lived in the pastoral belt of Africa-Asia, the cow-
puncher would often be set apart from the nonpastoral population in race or
speech or religion also, and perhaps he would be politically independent. But
his complementary integration with the nonnomadic culture would remain
fairly similar to the cowpuncher's with ours. It is in his social consciousness that

the nomad is free, separate, and proud. His specific culture       may be almost as
largely a part of a greater culture as the facet cultures of classes or castes else-
where are only such parts.
    There are several other populations, ranging from castes to small races, to
                                                             —
whom something like half-cultures might be attributed and disputed.
    There are the Jews, whose culture differs from that of coterritorial Gentiles
primarily in religion and ritual practices. When this religion loses its hold, Jews
come to approximate Gentiles very closely, and generally tend to merge socially,
or at least are willing to lose their group identity. Where the culture of Jews
is   distinctive in nonreligious matters, as in their occupations,   it   is   most often
because they are confined to these through being shut out from other callings;
or through having been shut out legally from them until so recently that en-
forced habits still persist. The degree to which Jews are separate in their bodily
heredity has been discussed in § 68. It can be at best only a quite minor factor in
their culture determination. Their speech too     is   usually that of the country in
which they live. If it differs, it is through recency of immigration, as in New
§    I20               NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES                        87

York. Or it is because of enforced migration, as of the Spanish-speaking Jews
of Salonika, or the corrupt German called Yiddish which the Jews of much of
eastern      Europe spoke because they were driven       there   from Germany. Com-
pulsory ghetto segregation, as in Czarist Russia, has kept dialects like Yiddish
alive through the centuries. Biblical     Hebrew was a dead language to about the
same degree as Latin until it was resuscitated as a living national speech by some
hundreds of thousands of Zionists in Palestine; but whether with historical suc-
cess, only the future can tell (§ 107, 181).

    All in all, the Jews seem to constitute a social quasi-caste based originally
and mainly on a religion that of course is voluntary, not enforced. Their social
segregation is markedly stronger than their cultural distinctness, though the
latter is not absolutely lacking.

     The Gypsy situation is a little different. Fundamentally, the Gypsies are an
endogamous caste. They originated in India; and they show definite evidence of
that fact in their blood type (§ 72) and in the Romany speech of which they re-
tain remnants in addition to the language of whatever country they inhabit. In
religion they are more or less professing Christians; and they specialize in certain
occupations like horse-trading and tinkering. But what sets them off from the
rest of the population is not so    much positive cultural peculiarities as the inclina-
tion toward an unrooted and vagrant life. Their distinctness lies above all in an
                        which leads them to select a certain group of activities
attitude, or orientation,
in Western civilization and to discard most of the others. They want a horse
or an automobile, but not a house; silver jewelry, but not a bank account; music,
but no education; and so on. In many of their attitudes they are like hobos: both
elect to     follow one particular vein of the many that make up our culture      —the
vein or line of freedom, irresponsibility, and instability. But of course hobos have
no separateness of race or speech, nor are they strictly a caste, because without
women and families they lack hereditary continuity and are merely an asso-
ciation group constantly rerecruited by adversity or temperament. Gypsies evince
definite cultural distinctness; only, as they neither constitute a full society     nor
possess a complete culture, they serve as another example of half-cultures. They
certainly have an ethos (§ 125) all their own.
       At the extreme edge of this concept, we have peoples like the Seri Indians
or the Negritos, whose attitudes are in part like those of Gypsies. Here we have
indubitably distinct and autonomous social groups, each with its specific culture.
The Negritos are even markedly distinct in their miniature racial type (§64),
though they speak the languages of their neighbors.^ The mode of life of both
peoples is unsettled, and, in line with that propensity, the culture of both may
be described as kept simple. It contains nothing specific that is not known in the
surrounding richer cultures. The specializations consist of makeshifts like the

       ^   The Negritos of the Andaman Islands are the only ones who have no immediate
neighbors and who do have a language of their own.
88                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § I20


single shaft that the Seri use interchangeably as harpoon, mast, or raft-poler; or
like the   Negrito bow, which the non-Negrito Filipinos have discarded as use-
less to   them. Historically at any rate, cultures such as these are parasitic. They
have contributed little or nothing, so far as we can judge, to the stock of human
culture, while they    have taken from other cultures what they do possess, and
that with heavy reduction. The Seri, so far back as        we know them, have also
been outrighdy parasitic on other groups, so far as they could, by force, cajolery,
or sufferance,   much like Gypsies. On the contrary, the Negritos are sturdily
independent; so that the cases are not quite parallel. Moreover, the historical
dependence or parasitism of one culture on another is by no means the same
thing as the social parasitism of one group on another. Nevertheless, if all non-
Gypsies were suddenly blotted out of Europe and North America and those
continents left wholly to the Gypsies, it is reasonable to believe that the culture
of the Gypsies in a      few generations would    fairly   resemble that of Seris or
Negritos in orientation, and perhaps ultimately in simplicity of substance or
content also.
     This matter of partial cultures or half-cultures needs more defining and
exploring. It is evident that the relations between the larger or "enclosing" cul-
tures and the special smaller ones vary a great deal   —as much so as the relations
between "whole" societies and their castes or classes or regional segments. Un-
consciously we tend to think in terms of large ethnic units, such as the French,
whose geographic boundaries are within a single color block on the map, and
whose society, nation, language, and culture pretty well coincide. Actually of
course France includes not only "Frenchmen" but Gypsies, Jews, Bretons,
Walloons, Basques, hobos, and apache criminals, each of which groups has its
variant form of French civilization, just as French officials and French dirt
farmers have. And of course French civilization itself is only one phase or form
of Western culture. Also we tend to think of the units as static, whereas they
are constandy flowing, changing, and influencing one another. If we knew
better the history of peoples like Negritos, Seris, or even Gypsies, or if we kept
more in mind the total composite history of peoples like the French and the
Bretons, we would realize more clearly the continuity of the material of culture,
and how its segregations are never complete. In their origin and their history
even the greatest and richest cultures are only parts of the great nexus of human
culture as a whole.



      121.    RURAL AND URBAN           FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS
                                                                modern popu-
     It is customary to distinguish rural and urban components in

lations.There are of course corresponding rural and urban facets or aspects in
the culture of such societies. Moreover, whole societies and cultures can be
classified into those predominantly rural or predominantly urban. India,      China,
and Czarist Russia will serve as examples of the one; England or Massachusetts
§   121              RURAL AND URBAN       — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                  89

of the other         —cjr   even Australia, recent as it is, with the majority of its inhabi-
tants living in its capital cities. In this familiar form, the rural-urban distinction
is well enough known to need no detailed analysis                  —
                                                          except for one comment
on a fundamental though obvious fact. The rural condition is the underlying
one, logically and historically: there must be a country area producing more food
than it consumes before other people can live in cities.
      On the widest consideration, the rural-urban differentiation is a somewhat
special and modern form of a more general distinction of societies              and cultures
into those which are   more folklike and those which are more sophisticated or
"civilized." This is not an either-or segregation. Rather we must conceive of a
line or an axis along which societies and cultures, or the part-cultures of seg-

ments of societies, can be ranged from the one extreme or pole of greatest folk-
like or tribal       backwardness to the opposite pole of greatest sophistication. The
concept is of some importance because it gathers in and subsumes a series of
diverse but related recognitions that have gradually become established in social
science.
      A characteristic folk culture or tribal culture belongs to a small, isolated,
close-knit society, in which person-to-person relations are prevalent, kinship is
a  dominant factor, and organization, both societal and cultural, is therefore
                                      —
largely on a basis of kinship sometimes including fictitious kinship, as in many
clans and moieties. By contrast, political institutions are weakly developed "prim-  :




itive democracy" is the characteristic form; but this denotes only a maximum of

equality coexisting with a minimum of authority or control. Such a way of
doing works because of the strong integration within the small group involved.
Everyone knows everyone else, and many of them are blood or affinal relatives.*
It has long been noted that there seems to be a spontaneous upper limit of tribal

size: probably around five thousand souls, in many areas less than that. When

this limit      is   transcended, the society breaks into two, often painlessly.         Where
"tribes" of fifty or a hundred thousand or a million persons are spoken of, they
are either organized into a supertribal state, or they are really no longer tribes,
but nationalities. Nationalities possess a culture and a speech that they recog-
nize as common in essentials, but they may constitute many societies. This means
that, in the case of a nationality, ethnically         and culturally we are dealing with
a single people, but politically often           with multiple independent societies, each
one autonomous and owning its own distinct tract of land. Such would be
populations like the Lolo, the Ifugao, the Maya, all of whom are sometimes
inaccurately called "tribes" when they really are multiple-society nationalities of
nearly uniform culture. The mere fact of the narrowness of range of their social
integration holds them near the folk end of the polar axis.®

     * Related to the folk-sophisticate polarity are the distinctions made by Durkheim be-

tween "organic" and "mechanical" solidarity, and by Tonnies between "community" and
 'society," as his Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft are approximately translated.
      *   The subject of nationality is discussed also in § 80, 102, 180-81.
90                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § 121


     It is also    the smallness of the maximal social unit which keeps folk popu-
lations homogeneous and uniform, with only slight division-of-labor specializa-
tion, beginnings of class divisions, or slender concentrations of residence in per-

manent towns. Folk societies are attached to their soil emotionally by ties of
habit, and economically by experience. Consequently they belong to that group

of societies   which    identify themselves with their locality, in contrast to the
sophisticated city dwellers who float without roots but take pride in living in
their era   and day and are therefore constantly subject to the play of fashion
(§ 121, 164, 253).
     Finally, it is folk societies that are specially dominated in their culture and
their behavior      by the folkways discussed in § 116. Their moral and      religious
sense is therefore strong. They believe in the sacred things; their sense of right
and wrong springs from unconscious roots of social feeling, and is therefore
unreasoned, compulsive, and strong.
     Folk cultures afford their individual members full participation in their
functioning    —
              they invite and encourage such participation; their functioning,
however limited and inadequate, is therefore personalized and saturated. The
relatively small range of their culture content, the close-knitness of the partici-
pation in it, the very limitation of scope, all make for a sharpness of patterns in
the culture, which are well characterized, consistent, and interrelated. Narrow-
ness, depth, and intensity are the qualities of folk cultures.

     Maturely civilized societies are inevitably large. A population that has be-
come great, whether by its own growth, by absorption, or by the welding to-
gether of originally independent groups, inevitably becomes depersonalized on
the one hand, individualized on the other. The kin group, of lifelong close asso-
ciates bound by affective ties, has lost its force, except for the   immediate or bio-
logical family,     and often partly even within that. In consequence, each indi-
vidual's relations with others take on     an impersonal character. There are now
numerous such relations, but most of them are special, limited, shallow, without
emotional implications. We do not know our milkman, who in fact probably
represents a corporation none of whose members we have ever set eyes on. And
as for the actual delivery driver, if we do now and then see him, it is to extend a
greeting or a comment on the weather: we do not invite him to dinner or seri-
ously exchange views on religion or social problems with him. If we have real
business with him, such as ordering an extra quart, we usually make sure of it
by leaving him a note in an empty bottle       —about as impersonal and unemo-
tional a method as there is. In fact, most writing and all printing are inevitably
indirect, remote, and "denatured" as regards feeling, compared with face-to-face

contact. Writing, then, greatly reinforces population size as a joint cause of the
growing impersonalization of higher civilization. So do large-scale urbanization
and mechanical industrialization. The four constitute a set of interdependent
causes, and of intercorrelated effects as well.
§    121           RURAL AND URBAN        — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                     9I

     At the same time, kin and associative groups, which were dominant under
tribal cuhure, have lost most of their strength and influence, and the large total

society being only remotely and mechanically interested in persons, the indi-
vidual has become relatively free. He is free to try to develop as he wishes, free
to choose his own contacts and to change them. There is nothing to hold him
in the course of his forefathers, nor even in his own original course. Individuals
therefore       become highly differentiated          — not indeed in their inner personality,
which the immense society and great culture have difficulty in reaching inti-
            —
mately but in their behavior, their actions. This differentiation corresponds to
the differentiation of labor         and profession. With it also there tends to go a
certain instability. This shows in the fluctuating careers of individuals: they may
live here today, there tomorrow, with ever               new associates but perhaps never close
friends.     On the sociocultural side it shows in the fluctuations of fashion, not only
of dress but of fads, novelties, amusements, and the fleeting popularity of persons
as well as things (§ 164, 253). The influence of the total sociocultural                mass on
the individual is probably as great as in the small folk society; but it is indirect,
remote, "mechanical," because             it   is   impersonal, extensive instead of intensive,
and directed toward time co-ordination rather than toward association based on
spatial contiguity.
        With this diluting and spreading of the fervid intensities of attachment, it is
inevitable that religiosity, piety, regard for the sacred things, should tend to
evaporate with civilization. Shrines become                 show places rather than spots of
worship. Criticism and rationalism grow. As beliefs fade that have rested largely
on the social dictation of a homogeneous small group, empirical and actual
knowledge comes to seem more desirable, and accumulates. Faith in the super-
natural and the magical gives way to faith in science. The culture and the life
are secularized. Here again dilution of the affective social group into imperson-
ality      goes hand in hand with rationalization, secularization, and urbanization:
each tends to produce the others and to be further produced by them.
        It is   evident that our present-day Western civilization            is   near one polar
end   —the most urbanized,         lay,   depersonalized, sophisticatedly civilized end     —of
an axis that can be traced through all societies and cultures. Basically this classi-
fication or ranging on a scale is perhaps social in character, concerned with size

and integration of the group. It is however expressed also in culture, and ap-
parently more emphatically so; namely, as secularization, ceaselessness of the
swings of fashion, and cultural instability. Even the rural-urban and tribal-state
distinctions deal with forms that are cultural as well as social. And finally, there
is   a psychological expression of the polarity, manifest in affectiveness, deperson-
alization of relations, and the like.
        Of course, intergradations occur all along the axis. China, for instance, and
India are markedly         less   sophisticate-urban-depersonalized than Western coun
tries, but      much more so than most tribal nationalities.
92                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                           § 121


      An intermediate place is occupied also by peasantry. Peasants are definitely
rural   —yet   live in relation to market towns; they form a class segment of a larger

population which usually contains also urban centers, sometimes metropolitan
capitals.   They constitute part-societies with part-cultures. They lack the isola-
tion, the political   autonomy, and the self-sufficiency of tribal populations; but
their local units retain much of their old identity, integration,      and attachment
to soil and cults. Peasantries persisted in probably every European country along-
side growing urbanization and industrialization all through the nineteenth cen-
tury, and they had been modified but were by no means extinct when the crash
of World War II overwhelmed the Continent. In Russia, four-fifths of the popu-
lation in 191 7 consisted of ex-serf peasants.      New countries rapidly settled by
large-scale immigration,        such as the United States and Australia, leave small
room for peasant conditions or attitudes. There is too little rooting in the soil,
too little stabiUty or knitting together by kinship, for local particularity as ex-
pressed in folk custom or peasant art to develop. However, a close approxima-
tion to a true peasantry did develop in those Latin            American countries like
Mexico, Guatemala, Peru, and Bolivia where the Spanish conquest froze the
bulk of the native population resident on the land into a depressed class living
under its own partial or folk culture. In later prehistory, after food production
had become established, a number of societies exhibit rather conspicuous peas-
antUke qualities: the Neolithic Europeans, for instance, including the Swiss
lake dwellers (§ 283)     ;   also the Indian, Greek,   and other early Indo-Europeans
(§ 305). These are all peoples      who had become settled but, either from newness
or   from remoteness, had made little progress toward urbanization. The Near
East may have gone through a similar phase on which we are less well informed
because it happened two to three thousand years earlier. And there were some
interesting national differences in this regard; as         between Mesopotamia and
Egypt, for instance. In these two lands amorphous folk cultures grew simultane-
ously into early civilizations, with writing, towns, political organization, metallic
industry. But during the last millennium before Christ,          Mesopotamia had be-
come sophisticatedly civilized, with a conquered empire, great cities of metro-
politan character like Babylon, and prosecution of true science; whereas Egypt
had stood nearly still for a thousand years. This difference was perhaps pardy
due to the fact that the population of Egypt consisted overwhelmingly of a rural
peasantry, capped by little else than a governing bureaucracy.
    The question fairly arises whether the trend from the rural to the urban,
from folk to sophisticate culture, involves the gradual extinction of religion and
moraUty, as might seem inferable from the strength that the mores and beliefs
in the sacra retain in localized folk cultures, but tend to lose in civilization. In
short, can we project this tendency, so apparent at the present day, and perhaps
most strongly so in Western civilization, forward into the future to a vanishing
point? In hne with such a trend is the fact that as time has gone on, states or
empires have been growing larger; and that "universal" states and churches
S   121       RURAL AND URBAN      — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                  93
universal in the Toynbee sense of aiming at totality   —are regular and expectable
phases in the growth of major civilizations.
      However, any prophecy      resting   on the extrapolation   or projection of a
trend assumes that the trend is constant. There is no proof that such constancy
holds throughout for the change from folk culture to sophisticate civilization.
We know of pieces of history that show the change; our own American con-
temporary history is impressively so oriented; and over the total range of human
culture the net drift is perhaps to the same effect. But the trend is not universal
and is not irreversible. For instance, following Alexander the Great's conquest
and the fusion of mature Greek and mature western-Asiatic civilizations, there
first occurred a conspicuous development of many of the symptoms that char-

acterize   modern life: withering of the closer social ties, along with decay of
beliefs and piety, democratization, growth of population, cities and larger states,

industrialization,   marked accumulation of knowledge, general         sophistication.
This culture period is known as Hellenistic; in the early  Roman Empire its
character was both accentuated and spread to the western Mediterranean. How-
ever, from the beginning of the breakdown of the Roman Empire in the third
century, the drift    was reversed in most respects. The international state fell
apart; the fragments      had Uttle intercommunication; loyalties became ethnic,
often tribal; outlooks were parochial, at best provincial, instead of metropolitan.
Cities shrank tremendously; the self-sufficient economic unit now was the rural
villa. Knowledge and education decreased; religious convictions under Chris-

tianity were far firmer and more influential than they had been in late paganism.

The outcome was the western-European "Dark Ages" of rural custom, igno-
rance, piety, and folkway dominance, from which our own civilization made
its first step of gradual emergence when it attained to mediaevalism. In the East,

Constantinople and in a measure Alexandria indeed remained great cities of
wealth and sophistication for some centuries longer. But they finally fell before
the expansion of Islamic society, whose culture must in some ways be regarded
as recessive also; it certainly aimed at simplification.
      There have presumably been other reversals in history. The overturn from
the Indus Valley civilization to that of the Vedic Aryans certainly signified the
partial triumph of rural folkway living (§ 105). And even primitives vary con-
siderably in the strength of their piety and animistic beliefs (§250). It may
therefore be fairly concluded that movement along the rural-urban, folk-sophisti-
cate axis is not necessarily one-way or predestined.
      It is of interest in this connection that Soviet doctrine aims at bringing about

a condition closely resembling one of the polar extremes we are discussing. The
program includes a single world state with only one class of citizens, speaking
a single language; what remains of other idioms and of regional customs will
be harmless nostalgic remembrances of the order of folk songs and dances
(§ 182). Life will be fully industrialized, according to the Soviet program; it
will be lived urbanly even on the farm. Knowledge and enlightenment will be
94                                  THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                           § 121


universal; religion will be defunct, rationalism in full control, the individual a
willing, depersonalized cog serving the ends of the universal community. It is
really rather curious         how closely the goal of Communism approximates an
anticipatory projection or sensing from the drift of the last two or three cen-
turies: it is like a Lindberghian "wave of the future."

   Finally, the folk-sophisticate polarity, especially when it is viewed not so
much as a scale but as a one-way drift, definitely overlaps with the emotionally
tinged idea of "progress" that is discussed farther on in this chapter, in § 127-128.



                122.     INTEGRATION              INHERENT OR INDUCED
      The double proposition can hardly be overaffirmed that most of what is in
any one culture was produced outside of                  it,   but that the highly composite
product nevertheless is regularly felt as something coherent and integrated, and
normally is accepted as "right." It is so accepted because the average individual
is   so thoroughly   under the influence of his culture, has been so molded by it
in growing up and adjusting to it, that even its incoherences and contradictions
tend to be taken for granted as if they were logically sound and a-priori evi-
dent. It must be     remembered also that any "average" individual knows little
or nothing through convincing personal experience of other cultures, so that
his   own must appear to him as being natural and inevitable. He accepts his
culture, his social inheritance, as            he accepts the surrounding atmosphere he
breathes, or as a fish accepts water. What is fifty years old in this culture  and
what is three thousand years old touch him alike and affect him aUke. So do
elements that the culture originated, and elements which were introduced into
it. Thus it is no wonder that his immediate reaction to it is as to a homogeneous

unit. It is only dissective analysis and knowledge of history that reveal the com-
positeness of any culture.
      As regards the historical origin of its contents, accordingly, every civilization
is   what Lowie has called it        :   a "thing of shreds and patches," a "planless hodge-
podge"; but it does not ordinarily seem so to the people living under it, nor
does it function as such. Every culture is an accretion to a far greater degree than
any living organism. It is the end product of a long series of events occurring
mostly in other cultures, accidents from its own point of view, but ultimately
of influence upon it. Plan or pattern there always is             —and in some ways pat-          its

tern is the most imponant thing about any culture                —see the whole next chapter
nevertheless, as regards origin, plan or pattern is secondary. The plan modifies
the cultural material that flows in, sometimes rejects               it,   fits   it   all,   native    and
foreign, into something that is not too discordant, something that the majority
of the society can get along under tolerably and some of them successfully and
pleasantly. It is patternings that produce the internal consistency.                     But it is im-
portant to recognize that cultures do not start with a pattern or predetermined
plan and then     fill   it   in.   That is what inveterate reformers and dreamers of
§   122                INTEGRATION   —INHERENT OR INDUCED                          95
Utopias do. Actual      societies tend   to evolve the   plan of their cultures as the
content of these grows. And the plan changes as introduced content changes,
although traits of internal origin   — innovations—are likely to develop in accord
with the way the pattern-plan stands at the moment.
       In short, cultures are constantly and automatically acquiring or reacquiring
a sort of integration.    But this is a very different thing from the organic inte-
gration that holds together, say, a grasshopper or a rabbit. This organic in-
tegration involves a pattern of finished animal that is essentially predetermined
when two germ cells unite to start a new individual. Cultural integration or     —
for that matter human social integration— is invariably of a much looser sort.
It is an   accommodation of discrete parts, largely inflowing parts, into a more or
lessworkable fit. It is not a growth of parts unfolding from a germ in accord
with a pre-existing harmonious master plan. Such an unfolding has often been
assumed, insinuated, or asserted by writers as diverse as Frazer, Spengler, and
Malinowski. But it remains wholly undemonstrated, and history shows it to be
at least partly untrue.

       The point sometimes made, as by Radcliffe-Brown, that every society is
confronted by the constant problem of how it is to preserve or maintain itself,
seems a false analogy with the organic world, where the struggle for existence
mostly is indeed keen. But when one society incorporates another, it does not
ordinarily destroy it, except perhaps as a conceptually separate entity. Its mem-
bers go on living under somewhat altered conditions; the frame of the society
has been enlarged; whereas if a society splits, there merely are two instead of
one. Culture    we have seen to be even more plastic than societies in merging,
partly merging, or dividing.
       Moreover, while animals make every effort to maintain themselves, they
are evidently not aware of a constant need of self-preservation; nor indeed are
men, who are the most conscious of organisms. Food is necessary to life, and
animals get hungry and set about satisfying their hunger, with pleasure if suc-
cessful; but they do not feel it as an unremitting problem of self-preservation.
That is rather the intellectual attitude of philosophers, or emotionally of neu-
rotics. When it comes to societies and cultures, the problem of preservation seems

even more philosophical and remote. The normal attitude of the normal man
probably is that his society and culture were, are, and will be. If anything, he is
likely to assume more perpetuity for them than they possess. And not without
reason. Most cultures do continue for quite a while. Sooner or later they may be
superseded, or altered out of recognition; but ordinarily there is no immediate
prospect whatever of that.
       In fact, what has impressed most observers is the power of persistence of
cultures.   They always change, but they change slowly        —too gradually to suit
the reformer. Every nation or tribe has its conservative party, whether it is so
labeled or not. There is nothing mystical in this faculty of cultures to maintain
themselves and to resist overrapid alteration. Any culture, even the lowly one
96                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            § 122


of a small society, is a pretty big thing, a complex of thousands of items and
activities, each interconnected   with many others. It just is a large mass to dent,
or roll along, or do away with. And this holds even more for the great civiliza-
tions of great nations. There is so much to them that it is almost a wonder that
they alter as much as they do. Even pieces of them are enormous. Take the
government of the State of Pennsylvania, or the Presbyterian Church, or the
educational system of Switzerland, or the commerce of England, and think of
all   they comprise, plus all that they touch or interlock with in addition.   How
can they be destroyed quickly, except by rare world catastrophes or revolutions.?
Big things at rest have great inertia, and if in motion they have great momen-
tum. Such seems the way to look at the enormous superindividual aggregations
that we call our greater civilizations. They change; they are always changing;
but at any given moment the expectation is that they will go on, mainly as they
are,   though never wholly so. To fail to realize this is to disregard the total
trend of history.



                       123.   MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL
       Through being born into a society, every individual is also born into a
culture. This culture molds him, and he participates in it.
       The degree to which every individual is molded by his culture is enor-
mous. We do not ordinarily recognize the full strength of this shaping process,
because it happens to everyone, it happens gradually, it is satisfying at least as
often as it is painful, and usually there is no obvious alternative open anyway.
Hence the molding is taken for granted and is accepted, Uke the culture itself
perhaps not quite unconsciously, but uncritically. The formal or deliberate part
of the process we call educationeducation through schools, in religion, and in
                                   :



manners and morals primarily at home. These agencies convey the mores and
some of the folkways (§116). But perhaps a larger fraction of the cultural tradi-
tion is acquired by each individual at his own initiative.    He is left to "pick it
up," to grow into it. In this class are his speech, bodily postures and gestures,
mental and social attitudes, which he imitates from his elders or from near-age
mates, and a thousand and one activities, such as putting on shoes, splitting fire-
wood, or driving a car, which a child "learns," often without any formal in-
struction, because he has seen others do these things and wants to do them too.
     How much of all that a person knows how to do, and does do, comes to him
from outside, from the cultural environment that surrounds him, and how much
from within, from his independent personality ? The former is surely much the
larger mass. That he speaks, say, English and not Chinese is the result of "where
he is born" or raised; that is, of which language forms part of the culture in
which he grows up. Similarly with his being a Christian instead of a Buddhist,
casting his vote in    November, observing Sunday, celebrating New Year on
January i instead of in February, eating with a fork and not with chopsticks,
5    123                    MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL                                    97
and bread and butter in place of rice, tucking his shirt in and not out (in Kip-
ling's day at least), saying hello to his parents instead of using honorifics, steer-

ing a tractor and not a lightly shod wooden plow, writing with letters instead
of a thousand logograms, and so on endlessly. In fact, the mass of what any
person receives from his culture is so great as to make it look at first glance as
if   he were nothing but an individual exemplar of his culture, a reduction of it
abbreviated to the scope of what one personality can contain. All there remains
of him that is not induced by his culture consists of two sets of things. First are
his innate general  human capacities, and second, his individual peculiarities.
       The capacities— already discussed in §30-35, 87-89, 103-105, and again in
241   —merely ensure, just because they are generic, that our normal person has
the faculty of learning to speak, to read, to operate tools, to practice a religion of
some kind or other. What the kind of speech, tools, religion is depends abso-
lutely on the culture, not on him. In other words, his birth as a normal man
gives him certain potentialities, but his birth in a culture determines how these
potentiaUties will be expressed and reaUzed.
       Individual peculiarities comprise such   traits as   speaking with a   lisp   or a
drawl, having a bass or a tenor voice, worshiping piously or perfunctorily, being
naturally tidy or hasty or bright or the opposite. These are individual variations
from the average intelligence, energy, or temperament. They range all the way
from genius to imbecility, from superexcitability to ultrasluggishness; but of
course the great majority of individuals depart only slightly from the mean in
any one trait. These "individualisms" or idiosyncrasies do have a physiological
and hereditary basis, in the main. Yet in part their qualities too can be culturally
induced, as when a drawl is a Southerner's or a cowboy's, or the tidiness and
phlegm are those of Hollanders. In such instances it is the occasional Southerner
who doesn't drawl, or drawls infernally, the Dutchman who is precipitate and
disorderly, who represents the individual variation from the norm that is char-
acteristic of the culture or the subculture of his society.

       This brings us to a second class of features in which individuals differ:
roughly, those areas which are alternatives within one's culture. Shall         I    be a
farmer or a storekeeper or a dentist, go in for tennis or baseball or golf, join the
Army or the Navy, be a Methodist or a Presbyterian or a Quaker.'' Here the
culture leaves several choices      more or less open to the individual members,
though it is well to remember that each culture has a different array of choices.
In unwesternized China, for instance, there would be no choice of dentistry or
baseball or Navy, and the religious denominations available would be altered to
Confucian, Buddhist, and Taoist. Even among ourselves, not all choices would
be open to everyone everywhere: golf might be only a theoretical possibility to
a farm laborer or a sheepshearer      on the Great Plains. In fact in rigidly segre-
gated India only a few of     all   occupations, worships, amusements, and foods
known to Hindu civilization would be open to the members of any one caste.
98                         THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              § 123


     In summary, heredity gives us at birth certain generic human faculties.
How we shall use these, and therefore how we shall mainly live, the culture in
which we are launched thereupon decides. But it leaves us, theoretically at least,
certain choices between alternatives in its total scheme; and it leaves us also a
degree of freedom of departure from its norms in personal mannerisms, innova-
tions, and successes.
     This enormous influence of culture in molding the individual has a bearing
on psychology. This science is set up to study particular individuals in order to
reach understanding of human beings in general; that is, of what might be
called the abstracted human person. But since all individuals as they actually
occur in life are patterned by culture, and their behavior is full of culture, the
task of psychology is made difficult. This was not clear at first. But then psy-
chologists began to realize how great was the effect on individuals of their
happening to be exposed to different influences, as these exist within our civi-
lization; how the children of articulate parents generally come to be above-
average in verbal facility; how the children of unhappy or broken marriages
are more likely than the average to be emotionally unstable in their adjustments
to other persons; and so on. So "conditioning" came to be one of the slogans
of modern psychology where innateness of behavior had been assumed before.
Then, as psychologists gradually came to be culture-conscious also, the variety
of cultures was seen to increase enormously the range of the conditioning people
are subject to. The abstract man, or what the psychologist felt he could properly
say about him, shrank in proportion. This is why there is such great difficulty,
as we have seen (§ 86-90), in deciding how alike or different the heredity equip-
ment of races or descent groups is. It is not that psychological tests are unsound.
The tests are valid enough, within Umits, within the culture for which they
were constructed. They show at any rate how much culture an individual has
absorbed in comparison with other individuals. They are less good at showing,
per se, whether greater absorption is due to greater exposure or to greater inborn
capacity. And the tests break down, or become dubious, when they are applied
interculturally. Hence it is that we do not yet know how different the races are
in their endowment, while we do know that cultures differ enormously in con-
tent and orientation. And of course individuals differ both in their heredity and
in what their conditioning has made them.



                             124. PARTICIPATION

     Besides differing in heredity and conditioning, individuals also differ in
degree of participation in their culture.   How large a share does a given person
hold in the stock company of his society, and what dividends of satisfaction
does it pay him? It is evident that the complex culture carried by a large so-
ciety is just too big for one individual to take an active part in, in all its many
departments. It is only the exceptionally gifted or favored member of a large
§   124                               PARTICIPATION                              99
society who can hope to operate successfully in a number of its more important
activities.   The run-of-the-mill man is likely to be equipped to follow only one
or two occupations out of hundreds or thousands of existing ones, and to have
a run-of-the-mill income, wife, home, a run-of-the-mill seat in the church or at
the game, run-of-the-mill tastes, thoughts, and habits. With a little bad luck, he
may even come out below-average in all or most of these things. In a culture full
of books he may not read a newspaper; in a land of wealth he may be ragged
and half-famished.
     This is the counterpart, the seamy side, of what has already been discussed
in § ii8: that large societies make for division of labor and specialization of
function, therefore for professional training, advances in the arts, and inventions
or at least improvements in the ways of living. But as the total culture is thereby
varied and enriched, it also becomes more difficult for each member of the
society really to participate in most of its activities. He begins to be an onlooker
at most of it, then a bystander, and may end up with indifference to the welfare

of his society and the values of his culture. He falls back upon the immediate         >




problems of his livelihood and the narrowing range of enjoyments still open to
him, because he senses that his society and his culture have become indifferent
to him. If the society and the culture retain a degree of integration, the lower
classes may participate vicariously: in imagination, by symbols or through

pageantry. The British lower classes participate thus in the life of the aristoc-
racy, which is so much richer than theirs, and        even more in the doings of the
royal court.    No doubt Egyptian peasant-serfs of five thousand years ago got
some similar satisfactions out of what went on in the god-king's entourage at
Memphis, or even when they contemplated his pyramid tomb over which they
sweated for years in a labor draft. In fact, one of the uses or values of kings and
costly courts is precisely to serve as   symbols increasing the integration of large
        But vicarious participation at best is partial, and it may be lacking.
societies.

Wherever there exists a true urban proletariat, or where the mass of country
pdople are outright serfs, a large part of the population is participating very in-
completely in their culture and being denied many of its satisfactions. This in
turn means that those who are most largely supporting the culture economically
are getting the least of    its   rewards; and, reciprocally, that the values of the
culture are being continued in their development by only a fraction of the
society.
      Most revolutions, successful and unsuccessful, seem to be preceded by such
a condition of imperfect participation.   Only we must remember that there is
no absolute scale of measurement. A sufficient discrepancy in one country be-
tween actual participation and what is considered possible participation will
bring on efforts at remedy; whereas elsewhere there may be even less partici-
pation by most of the society in most of the culture, but the ideal of participation
being also low, the condition is endured fatalistically. Thus the French Revolu-
tion was precipitated not because the oppression and the nonparticipation of the
100                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                    §   124

lower classes were extreme       :   as a matter of fact, their situation
                                                               was better than
in some other European countries which did not revolt, and on the whole it had
probably improved in the generation before 1789. But just because France was
the home of enlightenment and considered itself the most highly civiUzed
country in the world, the gap between top and bottom was felt keenly and en-
gendered the revolution.
        The Russian muzhik had probably achieved even less participation by the
early twentieth century. Nor is it probable that Russia left to itself would have
achieved a deep-going social revolution at one stroke. But conscious Western-
ization, initiated      by Peter the Great two centuries before,       finally      brought in
its   train also the Marxian ideology, which was organized to operate by revolu-
tion on the gap of nonparticipation, and had as its ultimate aim the abolition of
the gap. Marxism completely missed its own prediction of first succeeding in
the most highly industrialized countries of Europe. It did succeed in a marginal
area of low industrialization, because the standard of living and cultural partici-
pation of the population in Russia had remained unduly low for twentieth-
                               —
century-conscious Europe and for twentieth-century-Europe-conscious Russian
intellectuals.

        The contrast of all this of course is with primitive cultures. Here societal
units are small; skills, differentiations,      and privileges are limited; and partici-
pations are reasonably equal. No one is evicted for nonpayment of rent, or left
on the sidewalk to watch the prosperous stream into the opera. The simpler
cultures have simpler and smaller problems to meet. Much of the eighteenth-
century admiration of the romantic and unspoiled savage, and our own occa-
sional hankerings after South Sea island idylls, stem from a vague sense of this
fact.   To be sure, it is well to remember that if the Ifugao and the Yurok and
other nonliterate people did not evict, they did enforce debt slavery; and that
others practiced       war enslavement, human sacrifice, and cannibalism. Yet the
total range of activities remained    small enough so that even a slave might par-
ticipate in more of the culture than a serf elsewhere, or than a free outcaste in

India. Larger and richer cultures just do have bigger and harder social problems
to solve.



           125.   CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS: VALUES
        It is worth   while to examine briefly certain overlapping distinctions among
several aspects of culture.      They are: content and form of culture; eidos and
ethos; and material and nonmaterial culture.
        The content of a culture is the sum of the items of which it is composed:
things present in it— whether present or lacking in other cultures. For instance,
kingship, hereditary titles of nobility, a state church, stringent libel and divorce
laws, driving left on the road, spelling labor and honor with a u, are several big
or little items contained in British civilization but not in          its   close   American
§   125            CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS: VALUES                       lOI

counterpart.    However, British and American culture share as content steam
engines and railways, alphabetic writing, representative parliamentary govern-
ment, dairy foods, and many other items that until recently were wholly lack-
ing in, say, China. It is content like these items which tends to increase and
accumulate in the aggregate cultures of mankind, and to a certain extent even
in one culture, and thus to give the impression of progress taking place (§ 127)
though the process may actually be one largely of quantitative enlargement.
    Cultural form is harder to describe or illustrate. We might approximate it
by saying it is what is left over when we subtract cultural content from culture.
What is this remnant? It may be a rearrangement, a transfer of an item or a
group of items to other departments of the culture, to another of its jurisdic-
tions.    Thus education can be in clerical or in lay hands; schools may be paro-
chial or public, as we say in America, parish or board in Britain. The education
given may be very similar. In its elementary stages it is bound to be practically
identical -.Cat will spell cat and      3X3 = 9 whether the school and the teacher
be democratic, religious, communist, or fascist. Yet we all know that the tenor
or purport and the outcome of the schooling will be different      —different enough
to fight for, often. This is not wholly an affair of totalitarian propaganda aiming

to thrive by liquidating everything else. Such extreme        propaganda began to be
developed chiefly some years after World War I. Yet even before then it ob-
viously mattered who controlled the schools. Besides content, such as reading
and arithmetic, education inevitably imparts an ideology, a system of beliefs and
sentiments and values, which if accepted is all-important for its influence on
conduct. An ideology or a system might also be called a pattern or configura-
tion; that is, a way of arranging things.
     Theoretically, one might conceive of two cultures whose itemized content
was identical, and which yet differed in the form or arrangement or system or
pattern of this content. Actually, form and content are far too interwoven for
just such a situation to arise; but the hypothetical example will help point out
what is meant by cultural form. A system or configuration is always, in its
nature, more than the mere sum of its parts; there is also the relation of the
parts, their total interconnections, which add up to something additionally sig-
nificant.   This   is   well recognized in "Gestalt" or configurational psychology.
The "form" of culture may therefore be regarded as the pattern of interrelations
of the contents that constitute it.
      Somewhat related to the foregoing are a contrasting pair of aspects that have
been called the ethos and the eidos of culture. Greek eidos, from which we have
"idol" as a derivative, denotes form or appearance or likeness. The eidos of a
culture would therefore be its appearance, its phenomena, all that about it which
can be described explicitly. This would primarily coincide with cultural content
as just discussed. The Greek word ethos, from which we have "ethics," denotes
first of all disposition.   With reference to a people, it means their ways or customs,
corresponding nearly to the Latin mores. Like that term, it carries an implica-
102                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             §   125

tion of  what is sanctioned and expected. Hence the connotation of right or
rightness, on which we have centered in our derivative Christian use of the
words "ethical" and "moral" in their everyday sense. However, when we speak
of the ethos of a culture, we revert at least part-way to the original Greek
meaning, and refer not so much to the specific ethics or moral code of the
culture as to its total quality, to what would constitute disposition or character
in an individual; to the system of ideals and values that dominate the culture
and so tend to control the type of behavior of its members.
     Thus, we might say that the ethos of Italian Renaissance culture was
sensuous and passionate, but that of the northern-European Reformation, puri-
tan and ascetic. Hindu civilization is not only otherworldly but mystical, ration-
alizing, and extravagant in its ethos; Chinese, this- worldly, prosily moralistic,
and matter-of-fact. The Japanese ethos differs from the Chinese in putting more
emphasis on action, precision of form, and neatness.
     It will be evident from these examples that ethos deals with qualities that

                               —               —
pervade the whole culture like a flavor as contrasted with the aggregate of
separable constituents that make up its formal appearance and are the eidos. The
ethos includes the direction in which a culture is oriented, the things it aims at,
prizes and endorses, and more or less achieves. We are here getting into meta-
phors that personify culture as if it had a will and a purpose of its own. That
is   a fault of the language of our day. Scientific thinking has penetrated so re-
cently into these fields that it has failed as yet to work out its own more exact
expressions.   When we say that a culture aims at, prizes, and achieves certain
ends, that is a shorthand way of saying that most of the members of a society,
through having been molded by its culture, aim at, prize, and help achieve those
ends. The ends or things referred to, the qualities that differentiate one culture
from another, are undoubtedly distinctive, are genuine attributes of phenomena
of history and nature. The difference between Western, Indian, and Far Eastern
civilizations obviously consists of more than a diversity of content as exemplified

by items of the order of eating with forks, fingers, and chopsticks respectively.
Beyond these concrete facts, there is a pervading difference of character and
outlook in the three cultures. That is what is meant by ethos.
      It is evident   that the ethos of a culture is pretty close to what a philosopher
or a historian might call its system of values. This somewhat technical term de-
notes something that physical and biological scientists are agreed they cannot
properly deal with by their methods, and therefore ought, as scientists, to leave
alone   —though most of them admit that there are such things as values, moral
or otherwise, and personally try to live up to them. Whatever "values" are, it is
clear that they have some relation to culture. Cultures differ in their values; each

one shapes, or at least colors, its own. Values in this technical or philosophical
sense might be informally defined as those things        —cultural products, standards,
or ideas  —which men living        in societies prize   and hold as having a high im-
§   126                   MATERIAL AND NONMATERIAL CULTURE                                        IO3

portance, for them, for their group and descendants, and in themselves, over and
beyond      their practical   utility.   Christianity   is   one of the great values of our
society and culture; so are the works of Shakespeare, and our democratic institu-
tions     and liberty   —even the Liberty     Bell, as a visible    and tangible symbol. In
China, Confucius would represent a similar value.                 No one would deny that
these values influence        human conduct and constitute real phenomena and ef-
fective forces in the world of history, and therefore of nature. This                is   true even
though these same values have not been measured, and are regarded by the
physicist and biologist as beyond the scope of their sciences. For the present, let
us carry in mind that values exist and that they are tied up with culture.                We shall
be coming back to them again.


                 126.     MATERIAL AND NONMATERIAL CULTURE
      A distinction often made between material and nonmaterial culture                     is   men-
tioned here only as probably having no first-rank significance. The literal dif-
ference is of course obvious: physical objects as against institutions and ideas."
But do they stand for something basically different ? Do they function with sig-
nificant difference in culture? The answer seems No. What counts is not the
physical ax or coat or wheat but the idea of them, the knowledge how to produce
and use them, their place in life. It is this knowledge, concept, and function that
get themselves handed down through the generations, or diffused into other
cultures, while the objects themselves are quickly worn out or                 consumed. It is
the ax itself that is effective in chopping, the idea of the ax that is effective in
getting axes made and available for use. In fact we can almost conceive of the ax
as an institution, as      we can certainly speak of lumbering and wearing clothes
and grain farming in a sense entirely parallel to the institutions of marriage or
churchgoing.
      The attempt to segregate material from nonmaterial traits of culture perhaps
derives from a white-collar distinction unfortunately long made in Germany be-
tween Naturwissenschaften and Geisteswissenschaf ten                 :   sciences   deaUng with
nature and sciences dealing with the human spirit. The latter corresponded to
what we call the humanities and the social sciences. But there is nothing gained
by implying that since humanistic and social studies have to do with the "spirit"
or "mind," whereas natural science deals with tangible objects, the latter is there-
fore of a different and lower order. Such a point of view smacks of old-fashioned
theology with its contrasting of body and soul. Genuine science is characterized
first of all b)- •*:s method, only secondarily by subject matter, except that this must

be in nature and must consist of phenomena. My having learned how to write

      ^ Material culture and content of culture partly overlap,    but are conceptually different.
Objects of material culture are part of culture content; but a lot of culture content is nor
material; monogamy, for instance, or mother-in-law avoidance, or belief in ghosts.
104                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                     § 1 26


or being a Christian are phenomena; and equally so are the alphabet and Chris-
tianity    and ax-using; and so are axes and clothes and chairs; and they are all
parts of culture. Accordingly we may forget about this distinction between ma-
terial and nonmaterial culture, except as a literal difference that it is               sometimes
of practical convenience to observe.



                               127.   THE IDEA OF PROGRESS
        One of the most widely held preconceptions is that culture is progressive.
"The progress of civilization" is a familiar phrase        —almost a        trite one. Simple or

primitive peoples are labeled "unprogressive." The implied picture is of a con-
tinuous moving forward and onward. Popularly, evolution                      is   almost synony-
mous with progress; and progress means advance to something better.
    Actually, the idea of progress is itself a culture phenomenon of some interest.
Strange as it may seem to us, most of humanity during most of its history was
not imbued at all with the idea. An essentially static world, a nearly static man-
kind, were most likely to be taken for granted. If there was any notion of altera-
tion, a deterioration  from the golden age of the beginnings was as frequently
believed in as an advance. A definite system of belief in progress began to acquire
strength only in eighteenth-century Europe. Reinforced by the French Revolu-
tion, it became a sort of article of liberal faith in the nineteenth century. It

entered into the philosophy of Comte and Spencer. The latter saw evolution as
a manifestation of progress. Darwin, who propounded a mechanism by which
                                            —
organic change might be explained a mechanism about which the man in the
street is mostly still a bit hazy       —
                                    was popularly acclaimed as having "proved
evolution"    —that   is,   progress. The Unitarian profession of faith is interesting in
this connection: "I believe in the        Fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of Man,
the leadership of Jesus, salvation by character, the progress of mankind, onward
and upward forever." There is a certain nobiUty about this sentiment of liberal-
ism; but it is as indubitably a sentiment and a dogma, and not a scientific con-
clusion, as are the Apostles' Creed and the Thirty-nine Articles. Progress has
largely taken the place of Jesus in this most denatured               branch of Christianity.
But the concept of progress is far from being limited to that. If a poll were
taken, devout Methodists           and other Trinitarians would undoubtedly favor
progress overwhelmingly and believe             it   to be enjoined    by   religion.    So wide-
spread is the modern attachment to the idea that even many strict fundamental-
ists   would be shocked if told not to believe in "progress," in spite of some re-
maining inclination to balk at "evolution" as non-Biblical.
        These instances are mentioned to show, first, that the concept of the progress
of     humanity is a special characteristic of contemporary Western civiUzation;
next, that within this civilization it generally has the force of an a-priori assump-
tion;    and finally that, like most a priori's, it is adhered to with considerable
§   127                         THE IDEA OF PROGRESS                                    IO5

fervor of emotion. All this docs not disprove progress; but           it   docs   show that
progress is something to be analyzed rather than taken for granted.
       Now in a grand, over-all sort of way, there has undoubtedly been progress
in human culture in the last quarter-million years.  We are undeniably "higher"
or "more advanced" culturally than the Acheulians, in much the same way that
a mammal is higher than an Ordovician sponge or brachiopod. The real ques-
tions in this connection are: In what does progress consist.'' and,        L p'-ogress con-
tinuous and inevitable.?
       Let us consider these interrelated questions.
       We have seen that, broadly speaking, the process of cultural development             is

an additive and therefore accumulative one, whereas the process of organic evo-
lution is primarily a substitutive one. When men acquire flight, they add              it   to
their former faculties; when birds acquired it, they converted a pair of legs into
wings. One might thus fairly enough suspect that              new culture tended to be
incremental and not replacing; and that therefore the total stock of culture of
any society, and of humanity as a whole, would show a normal inclination to
grow. All in all, the verdict of history confirms such a judgment. There may
have been occasional periods of stress for this or that society in which its total
inventory of cultural items diminished. There           is   nothing to show that such
hard times and shrinkages ever extended simultaneously to all the societies on
earth. While one particular form of civilization is undergoing atrophy or decay,
neighboring ones are usually coming into vigor. What Egyptian culture lost
                                                    —
from 800 to I B.C.— if it did lose in total bulk was more than made up for by
the successive inventions and acquisitions of the contemporary Mesopotamian,
Persian, Greek, and Roman cultures. The Dark Ages of western Europe, around
A.D,   450 to 750, denote a period of breakup of an old pattern system before the
patterns of a new system had been developed very far, with a resulting loss of
political stabiUty, intellectual and aesthetic achievements,      urban refinement, and
wealth; and in consequence very few superior men were able to realize them-
selves as "geniuses."    But the historians most conversant with the era would
probably find it difficult to say how much the total stock of western-European
culture contracted during the Dark Ages, or to be wholly sure that it did con-
tract seriously.   Knowledge of Plato and Aristotle certainly was both less and
rarer, and roads were not kept in as good repair; but useful and important             new
things like horseshoes and water mills (§ 183)
                                          became commoner. In any event,
while Europe was perhaps receding, China was inventing printing and other-
wise advancing.
       Recessions in civilization, in short, either are local and likely to be com-
pensated for elsewhere; or they primarily affect patterns or organization and the
values of their products   —cultural   qualities.

       And it does seem clear that in an over-all sort of way the sum total of
culture of mankind has pretty continuously grown in bulk through history. As
I06                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                § 12?


.lew artifacts and faculties are developed, the old ones tend to sink to a rela-
tively more limited or humbler sphere, but rarely become entirely lost.         Candles
survive in the age of electricity, horses alongside motorcars, the bow beside fire-
arms (§ 159) bronze has its special uses and virtues in the age of iron, and iron
                ;



in that of steel. We use stone in more ways in modern civilization than Old
Stone Age men did, although it was of primary significance to them but is only
subsidiary to us.
      Quantitatively, then, civilization advances because it tends in its nature to
be accumulative; and to this extent the modern a priori of progress is justified.
But will the admission of a mere swelling of bulk satisfy those who wish to
beUeve in progress ? Mostly, progress is taken to mean advance in higher quali-
ties or toward more ideal values.

      And there of course we get on subjective terrain. Is the philosophy of Plato
or St. Thomas or Kant the highest and most valuable? Answers are obviously
going to be colored by nationality and religion. A good Hindu might put all
three of them lower than Sankara. Everyone will appreciate the values his own
civilization has developed. Egocentricity in the       form of ethnocentricity is in-
evitably injected into the problem,         and makes the objective attack difficult. It
is pleasant   to believe in progress   —which makes my times and my ways superior
to all others   —                                      my nationality, my
                    as it is pleasant to believe in the superiority of
religion,   my race, my language—my town or county even, my family, and
myself.
      Let us try, however, despite this emotional cloud, to discover something
scientific or objective to justify a degree of acceptance of the progress idea. There

are three approaches that seem to yield at least a partial standard of what con-
stitutes "higher" or more advanced culture, apart from mere quantity of it.

      The first is the criterion of magic and "superstition." In proportion as a
culture disengages    itself from reliance on these, it may be said to have regis-

tered an advance. In proportion as it admits magic in its operations, it remains
primitive or retarded. This seemingly dogmatic judgment is based on the ob-
servation that beliefs in magic, such as are normal in            backward societies, do
recur in cultures that by profession have discarded magic, but chiefly           among
individuals  whose social fortune is backward or who are psychotic, mentally
deteriorated, or otherwise subnormal. When the sane and well in one culture
believe what only the most ignorant, warped, and insane believe in another,
there would seem to be some warrant for rating the first culture lower and the
second higher. Or are our discards, insane, and hypersuggestibles perhaps right
and the rest of us wrong ?
      For instance, a Lassik Indian woman in California lost and buried her baby.
The next afternoon she heard a child crying overhead and fell over in a faint.
She was revived, but she kept hearing the crying of the baby, and got progres-
sively more ill. She engaged a shaman doctor to cure her, who finally said "It is :
§   127                          THE IDEA OF PROGRESS                                 IO7

your own child's shadow (soul) coming back to urge you to accept him as a
spirit helper aiding you to become a shaman yourself." This woman did not

happen to want such supernatural power, and so she began to argue with her
baby's shadow when its voice reappeared to urge her. She remained firm and
told him to leave her alone, until finally he desisted, and she became well again.
     To be a shaman is an honored and respected status among most of the
Californian tribes, and many individuals accept such spirit offers. In this event
they gradually learn to tolerate association with the spirit, therewith recover their
own health, and then profess and try to cure other people with the assistance of
their invisible helper. It is clear that in these societies there is complete social and
cultural acceptance of spirits and their ability to talk and aid; acceptance also of
the power of the shaman who is so aided, and of the place of the shaman in the
community. But in our culture a person who falls sick, hears voices, communi-
cates with shadows, and acquires special abilities from them is inevitably classed
as deranged.
       Thousands     of similar cases   might be      cited.   They provide a   consistent
criterion of distinction between primitive or folk cultures and advanced or high
cultures, apart from the respective quantity of content.   The backward cultures
in their magic,      shamanism, animistic ritual, recognize as objectively effective
certain phenomena that the advanced cultures regard as objectively unreal and as
subjectively psychotic or deranged. The limits of relation of personality and
world are differently drawn in the two series of cultures. What higher cultures
stigmatize as personal, nonreal and nonsocial, abnormal and pathological, lower
cultures treat as objective, conducive to ability, and socially useful.
       It   will be seen that the difference   is   in terms of socialization as well as
reality.    Backward peoples assume as actual certain phenomena to which we
grant only a mental or subjective existence that is not real in the sense in which
tangible human bodies or animals or stones are real. Or perhaps it is more ac-
curate to say that retarded peoples are also aware of a distinction but invert the
emphasis. To them a child or a hawk or a stone seen or heard in a certain kind
of dream or trance is much more important than a physical child or hawk or
stone that one can touch and handle, because it is the possible source of much
more power. Certain things we cbssify as unreal the primitive considers super-
real   —with the result that his world often seems "surrealistically" fantastic to     us.
From this follows the difference in socialization. To us a person who hears the
dead speak, or who thinks that he can turn into a bear or a wolf, is socially sub-
normal, socially useless, and likely to be a burden and an upset to the com-
munity. But among primitives he is a personality of special, enhanced, and pro-
ductive powers, which he may indeed abuse in witchcraft, but which ordinarily
are believed to help the community to better health, surer food supply, victory
over enemies, and similar benefits. So the primitive weighs and favors the
magical where we reject and try to exclude it. Our values rather than our per-
I08                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               § 1 27

ceptions differ from his. He recognizes, standardizes, rewards certain psychotic
or neurotic experiences      —socially channels them—which we regard as well out-
side our socially approved channels.
      It   is   important for a clear grasp of the foregoing view to realize that it
has no reference to the supernatural as such. Belief in             God is not a sign of
backwardness. All that is contended is that the bestowal of social rewards for
the inability to distinguish subjective experiences            from objective phenomena,
or for the deliberate inversion of the two,            is   a presumable   mark of lack of
progress.
      In so far, then, as the mentally unwell in modern advanced cultures tend to
correspond to the well and the influential in ancient and retarded cultures, at
least in certain       situations,   we can accept objective progress as having taken
place.

                              128.    MORE ABOUT PROGRESS
    There is a second group of traits that characterize backward as against ad-
vanced cultures. These have to do with the obtrusion of physiological or ana-
tomical considerations into social situations, or with the related matter of the
taking of human life. Some of these practices are: blood or animal sacrifice; seg-
regation of women at parturition and menstruation as being contaminating to
others; contamination by death or corpses, often with segregation of mourners
until purified; puberty crisis rites, especially for girls at the onset of physiological
puberty; preoccupation with the dead body, including mummification, skull
preservation and skull cult, wearing of skull or jaw by widows, disinterment
and reburial, eating of bits of the body or of cremation ashes; ritual prostitution
and inversion; human sacrifice; retainer burial; head-hunting; cannibalism.
These practices almost invariably contain an element of the magical or the
supernatural, and so far as they do they are allied to the class of traits we have
just reviewed as being apparently characteristic of cultural retardation.         But they
contain also a second element, toward which cultures that have once abandoned
such practices react with aversion, disgust, revulsion, or the shame of bad taste.
This other element has as             its   common denominator what strikes us as the
gratuitous obtrusion into public recognition and the social order of physiological
happenings, including blood and death and decay, which we tend to regard as
matters best kept private and unemphasized, and their public obtrusion as un-
pleasant and useless. Deformation of the head by pressure, filing or knocking-
out of the teeth, pattern scarifications, distention of lips and ear lobes and other
anatomical mutilations, can perhaps be included here because they also have to
do with the human body and tend to arouse shock or disgust in us; though
mostly they affect anatomy rather than physiology and sometimes have little
or no magical motivation. At any rate, they constitute a set of folkways allied to
the class we are considering. It is true that our fashions have developed strange
§    128                             MORE ABOUT PROGRESS                                           IO9

coiffures, cosmetics, corsets,        and such, but they lack the clement of permanent
bodily defacement, of mutilation.'
       All in      all,   retarded cultures seem infantile both in their unabashed pre-
occupation with bodily functions and in their disregard of other human lives as
compared with the gratifications of the ego. In this sense, advanced cultures may
be described as psychologically more adult. Hence their unwillingness to interest
themselves in personal physiology, but their concern about humaneness.                             The
latter     is   manifest also in trends like those of opposition to slavery, torture as a
judicial procedure, beatings as legal punishment, execution with torture, slaugh-
ter of prisoners of war.

       While, apart from deformatory practices, the primitive folkways enumerated
almost always have ritual approval or supernaturalistic association, it is equally
significant that the          advanced "universal" or world reUgions, Buddhism and
Mohammedanism         well as Christianity, have consistently and positively
                             as
thrown their weight on the prohumane and anti-infantile side. In other words,
what primitive religion approves or enjoins in this field, civilized religion for-
bids. This suggests that the role of religion is secondary in these matters              :   it   tends
to fortify such standards of decency, humanity, cleanliness, and propriety as each

culture has attained or only partly attained. It sanctions the mores more than it
causes them. The present class of criteria of progress, then, consisting of adult
attitudes toward physiological function, in which the magical and supernatural
elements appear to be only indirectly contributory, accordingly differs from the
class discussed in the last section, in which the animistic and surrealistic element

is   basic and essential.
    Of course, we are dealing here with exceedingly broad trends or drifts,
which cannot be uniform in particulars. Retarded cultures form an enormous
class, advanced ones another, and there is bound to be a deal of variation in each.

For instance, the Eskimo, as nonliterate, nonmetallurgical hunters, are always
reckoned as primitives. In fact it was long fashionable to begin the scale of civi-
lization with Australians, Bushmen, Negritos, and Eskimo at the lower end. Yet
the Eskimo do not possess in very emphatic form any custom of the class now
being discussed, and lack some of them altogether. Judged by this criterion
alone,     Eskimo culture would have to be rated as more advanced than some
high civilizations        —possibly that of much of India. In short, what we are deal-
ing with is not a handy yardstick, but a probability tendency that holds good on
the whole or in the long run.
       Among the North American Indians, the Western ones were particularly
      ^ Chinese     foot-binding seems to be the only case of serious mutilation practiced in a
great recent civilization. Ear-piercing and circumcision are after all anatomically negligible.
Foot-binding is rather a special phenomenon. It is consciously erotic with a tingeing of the
perverse to the point of making overt discussion of its motivation taboo; and      its       disabling
effect limited the practice to certain    economic classes.
no                                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                § 128


obsessed by notions of contamination through birth, menstruation, and death.
The Eastern tribes took these fears more lightly, but, here and there at least,
went in for retainer burial and human sacrifice, ossuaries and reburial, and
scalping as perhaps a partial equivalent of head-hunting.
       But the total trend of development in the area and the era of the great re-
ligions   is unmistakable. The way in which the blood sacrifice of the ancient

Mediterranean peoples, and of South and East Asiatic ones,                              is   perpetuated
among marginal primitives is discussed in § 165, 192, and 238. The hecatombs
and libations and feasts of Achilles and Agamemnon survive as sacrifices and
feasts of water buffalo, chickens, and palm wine among the pagan Igorot of

the Philippines and in West African Dahomey. In China, ritual bloodshed and
funerary deposit of valuables have long since been replaced by offerings of sym-
bolic paper figures. In Japan, more distant                    from the advanced center, retainer
burial went on until the early centuries of our era, when it was replaced, on
avowed grounds of humanity, by pottery imitations of the living retainers.
Leviticus, one of the later books of the Old Testament in date, is still full of
blood sacrifice. "Whatsoever man of Israel that killeth an ox or lamb or goat                        .    .   .



and bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle, to offer an offering unto the
Lord     .  blood shall be imputed to that man ... he shall be cut off from
             .   .




among his people.          And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of
                                  .   .   .




the Lord         and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the Lord." * These prac-
                     .   .   .




tices were still in full blast when Titus destroyed Jerusalem in a.d. 70. They did

not differ, save in deity worshiped and place and detail of manner, from the
sacrifices that Titus and his pagan Romans made. Graeco-Roman paganism

died out; Judaism lived; but, after the obliteration of the Temple in Jerusalem,
sacrifices quietly               dropped off from Jewish cult: they were becoming contrary
to the spirit                and attitudes of the times. Since more than a thousand years ago
the most orthodox Jews no more think of slaughtering animals on the altars of
their synagogues than do Christians in their churches.                      A tacit dropping of this
part of their law was no doubt a condition of their being able to survive at all
within the pale of civilization.
       The first great religion to break resolutely with all the ancient ritual obses-
sion on physiology was Buddhism." One of its cardinal injunctions is against the
killing of animals, even for food. This was part of its fundamental revolt against
its   parent, Vedic Brahmanism, in which sacrifice and bodily purification were
basic. Five hundred years later, Jesus seems never to have sacrificed on the altar

nor to have mentioned such sacrifice; and therewith it was tacitly, but decisively,

      ^Leviticus 17:3-6. For more on blood and burnt offerings, see Leviticus, Chaps.                    1-9;

for defilement and purification from childbirth see Chap. 12; menstruation, Chap. 15; death,
Chap. 21.
      ^ Jainism did so equally, is coeval,         and still living; but it became an Indian sect iostead
of a world religion.
§   128                            MORE ABOUT PROGRESS                                           III

eliminated from Christianity.*" Six centuries later          still,    Mohammedanism fol-
lowed suit completely. Even the minor religions and hybrid sects of the period,
such as Manichaeism, discarded the practice. The one exception was Mithraism,
which stressed not only the sacrifice of a bull but baptism in its gushing blood.
Mithraism, an offshoot of Persian Mazdaism, began earlier than Christianity,
which is perhaps why it retained the blood feature. Up to the third century after
Christ, it still competed with Christianity, but it weakened, lost out, was sup-
pressed in the fourth century, and died without trace or survival: it was literally
too raw for its times in the civilized parts of the world.
       Illustrations could be multiplied, but these examples may suffice.
       Finally, there is a third way in which the idea of progress in culture can be
justified     by objective evidence. This is in technology, mechanics, and science,
whose accomplishments have            definitely   more cumulative        quality than other
civilizational activities. It is true that high scientific productivity appears to come
in bursts or pulses as definitely as art (§ 136).        But there is the difference that
each art, or for that matter each philosophy or religion, very largely has to begin
all   over again, whereas each of the intermittent periods of discovery in science
can begin, and generally does begin,           just   about where the        last   one   left   off.

Science, and in the main technology, are evidently accumulative by nature, while
philosophy, religion, art     —and empire and nationalism too—tend strongly to be
substitutive    :   a new product replaces an old one. Consequently, once technologi-
cal or scientific      achievements have been made, they are likely to be retained,
even through long sterile intervals, until there is a new flashing-up of inventions.
A pulley or a water wheel, geometry and the laws of the lever, do not usually
get themselves wholly forgotten or abandoned, even in times of                       wrack and
misery. There may be lost mechanical arts or lost branches of science; but they
are certainly neither       numerous nor important, as will appear in a following
chapter (§ 156-160).
     Here then is a third manner of progress of civilization. But with it we are
back largely among aspects that are quantitative           —
                                                        Hke growth in population,
growT;h in size of states and nations, growth sometimes in the number and com-
plexity of their political subdivisions. Similar perhaps also is growth in stocks of
          —
wealth more gold, diamonds, farmed acres, houses in the world: part at least
of the old are physically preserved, and new ones added. But we have already
seen that there is serious doubt whether magnification as such, mere quantitative
swelling-up, can be legitimately construed as progress. Size is easy to boast about,
but does it bring with it wiser living or greater happiness ? Only so far as it does
can quantitative increase of culture be considered as making for progress.

      ^^ The   only mentions of sacrifice or offering in the New Testament, other than refer-
ences to Jewish and pagan sacrifice, are symbolic: as when St. Paul says that Jesus "appeared
to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself"   (Hebrews 9: 26)   ;   or the "blood of the Lamb"
in Revelation.
112                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 §   "8
        In summary, the quantitative expansion of the content of total human cul-
ture; the atrophy of magic based on psychopathology; the decline of infantile
obsession with the outstanding physiological events of              human life; and the
persistent tendency of technology and science to grow accumulatively            —these are
the ways in which progress    may legitimately be considered a property or an
attribute of culture. They are the residuum supported by fact when the emo-
tional and aprioristic idea of a continuous and inherent progress of civilization
is   subjected to analysis. More will be found on this in the discussion of cultural
losses already cited.       And of course the folk-sophisticate polarity considered in
§ 121     partly overlaps with the idea of progress.



                                      129.   FUNCTION
        Function has been increasingly dealt with in cultural anthropology, as in
other branches of study and science, in recent years.             The basic meaning of
"function" is activity or operation that is natural, proper, or characteristic, such
as "secretion of bile and storage of sugar are functions of the liver." From this
there is a shading into the popular meaning of purpose: such as the function of
a broom is to sweep. Between is a whole series of vague and elusive meanings;
consult any unabridged dictionary in confirmation.              Through most of these
meanings runs the idea of a relationship that is active but not causal.
      Linton has tried to clarify these variable concepts by distinguishing form,
meaning, use, and function in culture. The form of a culture trait or complex
is what can be perceived by the senses and objectively described.^^ The meaning

is its subjective associations in the culture, implicit and explicit. Its use is its rela-

tion to things outside the society and culture, as expressible in physical terms; its
function is its relation within the society and culture. For instance, the form of
an ax comprises the blade and the handle, the curve of the bit, the steel of which
it is   made. It is this sensory aspect of a trait or complex that obviously passes or
diffuses most readily from one culture to another. The use of an ax, according
to Linton, is to chop wood; its function, to keep members of the society warm

by providing fuel, and to make carpentry possible by providing logs. It is evi-
dent that if consideration of purpose has not already crept into the statement of
use and function here, it is not far distant. As to the meaning of an ax, while
Linton does not expatiate on this, it is evident that this is variable, not only
between different cultures, but according to context within one culture. An ax
is not only     a household and a vocational tool, but a weapon and the instrument

        ^^ Obviously,
                   "form" as used here is that aspect of the elements of culture which has
to do with their sensory appearance;   whereas in § 125 "form" means the organization of
the contents of a whole culture.  A more discriminating terminology will presumably come
into usage someday      —
                       perhaps "appearance" for Linton's "form," and "organization" for
the form that is contrasted with content. At present, the context will usually leave no doubt
as to which meaning is intended.
§    »29                                FUNCTION                                       113
of the executioner. In the primitive parts of southeastern Asia and the East
Indies,it has powerful meaning in connection with head-hunting. In ancient

Rome, in Fascist Italy, in Republican France, the lictor's ax, in conjunction with
the bundle of rods or fasces, is a well-known symbol of punishment, and there-
fore of governmental authority. In ancient Crete, the double-bitted ax or labrys
was a sign of divinity and a cult object. Axes of bronze, jade, and polished
stone have meant wealth or treasure to people emerging out of primitiveness, in
ancient Greece and elsewhere.
    The form of a ballot would comprise its material, size, shape, columns,
arrangement of offices and candidates. Its meaning might be said to be popular
freedom and sovereignty; its use, to elect officials; its functions, democratic and
representative.
        A song would have its form given by its melody and rhythm:           it is   a suc-
cession of particular notes. The meaning or association would be patriotic, senti-
mental, or religious according as the song was "The Star-spangled Banner," a
blues, or a hymn. The use would similarly vary from opening a patriotic meet-
ing, entertainment at a night club, or conduct of a       church service. In fact, the
national anthem has repeatedly been used to prevent incipient riots by compel-
ling everyone to stand still at attention. The function of songs is, as usual, the
vaguest aspect: to strengthen patriotism, make a drink more enjoyable, further
piety.

       The mother-in-law taboo of many nonliterate peoples is characterized as to
its   form   —                                  —
          or its substance too, if one will by silence, looking aside, moving
away. Its obvious use is to prevent contact between in-laws of opposite sex and
different generation. The meaning is, according to the usual testimony of those
who practice the custom, an expression of respect, or conversely of shame if the
respect were violated by familiarity. The function is usually believed to be
avoidance or easement of social strain. However, it is well to observe that this
functional relation is one-way: wherever the custom obtains, relief from strain
is    likely to be its function;   but where it is not customary, its practice would
immediately cause strain, of much the same kind and strength as would result
from nonobservance of the custom where it is mandatory. Opposites can there-
fore fulfill the same function in different cultures, or in different situations. So
can wholly diverse acts: making a gift, inviting to a meal, speaking politely or
flatteringly, or tabooing one's mother-in-law, all can ease social strain.

    A wreath may be defined as a ring of floral elements, either worn on the
head or hung. We use bridal, funeral, and Christmas wreaths, whose connota-
tions                 are certainly even more diverse than their materials or
           and meanings
colors.Not so long ago, in Europe, the bridal wreath was definitely a prized
symbol of virginity. The ancients wore chaplets or floral wreaths as a party dress,
and hung them on sacrificial victims. They also gave laurel wreaths as honors,
and called them crowns when they were imitated in gold. For wreaths, meaning
and use are evidently pretty much coextensive. And the function of wreaths.?
114                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              § 1 29


Can we say much more than that it is to express by a visible symbol an emotion
of joy or sorrow appropriate to a given situation ? But one might also wonder
whether such a statement means anything more than that wreaths, like a hun-
dred other kinds of things, serve as symbols of feelings.
      It is evident from   these examples that the function of a cultural act or trait
differs  from its form, use, and meaning in that these three all reside in the
culture, but the function is something we read into the culture. The "meaning"
of a trait may be literally "subjective," as that of a mourning wreath, or of "The
Star-spangled Banner"; but everybody in the culture          is   agreed on it, so that
the fact of the meaning can be ascertained objectively. Indeed many of us are
none too sure of the whole tune or words of the American national anthem
                                                        —
that is, we often do not securely control its "form" but no one doubts that its
significance is patriotic. Similarly, we all know what a black or white wreath
hung by the front door means, though many of us might be somewhat hazy as
to the material it was made of, or wonder whether the "use" might be to express

respect, to give warning that a corpse lay in the house, or to keep tradesmen and
solicitors   away. Still, everyone in the society is at least roughly informed as to
such points. By contrast, function is something that the student or analyst of
culture finds out about. Function   is an interpretation, something in his mind,

which he attributes to a culture; but the form, use, and meaning of artifacts
and institutions are actually part of the culture.
      This is not so different, in one way, from the role of physiology. A healthy
body functions without awareness. True perception of physiologic function is
the result of dissection, observation, test, experiment, and the laboratory. Even
some highly civilized peoples have been quite random in distinguishing nerves
and veins, let alone veins from arteries, and have variously associated emotions,
feelings, and thought with the bowels, the liver, the heart, or the brain. The

difference between physiological function and cultural function is that the physi-
ologist has his laboratory and can experiment, and ihe student of culture has not
this advantage.    In many cases he can only guess as to function      —as the Greek,
mediaeval, and Chinese physicians largely used to guess as to physiological
function.
      Professedly functional studies of culture accordingly tend to contain a maxi-
mum of theory, interpretation, or opinion, often based on a relatively narrow
selection of facts seen as significant. Their value as well as their weakness lies
in this point.

                             130.   PURPOSE AND NEED

      At bottom, much of the preoccupation of anthropologists with cultural
function seems to boil down to two things: concern with purpose, and concern
with integration. Integration has already been considered (§ 122). It remains to
consider purpose; or, as it is more fashionable to disguise it: need.
  13°                             PURPOSE AND NEED                                 II5

       Preoccupation with purpose appears for one thing to be due to the fact that
there are    many cultural beliefs and institutions which serve no visible utility,
or at least no utility that could not equally well be attained by other means, and
which are adhered to merely because they are customary and "right," like the
mother-in-law taboo just discussed; or which are destructive and unprofitable,
like   most war. Why are there exogamic groupings?          Why are these often to-
temic? Why is eating their totem often forbidden to members of a group, but
perhaps enjoined in special cases?    Why are uncles called fathers by many
peoples?     Why are adolescents initiated into the sacred mysteries of adults,
where they learn that apparent spirits or gods are only disguised fellow tribes-
men? Why does a Yurok not eat in a canoe while it floats on the ocean? To
all these questions there is no obvious answer of the sort of answer there is to

why an arrow is feathered or what use a fish net has. Moreover, the practices
cited are all limited to certain societies and do not occur in others, including our
own. Accordingly, the practices cannot correspond to any universal need, bodily,
emotional, or social; at any rate, not to any real or objective universal need. A
native may think his baby will die if he does not observe the couvade taboo
restrictions (§ 225). But since the babies of non-couvading peoples also hve and
these nations manage to multiply, the quite genuine problem remains for the
reflective student: What actual need is fulfilled, what good or purpose sub-

served, by people's believing in the necessity of the couvade ? Or for that matter,
in the necessity of clans, totems, initiations, taboos, and all the rest.
     The simplest and soundest answer is that the need, good, use, or purpose is
often imaginary; that a lot of culture is irrational, and that collectively human
                                                            —
minds are as full of aberrations as individual minds or fuller. But most of
these irrationalities are harmless, or at least not destructive. It may bore a man,
or be inconvenient to him, to      lie   around the house inactive for days after his
baby is born. But he has the compensating satisfaction of believing that he has
strengthened the child's life; and there will normally be brothers or friends

around to see that the needed household and living chores get done. What we
call the more primitive cultures are full of such extravagances, of strange, unpre-

dictable, exotic doings; variable, and suggestive of the habits of children, of neu-
rotics,   and even of psychopaths; sometimes highly charged with emotion, but
quite unreasonable; often vehemently backed by the mores or ethical sentiments
of society. Quite likely our civilization has its share of counterparts,   which we
cannot segregate of? from the more practical remainder of the business of living
because we are engulfed in this civilization of ours as         we are in the air we
breathe. Some centuries may be needed before the full recognition of our own
nonrational couvades and totems and taboos becomes possible.
       Obviously, it is going to /be very difficult to explain all these extravagances
and absurdities on the basis of any coherent system of specific needs that they
satisfy or purposes which they serve. The phenomena are too variable, the pre-

sumable motivations too diverse. Some nations follow the couvade, some do not;
Il6                          THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § 130


some set up social groups to forbid intermarriage, some merely specify the for-
bidden kindred. Certain of the practices seem actuated by fear or lack of assur-
ance, others by hope of a positive gain or reward; still others may spring from
restlessness, from the pleasure and excitements of change (§ 166-167). Or they

may have originated from one of these motivations in a particular, transient
situation; but the situation having passed, the practice continues to be followed
without motivation, or with a new one. It is plain that any general explanation
of phenomena as variable as these is bound to be thin, commonplace, and trite;
it can be vivid and satisfying only as it is particular and special.
     For instance, let us consider one of the most widespread of these "aber-
rations," the belief in and practice of magic. No culture has been free of it; in no
two cultures has it been identical. An older view, that of Frazer, sees in magic
an impersonal counterpart of religion, a sort of appUed pseudo-science that deals
with cause-and-eflect relations; the supposed causal relations are untrue, but they
contain a logic, in that, like the cause and effect of our science, they recognize
and deal with similarities and with proximities or contacts. A later interpreta-
tion by Malinowski construes magic as a response to the human sense of help-
lessness in a world beyond control: we invent a control, however fictitious, to
reassure ourselves and make living more endurable. Incidentally, the two inter-
pretations are not contradictory; they differ in emphasis rather than in being
exclusive. Malinowski goes on to assert that where people feel competent in a
situation, they tend not to invoke magic. Pacific islanders fish inside the lagoon
without bothering with spells, charms, and amulets; these are reserved for fish-
ing beyond the reef, where boats can founder or be blown away, where sharks
bite, and the surf pounds, where the prizes as well as the risks are greater.

      This explanation may hold for some Pacific peoples but it is not a univer-
sally valid principle.   In that event the Eskimo, who have to contend with far
greater dangers from ice, currents, waves, drowning, freezing, and starving than
the Melanesians, ought to make much more use of magic than the Melanesians;
whereas, in point of fact, they use it less. They are far more practical, competent
with   tools,   and self-reHant. They may make magic for a whale; they do so
occasionally for seals if these leave them altogether in the lurch; perhaps never
for fish. One might pick up the point of self-reUance and say that it is precisely
there that the Eskimo broke loose from magic, relatively speaking: that their
subsistence problems   were so tough that no bolstering of their courage with
magic would have sufficed for their survival. They had to find techniques that
actually killed the seal and brought the hunter back alive, or perish; and with
such techniques, they became self-reliant, and discarded much of their magic.
But with this concession, the explanation by need is weakened. Magic is no
longer a regular response to an automatic human need for assurance (§250).
This need is itself a variable, dependent on degree of technological invention,
and perhaps on other factors as well. Contact with a new people may result in
the learning of new weapons, tools, or techniques, increased competence and
Si   >30                                    PURPOSE AND NEED                                       HJ
self-assurance, and a falling-away of the cumber of magic. Contact with a new
people is certainly among what we call the accidents of history; and if such ac-
cidents can influence the amount or kind of magic or animism practiced, it is
plain that the explanation of magic as a function of a constant and imperative
need, universally intrinsic to the human psyche, pretty much falls to pieces.
        Of similar import is the fact that, in the same Pacific Ocean, Polynesians are
on the whole less magic-ridden than Melanesians; and among Polynesians the
Samoans are described as taking their animism with comparative lightness
(§ 250), and the Hawaiians as having been bored with their religion to the point
of wanting to discard it (§ 168). Here we are within the range of almost iden-
tical environments and therefore presumably very similar needs and problems.

     Another irregularity is furnished by the Yurok and the Karok of native
California. These tribes lived in a climate of no rigors, on a river that gave them
abundance of salmon, in a land full of acorns that were their staple, and for
centuries no foreign foes nor even pestilences invaded them. Their food supply
was greater and their population denser than in most of California, yet they
had hedged themselves in with a thousand do's and don't's of magic. You didn't
drink river water because it might have been poisoned, nor drink in strange
places; you didn't eat in a boat on the ocean, nor on the river-mouth spit, nor
before going hunting or doing the day's heavy work. You did not eat deer and
whale meat at the same time, nor bear meat and salmon. After eating venison, it
was obligatory to wash your hands, but in a basket, not in a stream. You might
sleep with your wife in the brush or in a camp, but not in your house, else your
shell money took offense and left you. Your bow had to be made from that side

of a yew tree which faced away from the river. And so on ad infinitum. Yet
need cannot be invoked as cause, as we have already seen. The elaboration of
all this magic and taboo system of the Yurok and the Karok is due to an orienta-

tion of the culture that has nothing to do with any necessities or actual problems.
For some unknown reason the culture just had gone hypochondriac, and all
members of the society, whatever their congenital individual dispositions, had
fear and pessimism pounded into them from childhood on.^- They were taught
by all their elders that the world simply reeked with evils and dangers, against
which one sought protection by an endless series of preventive taboos and magi-
cal practices. (See also § 253.)
        We must conclude, accordingly, that there is no relation of simple function
between specific organic needs rooted in the body and the mind or in the en-
        ^^   One might also try to explain such pervasive timidity by frequency of social fears or
interpersonal strains. The Yurok had a good many person-to-person quarrels and enmities,
but few class or communal clashes. It is difficult to say whether they experienced more social
strain than tribes of courageous and optimistic oudook, such as the Dakota or the              Mohave.
Beyond this       —   is it   a tense, hypochondriac disposition that leads to clashes with people, or
is it   actual enmities which make a people hypochondriac even toward nature?             It   would be
hard to say. In most cases of this type, the causality tends to be circular: each effect tends
to become a reinforcing cause.
Il8                          THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               § 1 30


vironment of man on the one hand, and his cultural activities, such as magic,
on the other hand. Whether it be magic or art, mythology or elaboration of
social structure, or what not, cultural activities differ so    much, from people to
people and from period to period, in their strength and in the forms assumed,
that it is impossible to derive these activities from, or even to relate them rigor-
ously to, any intrinsic organic necessities, which must in their nature be far more
constant.   Of course, organic factors are always present and operative. But as
soon as we have culture at all, another set of factors also becomes operative:
ideas, beliefs,   and the practices and affects attached   to   them   —cultural mani-
festations such as no subhuman animal shows. And these factors being highly
variable, their expression in specific but unstable cultural traits     and complexes
must be variable and complex, with considerable play or give-and-take. The
most immediate functional relations of cultural phenomena are to cultural
variables and epiphenomena, not to organic constants such as physiological
necessities or psychobiological imperatives.
                            CHAPTER EIGHT

                                        Patterns


131.    THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN          I32.   SYSTEMIC PATTERNS    I33.   TOTAL-CULTURE PAT-
TERNS       134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE         I35.   PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS           I36.

CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                I37. STYLE PATTERNS      1 38.   BASIC PATTERN
AND STYLE VARIABILITY         1 39.   THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS               I40.   THE
MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS


PATTERNS are those arrangements or systems of internal relationship which
         give to any culture its coherence or plan, and keep it from being a mere
          accumulation of random bits. They are therefore of primary importance.
However, the concepts embraced under the term "pattern" are still a bit fluid;
the ideas involved have not yet crystallized into sharp meanings. It will therefore
be necessary to consider in order several kinds of patterns.              We may call these
provisionally the universal, the systemic, the societal or whole-culture, and the
style type of patterns.



                            131.   THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN
        The universal pattern was proposed by Wissler, with the alternative desig-
nation of "the culture scheme." It is a general outline that will            more or less
fit all   cultures. It is therefore fundamentally different       from the other kinds of
pattern, since these all apply either to particular cultures or only to parts of
cultures. The universal pattern consists of a series of nine heads                 under which
all the facts of any     culture may be comprehended. The nine heads are: Speech,
Material Traits, Art, Knowledge ("mythological" as well as "scientific"). Re-
ligion, Society, Property,      Government, and War. These subdivide further, as
desirable. Thus under Society, Wissler suggests marriage, kinship, inheritance,
control, and games;       under Material Traits, food, shelter, transport, dress, uten-
sils,   weapons, and industries; Government is divided into political forms and
legal procedures.
        It is   apparent at once that this universal pattern with its heads and sub-
heads is like a table of contents in a book. It guides us around within the volume
rather than giving us the essence or quality of it. Except for minor variations,
120                                            PATTERNS                                  §   131

the universal pattern is in fact identical with the table of contents of most books
descriptive of a culture, such as a standard ethnographic report on a tribe. The
main heads are conventional captions for those classes of facts which common
sense and common experience lead us to expect to be represented in every
culture. We know of no people without speech, food habits, artifacts, property,
religion, society, and so on. We can say therefore that these captions represent
a sort of common denominators found in all cultures, and that the universal
pattern consists merely of the series of these common denominators expectably
represented in any culture             —represented perhaps very variably but represented
somehow.
        It is evident that the greater the range of cultures considered,        and the more
diverse these are, the more will the universal elements or common denominators
shrink or become vague. The proportion of universal or common traits in the
total range becomes less and less as this total grows more diverse, while at the

same time the concepts corresponding to the captions have to be increasingly
stretched to accommodate the facts or traits. Thereby the most characteristic
features of each culture get blurred out. The Yurok, and again the Ifugao,
have a highly intricate legal system, but a minimum of political institutions
in fact it might be argued whether they properly have any. This is certainly an
interesting situation in that it differs so radically from our own culture, where
not only both law and government are highly developed but law is                     made to
depend on government or to derive from it. This characterizing distinction,
which is obviously significant for the understanding of Yurok or Ifugao cul-
ture,    and almost certainly significant also for understanding our own culture
better   — this and similar distinctions are lost in the degree that one does one's

describing in terms of the common denominators of the universal pattern.
        This universal pattern thus boils down to a rough plan of convenience for
a preliminary ordering of facts awaiting description or interpretation.               No one
seems to have developed the idea since it was set forth in 1923, or to have made
serious use of       it   toward deeper understanding. We will therefore pass on              to
other kinds of patterns.



                                     132.   SYSTEMIC PATTERNS

        A second kind of pattern consists of a system or complex of cultural ma-
terial that   has proved its utility as a system and therefore tends to cohere and
persisr as a unit;        it   is   modifiable superficially, but modifiable only with   diffi-

culty as to    its   underlying plan. Any one such systemic pattern is limited pri-
marily to one aspect of culture, such as subsistence, religion, or economics; but
it is   not limited areally, or to one particular culture;         it   can be diffused cross-
culturally,from one people to another. Examples are plow agriculture, mono-
theism, the alphabet, and, on a smaller scale, the \ula ring of economic exchange
among the Massim Melanesians. What distinguishes these systemic patterns of
§    '32                           SYSTEMIC PATTERNS                                      121

culture    —or wcll-pauerncd systems, as they might also be called—            is   a specific
interrelation    of   their   component   parts,   a   nexus that holds them together
strongly, and tends to preserve the basic plan. This is in distinction to the great
"loose" mass of material in every culture that           is   not   bound together by any
strong tie but adheres and again dissociates relatively freely. As a result of the
persistence of these systemic patterns, their significance becomes most evident on
a historical view.

       As we mentally roam over the world or down the centuries, what is im-
pressive about these systemic patterns       is    the point-for-point correspondence of
their parts, plus the fact that all variants of the pattern         can be traced back to a
single original form.
       The alphabet is an example. Its history and variations are set forth in § 206-
221. But we may anticipate here by pointing out that the alphabet was invented
only once, by a Semitic people in southwestern Asia previous to 1000 B.C.; that
itoperates on the principle of a letter symbol for each minimal acoustic ele-
ment of speech; that the letters for most sounds in any form of alphabet, no
matter how specialized, always resemble the letters in some other alphabet, and
through that, or still others, they resemble and are derived from the letters of
the original alphabet; and that for the most part the order and often the names
of the letters are the same, or where different, it is evident where and why they
were altered. Thus Hebrew aleph, beth, gimel, daleth, correspond in sound,
order, and name to Greek alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and to Roman and our
A, B, C, D.
       The pattern of plow agriculture comprises the plow itself; animals to draw
it;   domestication of these beasts; grains of the barley or wheat type sown by
broadcast scattering, without attention to the individual seed, seedling, or plant;
fields larger   than gardens and of some length; and fertilization with dung,
primarily from the draft animals. This system originated in the Neolithic period,
probably in western Asia or near it, and by a.d. 1500 had spread from Morocco
to North              —
           China since then to the Americas and Australia as well. There are
two other and parallel systems, both without plows originally: the rice and
maize types of agriculture. The former involves small fields flooded by nature
or irrigation, hand planting of seedlings and hand weeding; the associated
animals, pigs and buffalo, were not formerly utilized in the rice-growing, though
the buffalo is now put before the plow in some areas. This rice pattern began as.
a hoe-and-garden culture and still largely is such. Native American agriculture,
centering around maize, also did not attempt to use the available domestic
           —                        —
animals llamas in the Andes and therefore was also hoe farming, or even
digging-stick farming. The planting was done in hillocks. Irrigation and fer-
tilizing were practiced locally and seem to have been secondary additions. The

plants grown in addition to maize were, with the exception of cotton, wholly
unrepresented in the plow or rice patterns. The histories of the three systems
have remained essentially as separate as their origins, except for some relatively
122                                    PATTERNS                                  §   132

recent transfers of draft animals      and plows from the plow pattern into the
two others where these began to be drawn into modern international, metro-
politan civilization.
    The exclusive-monotheistic pattern is Hebrew-Christian-Mohammedan.
The three religions are outgrowths of one another and originated in a small
area of southwestern Asia. The pattern comprises a single deity, of illimitable
power, and exclusive of all others; so far as there are other spiritual beings, such
as angels or saints, they are derivativefrom him; the deity is proclaimed by a
particular human vessel inspired by the deity;   and worship according to this
revelation excludes and forbids any other worship. Cults and philosophies out-
side these three organized monotheisms have repeatedly attained to mono-
theism, or to a pantheism or a henotheism that would be hard to distinguish
logically from monotheism. And many religions, even of backward peoples, rec-

ognize a supreme deity. But all these others regularly lack some of the features
of the exclusive-monotheistic pattern, and their resemblances are thus only par-
tial convergences of an analogical type. This merely analogical similarity of

these "high-god" and miscellanously monotheistic religions goes hand in hand
with their diversity of origin they are not connected with the exclusive mono-
                               :




theisms, nor for the most part with one another. By contrast, the three exclusive
monotheisms are homologous         —structurally or part-for-part similar—and they
are connected in origin: Jesus was a Jew, and Mohammed took his ideas from
Jews and Christians.
      The systemic type of pattern accordingly not only partakes of the quality
of a system, but is a specific growth. It originates in one culture, is capable of
spread and transplantation to others, and tends strongly to persist once it           is

established. It recalls the basic patterns of structure common to groups of related
animals developed from a common origin, with the original pattern persisting
through all superficial modifications as they occur under evolution. For instance,
the basic vertebrate pattern includes a skull with lower jaw, vertebrate column,
and, above the level of the fishes, two pairs of limbs each ending in five digits.
Within the range of this pattern, there is endless variation. A snake has no
legs, whales and some reptiles and amphibians possess only one pair.        Birds have
converted the front pair into wings;         seals,   into  and moles, into
                                                             flippers;

"shovels." The digits carry claws in carnivores, hoofs in running mammals,
nails in ourselves. They number five in man as in the salamander, never more
than four in birds and in pigs, three in the emu, two in the ostrich and the
cow, one only in the horse   —not counting nonfunctioning vestiges. Not one of
the thousand of species of amphibians, reptiles, birds, or          mammals ever pos-
sesses   more than two pairs of limbs or more than five digits; any six-fingered
vertebrate is an individual malformation.
      By contrast there are the arthropods, among whom the higher crustaceans
have five pairs of legs (modifiable to claws or paddles), the spiders four, and
the insects three pairs of legs and two pairs of wings; but none of the hundreds
§   '32                           SYSTEMIC PATTERNS                                 I23

of thousands of species of arthropods ever show a five-digited limb. Such arc the
basic arthropod plans, which are endlessly modified according to order, family,
and species. Thus many butterflies have only two pairs of legs; bees have two
pairs of wings, but the related ants break theirs off after mating; flics have only
one pair; beetles have two pairs but fly mainly with one, the other having be-
come converted into a protective shell; worker ants, fleas, lice, and many others
have long since become wingless. We might add that all arthropods have defi-
nitely    segmented bodies, a skeleton on the outside, antennae, and pale bluish
blood containing copper-protein haemocyanin, as compared with the nonseg-
mentation, inner skeleton, lack of antennae, and blood reddened by the iron-
protein haemoglobin of all vertebrates.
      It is   true that these fundamental plans of structure of the subkingdoms of
life such as the arthropods and  the vertebrates, or of their classes like insects and
mammals, constitute something very much bigger than the system patterns of
culture. They are hundreds of millions of years old, expressed in thousands to
hundreds of thousands of species and in trillions upon trillions of individuals.
The culture patterns muster an age of only a few thousand years. Once estab-
lished, the great biological patterns predetermine, as it were, the main frames

within which evolution will operate. No arthropod can give rise to a vertebrate,
or vice versa; their patterns are separated by profound, unbridgeable            clefts.

Evolutionary change takes place in the domains between these chasms         —   strictly
speaking, between their subchasms. By contrast, cultural system patterns, such
as exclusive monotheism, plow agriculture, the alphabet, pass from     one race or
society, from     one major culture, to another, and rather freely. Each year men
who otherwise remain in their ancestral culture are for the first time learning
to plow, to read letters, to fixate on a single   God. Such a transfer of pattern to
new kinds of carriers is of course impossible in subhuman organisms, whose
forms are dominated by irreversible heredity. But the transfer is characteristic
of the very nature of culture,  which is plastic, reversible, and capable of un-
limited absorptions^ anastomosings,   and fusions. Hence the patterns within
cultures impress us as shifting and often transient. They are so, in comparison
with the grand patterns of organic life, just as everything cultural, being an
epiphenomenon, something superadded to life, is relatively unstable, modifiable,
and adaptable. What the present type of cultural pattern system shares with the
fundamental organic patterns is that they both embody a definable system, in
the repeated expressions of which, no matter how varied, there nevertheless is
traceable a part-for-part correspondence, which allows each form or expression
to be recognized as related to the others and derived from the plan as it originally
took shape.
     In fact, the peculiar interest of these systemic patterns is that, within the
endless kaleidoscope of human culture, they allow us to recognize things that
are actually related in origin as against things that appear similar but are not
connected in origin. The patterns differentiate homologies from analogies, the
124                                     PATTERNS                                         § 13-2


biologist would say.      Thus, the several examples of exclusive monotheism are
both homologous and historically interconnected through derivation of one
from the other. But the Chinese Heaven, the Indian Brahma, the Egyptian
Aten, "god" in the abstract of the Greek philosophers, the supreme deities of
many primitive religions, represent analogies or convergences. They are distinct,
separate developments which led to results that seem similar. And so, Egyptian
hieroglyphs, Mesopotamian cuneiform, Indus Valley, Mayan, and other ancient
ideographic or mixed systems of writing, and the surviving Chinese system
(§202-205) are like alphabets in that they function as more or less effective
methods of visible-speech communication. But they are like them only in that
                                                   —
functioning. All alphabets are genetically one derived from a single source; the
other methods of writing have separate sources, operate on different principles,
are built on different plans. They resemble alphabets as a              whale does a fish
both communicate or         swim  —but without genuine similarity of structure or
meaningful relationship. But alphabet resembles alphabet as whale and porpoise
and dolphin resemble one another.
      It is in   the working-out of these real relationships, structural       and genetic
relationships as against      mere functional   similarities,    that    the recognition of
culture patterns of the systemic type finds one of its chief uses.



                          133.   TOTAL-CULTURE PATTERNS
      Next, there are patterns that relate to whole cultures. There is an Italian,
a French, a British pattern or form of European civilization.              There is an Iro-
quoian, Algonkin, and Siouan aspect or facies of North American Indian
Woodland culture. This Woodland culture in turn has its own larger total
pattern, which, together with the Southeastern, Southwestern,                North Pacific
Coast, Mexican, and other patterns make up the still larger native North Ameri-
can pattern (§ 326). It is evident that we are here dealing with culture wholes,
not, as in the last section, with specific complexes or systems that form only part
of any one culture but can be grafted onto others.
      East is East and West is West, Kipling said in vivid allusiveness to the
different physiognomies or qualities of Occidental              and   Asiatic civilizations.
When he added that never the twain shall meet, he was technically overstating
things, in that civilizations do borrow and learn from each other, do assimilate
or "acculturate"    —which   fact he was perfectly aware of when he went on          :   "But
there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth, when two strong
men stand face to face." But the "never-meeting" is also a poetical way of say-
ing that civilizations are vast things like great ocean currents flowing past each
other, and perhaps of implying that the sets or trends of civilizations as wholes
vary profoundly, quite apart from the sum total of the items which                make up
their content. Civilizations differ in "configuration," in modern scientific jargon;
"spirit" would have been an earlier word, "genius" before that.
§     "33                     TOTAL-CULTURE PATTERNS                                     I25

    There is of course nothing new in the fact that civihzations are distinct.
Innumerable items can always be cited, either of differential or of likeness. To
engage a button, we cut a slit in the cloth; the Chinese sew on a loop; and so
on. But what do a hundred or a thousand or ten thousand such items mean.?
What do they add up to that is of wider import or deeper significance? If the
items just scatter with equal randomness in two or more cultures, their effect
will be equivalent, in spite of the endless variation of detail. Obviously, the
specific items    must concentrate in some peculiar way in each civilization, must
gather or weight themselves along certain          lines, if   they are to have a larger
meaning. And therewith we have a pattern or configuration.
        There remains a difficulty, however. Items like buttonholes are definite and
are readily ascertained or established, but their significance is limited. The pat-
tern or physiognomy or trend of a great civilization           is   certainly   an important
thing to know, but it is     difficult to   formulate accurately and reliably. Such a
pattern has in it breadth and complexity, depth and subtlety, universal features
but also uniqueness. In proportion as the expression of such a large pattern tends
to the abstract, it becomes arid and lifeless; in proportion as it remains attached
to concrete facts, it lacks generalization. Perhaps the most vivid and impressive
characterizations have been made by frank intuition deployed on a rich body of
knowledge and put into skillful words. Yet this does not constitute proof and is
at best at the fringe of the approved methods of science and scholarship. These

difficulties will   explain why the formulation of whole-culture patterns has not
progressed farther, though it is surely one of the most important problems that
anthropology and related researches face.
        A spirited depiction of the total pattern of any culture possesses much the
same appeal and interest as a portrait by a good painter. Some cultures, like
some faces, are more interesting than others, but all can be given an interest and
meaning by the hand of the skilled master. This gift of "seizing" character, with
its    suffusion by insight, admittedly partakes as      much of the faculties of the
artist as of those of the scientist.   Excellent delineations of culture patterns have
in fact been presented by nonanthropologists, by historians and travelers. More
than eighteen hundred years ago Tacitus gave to posterity one of the master-
pieces of this genre in his analysis of German        custom and character. So keen
was his penetration that many qualities of his subjects are still recognizable in
the Germans of today. Other notable examples are the mediaeval Persian
Al-Biruni writing in Arabic on Indian civilization; and in the nineteenth cen-
tury, Burckhardt's Renaissance, Doughty 's Arabia Deserta, Codrington's Mela-
nesians. The first was a historian, the second a crotchety Semitist, the third a
missionary bishop. At the risk of making invidious distinctions, Malinowski,
Benedict, Mead, Evans-Pritchard, might be cited among recent avowed anthro-
pologists.    Through the medium of fiction, Pierre Loti, Freuchen's Eskimo,
Maran's Batouala, and Mofolo's Chakjz have done something similar widi ex-
ceeding vividness.
126                                         PATTERNS                                     §   133

       A requisite for the recognition of the whole-culture type of pattern, besides
of course insight and articulateness, is willingness to see a culture in terms of
itself,     of its own structure, values, and style. There must be an interest in the
culture for its own sake. Without this, the depiction tends to degenerate into
a recital of oddments, or of those features in which the culture's standards differ
                        —
from our own to its own worsening, of course. The disengagement from the
biases and values of the describer's own culture should be complete, at least
for the time being. Such preconceptions should never block his sympathies for
the culture he is describing, where its qualities call for sympathy. Of course the
account must not be a laudation, but an appraisal of what the culture's own
standards and valuations are, and how far they are adhered to.
       This process is akin to recognition of style in art; to "appreciation" in the
stricter sense of that word, before it acquired its popular meaning of mere liking.

There too we do not judge Michelangelo by the standard of Rodin, or Mozart
by that of Shostakovich; nor, for that matter, Shostakovich by the values of
Mozart, though unconsciously that is what conservatives may tend to do. What
is   in question in such endeavors is the recognition of the art of a certain region
and period as expressed by its best exponents, the evaluation of how far it
achieved its aims, and the definition of what these aims and values were. At-
tempts to recognize and define whole-culture patterns are of the same kind, but
are larger in that they try to grasp the totality of styles           —the nexus of     social,

ethical, intellectual,        and economic as well as aesthetic styles or manners which
together constitute the master pattern of a culture.^



                            134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE

        As so often, language, which is one specialized part of culture, can be
used advantageously here to illustrate the total cultural situation. An author's
style   —   literally   his "writing-rod" or pencil   —refers to his consistent ways or
habitual manners of expressing himself distinctively enough to be recognizable
from others. We have also superindividual styles, such as that of Elizabethan
and of eighteenth-century EngHsh as compared with that of contemporary Eng-
hsh. Going still farther, we may say there is a Latin style, an Anglo-Saxon style,
a Germanic style, in English; and beyond these, there are styles characteristic
of the Latin, English, and             German languages. These whole-language styles
consist of more than degrees of elaborateness of sentence structure, or the posi-

       ^   Kluckhohn proposes to distinguish patterns from configurations. Both refer to struc-
tural regularities of culture.  But to him patterns are objective and explicit ("overt"), or
readily brought into social consciousness, whereas configurations are implicit ("covert")
setsor trends akin to attitudes or motivations, and have to be dissected out by analysts of
the culture. In part, though only in part, Kluckhohn's "patterns" correspond to what are
here called systemic patterns (§ 132), his "configurations" to total<ulturc and style patterns
(S 133, 137)-
S   '34                      EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE                                   I27

tion of the verb. By insensible degrees they involve the whole of what we ordi-
narily call the grammar of a language. Latin has six distinguishable cases, Ger-
man four, and English two. Latin conjugates its verb by a long scries of complex
suffixes,     whereas spoken English has only three living conjugating suffixes and
performs its main business of conjugation by the equally effective mechanism
of separate auxiliary words, as set forth in § 97, 109. What are such grammatical
                                                   The grammar of a language
peculiarities but crystallized stylistic idiosyncrasies?
may be viewed as its total specific style compared with the styles of other lan-
guages, or as its total pattern of structure.
      It is   true that what we ordinarily call "style" in language       is   more limited,
superficial,     optional,   and perhaps individual than what we ordinarily                 call

"grammar," and for many purposes it is desirable to observe the distinction. Bui
there is no absolute line between the two, and both are ways or manners or
patterns of expression. Just as the grammar of a language is its total pattern of
fixed forms, so we might conceivably refer to the total pattern of a culture as its
cultural grammar. That is not usage; but the comparison may help clarify what
we mean when we talk of total patterns. The trouble is that there is as yet no
word in English, or in any other language, to express this concept except vague
or metaphorical terms like "genius," "spirit," "style," "trend," "direction."
      Comparison with language may also help clarify the difference between
the systemic patterns (§ 132)and the total-culture patterns (§ 133). Much as
grammar corresponds to total pattern, so lexical content corresponds in one way
to system pattern and to miscellaneous unpatterned material. It                is   lexical con-

tents,    words, that are often borrowed by one language from another, as when
English takes over Gestalt from German or chic from French, or thousands and
thousands of earlier words from Latin or French or both        —   all   without the form
or grammar or pattern of English being appreciably changed. Similarly, in-
numerable items or traits of cultural substance, such as corn-planting or season-
ing with curry or voting on Australian ballots, can be taken over into a culture
without its basic pattern or "grammar" being affected in principle. Moreover,
we have seen cases of a system pattern such as the alphabet passing over into
culture after culture but its various forms there being recognizable as derived
from one common source by their part-for-part correspondence. Well, just as
in the alphabet aleph, beth, gimel, correspond to A, B, C, and help prove their
joint derivation, so in the relationship of language.      English nose, tongue, two,
three correspond to Spanish nariz, lengua, dos, tres, and to German nase, zunge,
zwei, drei, in sound as well as meaning; but none of               them correspond to
Japanese hana, hita, juta-tsu, mi-tsu in sound or form. Thereby these words
help prove that English and Spanish and German speech have a common origin
and relationship, which we call Indo-European, but that Japanese is outside the
Indo-European origin and relationship. It is the parts or content of a system
that can be used as evidence of this sort, and it is the parts or words or content
128                                      PATTERNS                               §   134

of a language that can be used in the same way. Both kinds of content are re-
ceivable into larger entities   —culture wholes or language wholes—without much
affecting the forms or major patterns or styles or "grammars" of these.
      On the contrary, resemblances in style pattern mean much less as regards
connective relationship. The Japanese language compounds nouns, piles up and
encapsulates subordinate clauses, and then finishes up its elaborate periodic sen-
tence with a verb, in much the way          German speech style does. English word
separateness and English syntax or word arrangement in the sentence are much
more like those of Chinese. It is evident from this example that these gram-
matical, styhstic, or pattern resemblances can grow up in languages quite in-
dependently of their historical connection. Of the four just mentioned, English
and German are the only two related. In fact they are closely and recently re-
lated in origin; but both tie up in certain features of their style pattern with
wholly unconnected languages at the far end of another continent.
     As a cultural counterpart one might mention the sharing by early Romans
and by Chinese of addiction to patriarchal authority in the gens or extended
family, the strong economic functioning of this group, the use of gentile or
family names, the cult of manes or ancestral spirits, the relative meagerness of
other ritual and mythology, the high premium on sobriety, piety, self-control,
and moderation. All these pattern resemblances of orientation or outlook or
physiognomy are certainly not due to any specific or direct historical connection
of Rome and China, which these two countries never had. The pattern re-
semblances are evidently convergent or parallelistic (§223). That is, the two
patterns originated independently, and therefore their similarity is secondary,
functional,   and analogous only. For instance, early       Roman culture put, and
Chinese does not put, strong emphasis on bravery, on military training and suc-
cess, and on a martial tribal god.

      Again, the late Roman Empire, in its Byzantine phase long after the capital
had been moved to Constantinople, shows interesting approximations to late
Chinese civilization, say of the Ming and Manchu dynasties, roughly 1400 to
1900. In both instances there are present: a sense of old and thorough saturation
in high civiHzation, leading to self-satisfaction    and disdain of the achievements
of other cultures; a competent and educated bureaucracy as the mainstay of the
state and civilization; fatigue as regards war, coupled with tried defensive skill;

a   flagging of originality in the arts, science, and philosophy, side by side with
real respect for learning   and    its   quantitative reproduction in encyclopaedias,
commentaries, and the like. Some of these shared trends may be the results of a
sort of civilizational senility. At any rate, they could hardly occur except in cul-

tures of some maturity. Nevertheless, whatever the causes at work, they do not
include imitation influence of the one civilization on the other. And we have
again a degree of physiognomic resemblance, of total-pattern similarity.        And
this is evidently analogous in kind to the patterning that makes the grammar of
 §   "35                           PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                               I29
 English— and not of Latin, or Greek, be it noted           — more like that of Chinese in
its   general character than      is   that of   any other European language.


       In summary, systemic patterns are blocks or pieces of culture or language
sharing a content that is of common origin and is arranged in a common pat-
tern persistent     enough   to be recognizable for a        long time, even after direct
historical record of the community of origin has been lost. (In the case of lan-
guage, the block may be so large as to comprise the majority of the vocabulary.)
Total-culture patterns are the over-all quality, set, cast, organization, or gram-
                                                       —
mar of the whole of a culture or language the direction in which it slopes,
so to speak. The total patterns of separate cultures sometimes are perceptibly
similar, even     though differing considerably in their content; and they can be-
come similar of themselves even though starting out independently and dif-
ferent. Or, conversely, they can begin            by being alike and then diverge increas-
ingly. Their value is thus low for tracing historical connections or proving rela-
tionships. Their significance lies in expressing the distinctive individuality and
quality pervading a whole culture or language.



                           135.    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS
      It   will be seen that the examples just cited of whole-culture patterns tend
somewhat toward the psychological; they have psychological implications. This
isinherent in physiognomic characterizations, whether these be of particular
men, of racial types, of historical periods, or of cultures. A face may express stern-
ness or majesty or raptness or serenity or benevolence or craftiness or intellec-
tualityor sensuousness, or combinations of such qualities. In much the same
way, in referring to a civilization or period or tribal culture or phase, we often
use terms of psychological appraisal, such as fatigue, self-satisfaction, bravery,
premium on sobriety, flagging of originality. Yet it is true that other character-
izing concepts, such as family names, ancestor worship, bureaucracy, encyclo-
paedias, manual arts, obviously refer to specific institutions or concrete cultural
phenomena. It would seem accordingly that formulations of the total pattern
of cultures contain both strictly cultural and psychological characterizations.        A
formulation begins with the former, with institutions or folkways; and as these
more and more weave themselves into a larger coherence, it gradually also be-
comes evident in what directions the culture is faced, what ends it looks toward,
which qualities it is occupied with and prizes most. In short, its characteristic
values and its characteristic attitudes or orientations become comprehensible. An
attitude, or for that matter an orientation, necessarily implies psychology. Atti-
tudes might be said to refer to the ways an organism sets or arranges or orients
itself, adjusts inwardly   and outwardly to its environment; anything in its merely
internal physiological operations would hardly come under attitude and orienta-
tion. Where the boundary lies           here between straight anthropology and straight
130                                    PATTERNS                                   ^   ^35

psychosomatics has not yet been determined.         We might     venture that   we are
still   within the jurisdiction or claims of anthropology      if   the   environment—
toward which human organisms react by an attitude or an orientation is a         —
cultural one, if it includes folkways or mores with societal pressure, or, in wholly
untechnical language, institutions. If however the environment is unmitigatedly
physical, like warm sunshine after exposure to cold, or the proximity of an angry
bear when one is in the woods unarmed, the reaction toward the environment
is primarily psychosomatic and outside the domain of anthropology.

        In recent years attempts have been made to characterize cultures definitely
in psychological terms. This does not mean that their cultural features were dis-
regarded.     On the contrary, their cultural traits were carefully studied for a
selection and an enumeration of all those customs and institutions which would
fit into a coherent pattern or plan expressible   in psychological terms. In short, the

procedure was to try to convert cultural phenomena into psychological formu-
lations through the medium of total-pattern recognitions. This is of course the
same procedure as we have been discussing, carried one step farther. Mead,
Gorer, and Fortune have described cultures more or less along these lines, but
the most comprehensive procedure has been that of Benedict. She began by con-
trasting two American Indian cultures, those of the Plains bison-hunters and
those of the southwestern Zuni and other Pueblo farmers, as being respectively
Dionysiac and ApoUinian. The Dionysiac temperament       —named after the god
of wine    — outgoing, addicted to rushes of strong feeling and their expression
             is

in activity; the self is asserted. The   ApoUinian type of personality is calm, re-
strained, "classic"; it dislikes surges of emotion, vehement action, and insistence
on the ego; this last should be muted in favor of group tranquillity. For example,
among the Dakota each man was free to seek his own "vision" or inspiration
from supernatural, who instructed him in his personal ritual and made him a
shaman. Among the Zuni, such personal experiences would be frowned upon,
and personal rituals were socially taboo. Ritual was in the hands of priests hold-
ing established offices, transmitting traditional tribal lore and cults, and teach-
ing younger priests to follow in their footsteps. The psychological formulation
of Zuni culture as ApoUinian is based on a large mass of cultural traits, such as
these customs differentiating shamans from priests.
        Later, Benedict   went farther and passed verdicts on cultures outside her
personal experiences: the Melanesians of      Dobu Island, described by Fortune,
and the Kwakiutl Indians of Vancouver Island, on whom elaborate reports by
Boas were available. The Dobuan culture she found to be paranoid in its in-
clinations; the Kwakiutl, megalomanic. Individual         temperaments tend to con-
form to the cultural set; they are molded by it. A Dobuan who may be sus-
picious and plotting by nature fits in with the trends of his society and becomes
a successful      member of it, a distinguished citizen. But one who has impulses
to be confiding and amiable, and cannot overcome these impulses, will be taken
advantage of by his tribesmen and be a social failure.
 i»   '35                       PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                                   13!

     There is no doubt that these four cultures actually di(Ter in the directions
described, and that other cultures difTer from one another in analogous ways.
Also, the characterizations tend to be in more or less psychiatric terms, or at
least clinical ones, partly because clinical psychology was the first recognized

branch of psychology that attempted to deal with whole human beings, as dis-
tinct from their intelligence or learning ability or other parts or special aspects

of the mind. Furthermore, terms like "paranoid" or "megalomanic" do not
imply downright insanity in psychology, as they frequently do in laymen's
speech. A man may have a definite megalomanic streak in him and yet be a
"normal" and useful member of society. Most of us in fact can think of an
acquaintance or two whom that cap just fits. Also, there are five or ten indi-
viduals with clinically recognizable paranoid or schizophrenic or manic-de-
pressive tendencies for every one that actually breaks into such a psychosis.          We
speak of such persons, quite properly, descriptively and without stigma, as being
for instance of manic-depressive temperament. Which is as much as to say that
if they     were to become insane, which they probably won't, their psychosis would
take such and such a form; just as one man will show a phthisic constitutional
type to a physician, and another an apoplectic one, and yet the betting is that
both will ultimately die of some other disease, respectively, than tuberculosis
and a stroke. So much then in validation of these translations of total-culture
patterns into psychological "diagnoses."
       However, there are limitations to this method. So far as it is valid, it ought
to    be applicable to any and all cultures beyond the four primitive ones cited.
Benedict herself seems to think that only some cultures can be described in this
way; the majority are not sufficiently "integrated" around a single psychological
trend, not oriented exclusively in    one direction. If that is true, then her Zuni,
Dobu, Kwakiutl cultures are abnormal cases, and are of significance chiefly
as showing to what degree of specialization culture orientations can be pushed.
But it seems much more likely that every culture is psychologically character-
izable; and that if only a few can be appropriately labeled, it is because our as-
sortment of labels is inadequate, or our interest flags beyond the gaudy ones.
Psychologists do not deny a personality to individuals         who are complex, bal-
anced, and well rounded, or allow it only to those who have warped themselves
around a single impulse or idea. The same must hold for the personalities of
cultures. Some will be more decisively one-sided than others. But all must have

a psychological      physiognomy of some kind corresponding           to   their   cultural
physiognomy.^ This is because culture is itself the product of psychosomatic
activity;    because in turn it conditions and molds psychology, as we have seen
(§ 123) ;    and because its operation is necessarily accompanied by psychological
functioning.

    - Subsequent well-rounded characterizations of East Asiatic cultures made by Benedict

during World War II (see § 245 for a Siamese example) avoid the single-label designation.
132                                  PATTERNS                                         § 135


      As a matter of fact all kinds of psychological emphases can be recognized
in cultures, even though it is but a rare culture all of whose manifestations can
be constellated around a single motif. For instance there are cultures, such as
the Yoruba and the     Dahomey in West Africa, that are marked by a passion
for method and relational organization; others, such as the Nupe, also in West
Africa, view the world matter-of-factly as consisting of an agglomeration of so
and so many discrete events which they feel no impulse to order (§251). Ac-
quisitiveness and retentiveness are certainly personality traits. Dobu culture is
acquisitive and retentive as well as sensitive and paranoid; Ifugao, in the Philip-
pines, is acquisitive but normally healthy in its outlook; Yurok, in native Cali-
fornia, is highly retentive of property but neurotically timorous; the Polynesian
and Australian cultures generally are not acquisitive,        still   less   retentive, but
geared to constant consumption. There is bound to be one pervasive psychology
in a culture that puts a social premium on co-operativeness, but a quite different
set of   mental reactions when a culture really prizes and rewards ruggedly in-
dividual competitiveness. Still other colorings are reviewed in Chapter Fifteen,
where this whole set of problems is examined more systematically.
    There are thus all kinds of psychological concepts against which cultures
can be graded, if not as yet by any system of measurements, at least by general
consent. The recognition of some such psychic qualities flows almost inevitably
out of recognition of total-culture patterns. Sound formulations are likely to in-
volve various sets of concepts. Thus it might be maintained that there was a
culture at one and the same time acquisitive, wasteful, competitive, intuitive, san-
guine, and uninterested in relations and abstractions. Which one.''            Contempo-
rary American civilization can be so appraised, perhaps without too much un-
fairness. At any rate it would be generally accepted that there are at least half a

dozen distinct psychological strands involved in our national make-up. Such
multiple-term characterizations as   this,   though   less incisive, will     in the long
run be applicable to far more cultures, and are likely to be fuller and truer de-
scriptions than the occasional instances in which a culture is so speciaUzed that
nearly everything in it can be disposed along one conceptual axis expressible in
a single word.
      There is a large field here waiting to be developed as more students of
anthropology learn to make psychological characterizations, or more psycholo-
gists learn to deal with culture. In both sciences, the tools of method have been

sharpened, for about the last two lifetimes, by pursuit of critical analysis. Apart
from psychiatry as a branch of medicine, clinical or whole-personality psychology
of    more than mere   introspective or   guesswork    caliber scarcely existed con-
sciously, even in germ, before about 1920, and is still in its infancy; and the same

is true of whole-culture or pattern anthropology.   When both have grown farther,
and interpenetrated each other more, the results        are hkely to be        immensely
interesting.
§    '35                                    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                                 I33

       From what has been said about the conditioning or molding of men by
their cultures,       it    is   evident that to every total pattern or orientation of culture
there      must correspond a type of personahty. In fact, strictly, all psychic action
lakes place not in the culture but in the people who participate in it, carry it, and
are shaped by         it.    The culture, which from one angle is a sort of set of rules
enabling a certain set of activities to go on, by its existence inevitably induces
certain habits in the members of its society;                  and these habits aggregate, in any
individual, into a particular kind of personality. This personality will tend to
be more or less alike in all members of a society, though varied by their purely
individual conditionings as well as by their individual heredities,                   which are
never wholly the same. The average or type or mode of these personalities pro-
duced in a society by its culture is, strictly, what the cultural psychologist tries
to recognize or describe; the culture that produces the personality type is, strictly,

the anthropologist's first concern.               A potlatch and a thousand-guest wedding are
cultural facts; but              if   a culture favors   and rewards them, certain psychological
attitudes,       such as those toward lavishness and personal ostentation, tend to be
set   up in most people living in that society under that culture. This idea, of a
type of personality always having to correspond to a type of culture, at least on
the average, is after all a quite simple one, as well as being seemingly unassail-
able. It    is   the basis of the relation of anthropology and psychology,               and the
reason why examination of whole-culture patterns or physiognomies inevitably
suggests psychological implications.
       This rather simple relation has sometimes been obscured by premature
attempts to explain the full causality of cultures or persons —which no one yet              is

in position to do      —and sometimes by technical jargon, such as "basic personality
structure." This phrase seems to mean nothing more than the personality type
corresponding to a particular culture                —the kind of person normal or average to
the culture, one might say. "Basic" is unfortunate, because to biologists "basic"
means what is hereditary and congenital, whereas this kind of personality is
induced by the culture, not primary. If "basic" refers merely to being typical
or average, it would better be called that. "Structure" appears to be just a yield-
ing to a word that has a perfectly good meaning but suddenly becomes fashion-
ably attractive for a decade or so                —like "streamlining"—and during      its   vogue
tends to be applied indiscriminately because of the pleasurable connotations of
its sound. Of course a typical personaUty can be viewed as having a structure.

But so can a physiology, any organism, all societies and all cultures, crystals,
machines     —
           in fact everything that is not wholly amorphous has a structure. So
what "structure" adds to the meaning of our phrase seems to be nothing, except
to    provoke a degree of pleasant puzzlement. Moreover, an impressive phrase
Uke this one tends                to   provoke an     somehow knowledge of life
                                                    illusion that
histories of typical personalities in a society will explain why the culture is as
it is; whereas in the main it is the culture that has made these personalities what
134                                       PATTERNS                                     5 135

they are (§ 123). However, apart from such putting of the cart before the horse,
and from the matter of technical verbiage, the idea of some certain kind of a
person or type of mentaHty corresponding to each particular culture               is   both
simple and important. It will be developed farther in Chapter Fifteen.


               136.    CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS

      If   we consider how cultures grow, by reviewing the course of those civi-
lizations we know best through their history or archaeology, we are soon struck
by a familiar phenomenon. Successful growth, which in retrospect is judged to
have been productive, tends to come intermittently, in pulses or irregular
rhythms. The word "cycles" is sometimes used, but it denotes a repetitive return,
and return is more than is really characteristic of the phenomena now in ques-
tion, or at least     more than is sure about them. The manifestations are more
Uke unpredictable swells or waves than            like    any wheel-of-fortune action in
which an idea of retribution is implicit, or of a fate that eventually levels all
things out. The "rise and fall of nations"         is   the familiar phrase that refers to
the phenomenon; but there is actually a good deal involved beyond the success
or failure of national fortunes.       There is included, it is true, politico-military
achievement: that is, success of the society in outright competition with other
societies. But, more or less associated, there are usually : a growth in      population
an increase in wealth; technological advances; and bursts of productivity in the
aesthetic    and intellectual fields, all the way from sculpture to literature, from
philosophy to science.     The peaks in these several activities may come simul-
taneously, or overlapping, or in close succession.           Sometimes the    total rise is
gradual, as was that of ancient Rome; sometimes it comes suddenly, or seems
abrupt, perhaps because the initial stages have not got into the preserved record
of history.
      An almost supertypical example is provided by the ancient Greeks:
      Military success: 500-250 B.C.
      Politics: progressively   democratic constitution building, 600-400
      Population: increasing to probably 300, decrease by 200
      Philosophy: 585-200; peak: Plato, Aristode, 400-320
      Science: 585-150; peak: Euclid, Archimedes, 320-220
      Medicine: 500-100; peak: Hippocrates, 420
      History: 500-200; peak: Thucydides, 420
      Tragedy: 500-400; peak: Sophocles, 450
      Comedy: 480-280; peak: Aristophanes, 420
      Poetry: 650-200; peak: Pindar, 450
      Oratory: 450-300; peak: Demosthenes, 340
      Sculpture: 550-100; peak: Phidias, 450
      Painting: 500-100; peak: Apelles, 330
      Architecture: 600-100; peak: Parthenon, 450
§    136                        CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                           I35

            It is   evident that for a few centuries Greek cultural activities were        much
heightened in the quality of their values achieved: the near-concurrence of dates
is    striking.
      The five centuries involved include everything the Greeks produced which
the world since their time has thought important, with the following few excep-
tions: Around 850-800 b.c, well before the main growth, there were the Homeric
epics. Under the               Roman Empire, two or more centuries after the great growth,
there occurred an aftermath of science, largely in the nature of codifications
(Ptolemaic astronomy. Galenic medicine,                    a.d.   100-150); a philosophic revival
(Neo-Platonism,                a.d.   250); and a "silver-age" prose literature (Plutarch,   a.d.

150). All the rest of the Greek contribution falls in the period 650-100 b.c; much
the most of it, in fact, is comprised in the three centuries 500-200, with practi-
cally all the          peaks or climaxes between 450 and 300. And this happened in a
quite small area, as well as in the quite brief time. To put it a little differently,
there was an enormous concentration of culture energy and innovation, of pro-
duction of high cultural values, and of flourishing of men of the first rank of
genius, in a very limited space  and period, in contrast with much less of the
same that the Greeks did before or after or elsewhere.
     Quite so intense a condensation was perhaps never again accomplished in
history. But the number of less extreme examples is indefinitely large. In Rome,

the "Augustan" age around the time of the birth of Christ corresponded to the
Greek "Periclean" age. All the most notable Roman achievements cluster around
this Augustan climax, within a century or two before and after it Cicero, Caesar, :




Lucretius, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Tacitus; the world's first truly realistic portrait
sculpture           fifty to   a   hundred years after Augustus; Trajan, the emperor who
brought the Empire to its greatest extent; and the culmination of Roman archi-
tecture, road-building, engineering, and probably population and wealth, in the

first       two Christian centuries.
    Sometimes such bursts come repetitively within one area and population, as
in China of the Chou, Han, and T'ang dynasties; ^ or in Egypt of the Pyramid

Age, the Middle Kingdom, and the New Empire, with an aftermath renascence.*
Sometimes successful activities string along spottily and successively, or some-
how fail to appear altogether. Thus England was musically productive until
1700, musically imitative or second-rate thereafter; but began painting success-
fully only after 1750;and never had a first-rank sculptor. Holland's great men
allcame in the i6oo's: Spinoza in philosophy, Rembrandt in painting, Huygens
in physics, Vondel in literature. This was also the century of successful Dutch
aggression against Spaniards and Portuguese, of the founding of their colonial
empire, and of an unusual accumulation of wealth. In a small country it seems
to be easier for everything to pile up simultaneously. The much more numerous

        ^   Most productive about 550-300 b.c, 200 b.c.-a.d. 200, a.d. 600-800.
        * At peak around 2600, 1900, 1400, 600 b.c, respccdvely.
136                                   PATTERNS                               § 136


adjacent Germans toward 1800 had in Kant, Goethe, Beethoven, the greatest
contemporary European philosopher, poet, and musician, respectively; but po-
litically they were mediaeval and disunited, and militarily Napoleon buffeted

them around. Their famous science was only just beginning to function success-
fully at the time. During the nineteenth century this science flourished, Germany
became politically organized and strong in war, population and wealth increased
faster than in                   —
                most of Europe but German philosophy, literature, and music
were progressively on the downgrade. Nevertheless, on the larger view the sig-
nificant dbing is the close time association of these somewhat separate German
culminations. Some merely happen to reach their peak a Uttle before the others
some during 1 750-1 825 and some during 1 825-1900.
     It will be seen that there are two related aspects to the type of phenomena

we are considering. One is the fact of the production of great men and great
cultural achievements; the other is their normal concentration in time, space,
and nationality.
      It   used to be customary to "explain" such happenings as these, especially
literary ones,   by referring them to the stimulating effect of great victories, or
other national events. It was said, for instance, that Shakespeare was somehow
helped to write great plays by the defeat of the Spanish Armada; Phidias,
Sophocles, and the other Athenians similarly were pushed forward to higher
achievement by Marathon and Salamis; Augustus at last ended civil war and
brought peace. But in many cases closer examination of the facts shows that the
literary or other burst had already begun before the poUtical event.   And even if
the burst is wholly subsequent, it is hard to see why and how better painting,
or a discovery like Harvey's of the circulation of the blood, should be "produced"
by a victorious war. The present-day view is that this kind of working from
specific cause to specific effect will mostly not hold water in these complex
matters of civilization.   Modern opinion sees correlations or functional inter-
relations between a group of historical    phenomena, rather than saying that A
"produces" B. The Armada, Shakespeare, the playwriters who preceded both,
the poet Spenser, Harvey with his circulation of the blood, Napier and his in-
vention of logarithms, the composers of madrigals, the freebooter Drake,
Raleigh and his colonial expansion, are all interconnected in making the Britain
of 1575-1615. Each of them represents or expresses part of a successful pattern;
and the group of patterns together constitutes the national culture-whole pattern
of England in its temporary "Elizabethan" phase.
      These national spurts of success and concentrations of cultural productivity
may accordingly be regarded as constituting a phenomenon that recurs through
history    —and presumably through prehistory—even though separate occurrences
never manifest wholly identical forms. The bursts have considerable significance
in illuminating the     dynamics of style patterns, the nature of genius, and the
causes of invention. Their bearing on these three matters will now be consid-
ered in turn.
§    '37                                      STYLE PATTERNS                                      I37


                                       137.    STYLE PATTERNS "

        The basic reason for the concentrations of productivity seems to be that for
things to be done well they must be done definitely, and definite results can be
achieved only through some specific method, technique, manner, or plan of
operations. Such a particular method or manner is called a style in all the arts,
as we have seen.           And "style" is perhaps the best available word that will cover
also the      corresponding methods or plans in other activities. We can speak of
styles of      governing, of waging war, of prosecuting industry or commerce, of
promoting           science,   even of speculative reasoning. For instance,             all   modern
Occidental business is carried on in a style that includes banking and credit.
But ancient and Byzantine and Islamic businessmen necessarily followed                              a
quite different style or pattern because they did not seriously employ credit, and
actual money had usually to be collected or moved for any and all transactions.
A style, then, may be said to be a way of achieving definiteness and effectiveness
in   human relations by choosing or evolving one line of procedure out of several
possibles ones, and sticking to it. That means, psychologically, that habits be-
come channeled, facility and skill are acquired, and that this skill can then be
extended to larger situations or to somewhat altered ones. This process may
mount for a while, the original skill itself being developed farther or giving rise
to subsidiary ones. Or it may mount through enlargement of the field to which

it is   being applied, and therewith the product achieved perhaps increases in quan-
tity as     well as improving in quahty. But the process cannot go on mounting
indefinitely, because          it   began with a limitation of choice, a selection among
possibilities.       Therefore every     style is necessarily prelimited: it is an essential

commitment to one manner, to the exclusion of others. Accordingly it cannot
encompass everything. The range of its channeled skills will extend so far; be-
yond, they fail. Then we say that the style has exhausted itself, its characteristic
pattern has broken down. Or the style may be able to maintain itself for a while,
but without any longer increasing the range of                     its   control or improving      its

achievements.          When this termination has been reached, accordingly, there is
either decline or a freezing.             The style either loses its skill of touch and its
products deteriorate; or it becomes frankly repetitive, which is usually equiva-
lent to a      slowed-up deterioration, interest and feeling having been                 lost   when
further change is eliminated.            A pickup in quality will normally be possible only
with a new start toward a new style. And the evolution of a new style is likely
to be easier to outsiders or novices than to the group which has been reared in
an old style. That is why nations replace one another in their achievements; or
if one does repeat, it is usually after a considerable interval.

     This course of development will be familiar to anyone who has ever fol-
lowed through the history of any art style, whether in literature, sculpture, paint-
        5 This is   the last of the four kinds of patterns listed in the introduction to this chapter
138                                      PATTERNS                                § 137


ing, architecture, or music. It is a commonplace that all aesthetic styles rise and
fall    and perish. All art has constantly to get itself reborn with a new set of
impulses, and then run a new course.        Why that is so is what has just been set
forth. But, as has also been just said, the arts are by no means something wholly
set apart  from the rest of civilization. The same principles of style or method,
and therefore of pulsation, tend to hold for most or all cultural activities except
the basic day-by-day and year-by-year repetitive ones like plowing and reaping,
making a living, cooking and eating, marrying and dying. And even in these
day-by-day activities, style patterns do intrude: we certainly have changing styles
              —                                              —
of cookery usually dignified as cuisines; of marrying early or late, for love
or convenience, and so on; of funerals and corpse disposals. However, let us con-
sider a cultural activity that is obviously neither of the repetitive kind nor
aesthetic, one that passes as cumulatively progressive science.
                                                         :




     We have seen that Greek science and mathematics came in a four-century
spurt and then stood still. The Greeks never did achieve much in simple arith-
                                                                          —
metic, probably partly because their method of writing quantities by letter
symbols denoting certain specific numbers instead of by position numerals
made ordinary computations of any size difficult. Even less was accomplished
                                                                  —
by them in algebra, of which the imperfect rudiments began or first appear to
            —
our view some four hundred years after Greek general mathematical progress
had stopped. The branch of mathematics the Greeks did wholly originate and
                         —
develop was geometry plane, solid, and spherical. Here they substantially "ex-
hausted the pattern," fulfilled its possibilities, and left nothing for others to dis-
                                                                   —
cover. Now geometry is a special way of doing mathematics with a compass
and rule and nothing more, the Greeks insisted. It visualizes properties and rela-
tions; it can be pictured, as algebra and arithmetic cannot be. Although already
truly abstract, geometry easily retains the most concrete aspect of all branches
of mathematics. This geometric approach was the Greek "style" in mathematics.
One part of the style was the Greek emphasis on proportion, which can also be
diagramed; and the Greek avoidance, where possible, of all but integral num-
bers, which can be handled like visible and tangible blocks; and the avoidance
also of negative quantities and irrational fractions, which cannot be handled
in this way. On the positive side again, the Greeks pushed on from their geom-
etry     into conic sections   —dealing with plane cuts across cones, resulting in
curves such as ellipses, parabolas, hyperbolas. This is a branch of mathematics
which we still call by the original name of "conic sections," although we mostly
express its concepts algebraically now. The further limitations of the mathe-
matical style of the Greeks are shown by their failure to develop anything at all
in the field of logarithms, analytical geometry, calculus, or the concept of func-
tion.    What they could do with their geometrical and whole-number manner or
style,    they achieved. Other mathematical possibilities, like these mentioned,
were simply left to be realized by other peoples and times       —chiefly by western
Europeans in the last three or four centuries.
§   '38                BASIC PATTERN     AND STYLE VARIABILITY                             139

        A Style of mathematics quite difTercnt from both the ancient Greek and
the     modern Occidental was briefly developed in China around 1300 but was
soon dropped, then taken up in Japan around 1600, and carried farther there
during the following two centuries. This was an algebraic approach, though
quite different in detail      from Western algebra and very            likely   unconnected
with it. This method was used ingeniously enough; but as neither China nor
Japan had ever discovered or learned geometry, their method or style of mathe-
matics was subject to limitations as great as was the Greek method, though
the limitations    were in many ways almost opposite. For instance, the native
Chinese-Japanese algebra handled negative quantities as freely as                 it   handled
positive ones, but    it   concerned itself very    little   with the properties of shapes,
such as triangles, cylinders, or tetrahedrons.
        In much the same way, the style of ancient Greek science as a whole and
the style of    European science are distinguishable. The Greeks observed, but
without instruments and without standard measures; and they did not ex-
periment. These aids to the prosecution of science were developed only after
A.D. 1500, as   part of the western-European         method of science. Galileo's trials
with bodies falling from the leaning towar of Pisa were made about 1590. The
telescope, invented in      Holland in 1608 (§ 140, 152), was used for astronomical
discovery by Galileo within        two or three years. The microscope was almost
simultaneous. Since understanding of the subtler forms of energy and of the
qualitative properties of matter seems to depend on systematic experimentation,
the basic discoveries in electromagnetism          and chemistry were made still later,
about 1750 to 1800, after the modern European pattern or style of science was
becoming mature.
        We can assume, then, that the higher values of human civilization tend to
be produced in bursts or spurts of growth. This is because their achievement is
dependent on the development of specific methods or styles somewhat similar in
kind to styles in art; and, like art styles, it is limited or exhaustible. Further
progress,    beyond the potentialities of a given style and pattern, normally              re-

quires a pause, followed by a fresh start with a new style or pattern                  —a new
approach to the problem, we might say. This principle seems to apply almost
equally to aesthetic activities, to intellectual ones, to politico-military or national
fortunes, and even to major economic achievements.               At any rate, such related
items as machine versus manual manufacture, mass production, and credit sug-
gest that industrial progress can also be      due to the fact that a "style pattern"
has been devised.



                138. BASIC      PATTERN AND STYLE VARIABILITY
        Dress obviously is heavily involved in the matters under discussion. The
    association of many women to "pattern" is likely to be the paper model
first

from which dresses are cut and shaped. Vulgarly, the word "style" refers to dress
140                                      PATTERNS                                 §   138

first   of all; and it is certainly plain that dress in general is heavily conditioned
by style. But beyond all this, dress excellently exemplifies even basic pattern and
its influence.

        For    instance,   Occidental civilization. Ancient Mediterranean, and East
Asiatic are each characterized by a distinctive, long-term basic pattern of cloth-
ing. In       comparison with our fitted clothing, Greek and Roman clothing was
draped on the body. While this statement is not wholly exact, it is true com-
paratively. Sleeves were little developed, trousers lacking, the waist of clothing
was not fitted in to follow the body, the general effect accentuated the fall of
drapery and the flowing line. The Roman toga was a wrap-around blanket. One
did not slip into it like a coat, one adjusted it to hang in proper folds.
    After prevailing for many centuries, this basic pattern of dress began to
crumble and become transformed toward the end of the Roman Empire, when
the old Hellenic-Latin religion had yielded to Christianity and the total Medi-
terranean civilization was disintegrating and at the point of gradually being
replaced by the beginnings of our Occidental one. Trousers, in spite of protests
and counterlegislation, were adopted from the barbarians. Sleeves came into gen-
eral use. During the Dark Ages, the transition was gradually accomplished.
The fitted clothes might be pretty well concealed under a long coat or cloak,
as in the sixth-century mosaics of the Eastern Emperor Justinian and the Em-
press Theodora; but they were there. By the Middle Ages, they were in the
open; and their pattern is still the fundamental pattern of our own clothing.
The characteristic of this, in contrast with ancient clothing, is that it is cut and
tailored, fitted to the figure. Our word "tailored" is from French tailleur, one
who cuts, carves, or trims; and taille still denotes both the figure as a whole
and the waist. The plan of Western clothing for men is that its parts follow the
limbs as well as the figure. For women, on the contrary, the legs are withdrawn
from sight in a skirt that during most centuries has been ample. From the hips
up, however, the pattern of Western women's wear makes up for the loose skirt
and has a bodice or an equivalent that follows waist, bosom, shoulders, and arms
fairly closely.

        How thoroughly this is our basic type of dress even today, underneath
all local or national variations     and fluctuations of period and fashion, is evident
when we compare Western dress as a whole for the past thousand years with
the East Asiatic in the same millennium. Chinese and Japanese dress is also cut
and tailored, but it is not fitted. It is cut loose, with ample sleeves, or kimono
style, to suggest a broad figure. Trousers are ample, so as to have      almost a skirt
effect.   The use of clothing to model or suggest women's bust, waist, and hip
contour is wholly outside the Far Eastern pattern. Witness the Japanese obi sash
and bow intended to conceal these features, while European women for four
centuries or more have worn corsets and girdles to accentuate them.
        Of course dress is notoriously subject to fashion change. But it is remarkable
how virtually all changes of fashion, alike in Classical, Western, and East
 ^   '38                      BASIC PAITERN   AND STYLE VARIABILITY                      I4I

 Asiatic costume, have consistently ojicratcd each within the basic dress pattern
of    its   own civilization. Fashion creates a thousand bi/.arrc forms and extrava-
gances; but it never has [produced,       among Occidentals, a man's type of dress
based on toga instead of trousers, nor a woman's with a Japanese silhouette.
The matter of fashion changes, which represent a minor sort of restless and
anonymous innovation or invention, is discussed elsewhere (§ 164), with em-
phasis on a concealed rhythm or regularity much greater than the participants
in a fashion are ordinarily          aware of. But there    is   another aspect of fashion
change— what may be called the intensity of its alteration, its momentary degree
of variability    —
               that both defines the basic pattern and helps to explain variation
from it. Variability is high when the fashion of one year differs considerably
from that of the year before; it is still more so when a series of particular dresses,
all   of the same year, differ considerably       from one another. Low variability of
course is marked by small differences of this sort. Such variabilities are easily
expressed statistically."
          The underlying fashion swings or trends change what might be called the
total silhouette of dress rather   than its details. These minor features may come
and go quite rapidly, and are what give the impression nearly everyone has
that dress fashions are highly unstable.          On the contrary, the total silhouette
shifts rather steadily for        perhaps fifty years toward one extreme of proportion,
such as a narrow skirt for women, and then for about fifty years toward the
opposite, giving a wavelength of close to a century for the periodicity,             which
seems to be adhered to with fair consistency in case after case.
       It   might be thought that the basic pattern       (for Occidental   women's dress
during the last hundred and fifty years) would lie somewhere between these
proportion extremes. Occasionally it does. But mostly the basic pattern proves
to coincide with one of the extremes. The other extreme then represents a sort
of opposition or aberration from the pattern. One might describe these aberrant
extremes as the proportions 'still just inside the pattern but as far away as pos-
sible from its center of gravity.       Or one might say the aberrant extreme is anti-
thetical    — almost perversely antithetical—to the ideal or saturation point of the
pattern, though still barely remaining within its range. Thus, as the permanent
Western pattern aims at amplitude from the hips down but slenderness above,
the silhouette-extremes conformable to the pattern would be: full or wide skirt,
long or low skirt, narrow waist, and therefore waistline just at the waist proper.
The antithetical extremes would be: narrow skirt, short skirt, wide or full
waist, and waistline moved from the anatomically narrowest part up toward
the broader breast or down toward the broader hips. In this last proportion

                                 —
position of the waistline pattern saturation evidently falls at the midpoint be-
tween extremes. In the three other proportions, pattern saturation coincides with
one of the extremes.
      ^   By the standard deviation or sigma, converted into a percentage of the mean as the
coefficient of variability.
142                                    PATTERNS                                    §   138

      A   glance at the silhouettes in the   upper row of Figure 19, showing char-
acteristic dress at   twenty-year intervals during the latter and larger part of the
nineteenth century, reveals what characterizes the pattern      —   its   consant stable
features    underneath temporary fluctuations.      The lower row gives two            sil-

houettes from the period of the French Revolution and Napoleon, and two
                                        —
from the period of the World Wars two eras of sociopolitical restlessness en-
closing the relative calm of Victorian times. Here skirts are in evidence that
are narrow or high or both, and waists that are thick or ultrahigh or ultralow
the aberrant extremes.


   VARIABILITY IN EUROPEAN WOMEn's DRESS SILHOUETTE DURING
        FOUR YEARS OF PATTERN CONFORMITY AND STABILITY
                              COMPARED WITH
               FOUR YEARS OF PATTERN STRAIN AND INSTABILITY
                                                               *
                       Stable Pattern Years: Low Variability
                              1859                                     1899




      1789                                      1916




                              1813                                      1935
         FIG. 19.         BASIC STYLE PATTERN IN WOMEN S CLOTHES
    Transient fashions conforming to basic pattern in upper stagger contrast with in-
trinsic departuresfrom pattern in the lower. Also, upper figures are accompanied by low
variability of fashion,and date from the calm Victorian era; lower figures show high
variability and date from Revolution, Napoleonic, and World War periods.
144                                            PATTERNS                                     § 138


the mode, whereas in times of calm they design them as aUke as they can make
them and       still    keep them from being          identical.   What evidently happens is
merely that in periods of general stress, when the foundations of society and
civilization  seem rocked, the pattern of dress is also infected and subject to
strain. It expresses this strain   by moving from stable saturation to aberration,
antithesis, restlessness, and instability.''
     This example may make more concrete the role of patterns both style            —
                                               —
patterns and total-culture patterns in cultural change and stability. Not that
patterns are the beginning and end of everything about civilization. But prac-
tically everything in culture occurs as part of one or more patterns. Hence

whatever happens in the way of accomplishment, alteration, succession, or per-
sistence in any culture is Hkely to happen through the mechanism of patterns.
We do not yet know too much about them, because awareness of patterns is
relatively recent in anthropology.             But it is already clear that understanding of
culture as something more than an endless series of haphazard items is going
to    be achieved largely through recognition of patterns and our ability to
analyze them.



                 139.     THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS
      We have seen that the higher values of civilizations, their greater accom-
plishments, tend to be achieved spasmodically, in intermittent bursts. Also, these
bursts can be associated with the growth and fulfillment of style-type patterns.
Yet there is something else equally associated with the bursts of cultural pro-
ductivity. This is frequency of genius, frequency of extraordinarily gifted
individuals.
      Personalities        of the    very highest ability    —whether in ruling, thinking,
imagining,       innovating,        warring,    or   religious   influencing—have long been
known to occur in concentrations of country and period. The list in § 136 is not
only a tabulation of when drama, sculpture, war, philosophy, and other activities
of culture flourished in ancient Greece; it is equally an enumeration of its great
men, its outstanding geniuses. The philosophy, for instance, is exemplified by
Plato and Aristotle, by their predecessors like Democritus and Socrates, by their
successors like Epicurus and Zeno the Stoic. Or we can equally well say that it is
these men who produced the philosophy. These are but two ways of describing
the   same phenomenon. Obviously, there is not going to be much important
philosophy without able philosophers around, nor able philosophers without
important philosophy to show for it.

      ^ Literally,   of course, it is the minds of designers of dresses that are affected and show
strain in their creations.     But since such individuals tend to be affected and to react more
or less alike, it is their common behavior, and the common drift of their products, that are
historically most significant. This significance in turn justifies the use of short-cut metaphors
like "patterns       being infected," "straining," "moving," "saturating," "freezing."
§    139               THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I45

         Of these two related aspects, the philosophy and the philosophers, the ac-
tivity      and product or the personalities, there is no doubt which        is   the easier
to grasp: the concrete persons. All sorts of Athenian contemporaries saw, heard,
and perhaps touched Socrates, and had quite definite reacticjns to him and judg-
                        —
ments of his merits Athenians who nevertheless knew little and understood
less of his thoughts. Through the accounts of Plato and Xenophon, Socrates re-

mains today a very living and real personality whom one can never quite forget
even if one's interest in philosophy be zero or negative. Hence ordinarily we
tend to think first of Socrates the man and secondarily of what new ideas he
produced. To put it on a lower level, a child cannot comprehend a philosophy,
but it can comprehend events like being married to Xantippe or drinking hem-
lock in prison. The first recognition of the two-faced type of phenomenon                we
are dealing with, accordingly, was in terms of great men and their near-simul-
taneity or clustering. This fact was already recognized by the later Greeks and
the      Romans. Velleius   Paterculus, a historian contemporary          with Augustus,
has quite a little passage on it. No one since appears to have doubted it.
         However, as long as the matter is viewed simply           as   one of persons,   it

remains rather meaningless      —curious but inexplicable.    It   came to be accepted
that there are golden ages thickly studded with great           men achieving unfor-
gettable products; silver ages with somewhat lesser men attaining smaller per-
formance; and ordinary times when men of ability or talent are still available
though the great lights of history just do not put in their appearance. But no
reason was manifest, through   many unstatistically minded centuries, for such
fluctuations,which glaringly violate the principle of random distribution or
accidental occurrence, and therefore suggest that there must be specific factors
at work to produce the      unevennesses.
         Biologically we know that hereditary races are constant to the degree that
if   a     thousand morons and one   man of genius are born per million in this
generation, the proportion is unlikely to be seriously different in the next gen-
eration or for a number of generations following. If Athens for a thousand years
had no great men, began to have a few in the sixth century, produced an aston-
ishing number of geniuses of absolutely first rank in the fifth and fourth cen-
                                then became sterile again and has remained so
turies, tapered off in the third,

until now, there is no known mechanism of heredity which can explain this
fluctuation of incidence of high ability; nor is it within the reasonable bounds
of mere statistical possibility. Galton, who still argued for a change to inherent
race superiority in the Athenians (§90), because Httle         was known before his
time about the heredity of intelligence and ability, already recognized that the
brief upcurve could not be a statistical accident, but that it must indicate some
factor at work. Nor is there any serious doubt now what that factor is, among
the ancient Athenians and in similar cases. It     is,   in general,    what is variously
called the milieu, the social environment, the cultural context, the condition of
civilization.    More specifically, the involved factor may be supposed to be the
146                                     PATTERNS                                    § 139

nature and degree of development of the value or style patterns of the Greeks,
and among them of the Athenians in particular, around 500 b.c. There was a
style of tragedy, for instance, in the     making then. Aeschylus developed this
tragic style farther in the grand manner, Sophocles freed it from the last traces
of archaism, Euripides introduced the final psychological finesses            and tender-
nesses   —and in this style of tragedy there was nothing essential or important
left to   be done. If there had been an unfinished remnant to be achieved, it is
expectable that this remnant would have been contributed. With the exhaustion
of the Greek tragic pattern, no very great Greek tragic poets could arise, it may
fairly be argued. There was nothing left for them to do in the Athenian pattern.

Nor could they, as children of their time and place, conceivably invent Eliza-
bethan or Japanese tragedy, not even in Attic Greek language dress.
      Now this explanation does not mean that the state of the dramatic pattern
in Athens around 400 b.c. prevented the birth of men endowed by nature with
high potential ability of expressing themselves in tragic poetry. Such a direct
reaction of a momentary condition of culture on organic heredity would be an
even more unreasonable belief than Galton's belief that the heredity turned
itself   on and off again within a dozen generations like a playful faucet. What
the situation does warrant us in inferring is that when general cultural condi-
tions and specific dramatic pattern conditions were at their optimum in Greece,
there would be an average of one individual of the poetic potentiality and caliber
of Sophocles or Euripides born      among so and so many thousand or million
Athenians; and also that these rare individuals would be able to realize or
express their gift by writing tragedies. When the general and specific pattern
conditions were not at optimum, there would continue to be just as many po-
tential poetic geniuses  born among the same number of Athenians, but they
would not become tragedians, or if they stubbornly tried to, they would find
that their say had already been said, and that instead of fame they were ac-
quiring mainly a repute for being somewhat dull repeaters. Conceivably, if
they had a somewhat different vein in them also, they might still become great
comic poets, since Athenian comedy ran a somewhat later course than tragedy.
Or if their gifts were not too narrowly specialized but <vere plastically adaptable,
these potential geniuses might have become actualized geniuses in oratory or
history-writing, or perhaps even in philosophy. Here we are at the border of
certainty of opinion, because no one yet knows how far the high capacities that
                                             —
we call genius are congenitally specialized say for poetry and not for prose or     —
                                                            —
on the contrary how far these capacities are general like articulateness of ex-
pression, for instance, or originality of ideas   —and   it is   a matter of conditioning
after birth that   determines whether the inherent genius is to become a writer
of tragedy, comedy, lyrics, or prose.
      In any event, within a very few hundred years there was no form of litera-
ture left active in Athens, and soon after that no form of cultural activity any-
where among Greeks,       in   which a congenital super-AAA genius could any
S    139                  THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I47

longer hope to attain supcr-AAA rating. This was hecause the possibihties of
Greek civilization were so used up, its pattern so exhausted, that no supcr-AAA
achievement was any longer possible in that civilization. The same one-in-four-
thousand or two-hundred-in-a-million births of top-flight                ability   presumably
continued to take place in Greek society in subsequent times as before.' But
these individuals simply no longer had any chance to become top-flighters. They
very likely became the leaders of their day; but posterity would rate them only
BBB instead of AAA, because what posterity can judge, or does judge, is accom-
plishment. What posterity cannot readily judge, of course, and ordinarily is too
busy to try to, is how much of any accompHshment is due to innate or heredi-
tary endowment and            how much due to favorable cultural and environmental
circumstance.
   What we have in this whole matter, in summary, is first the fact that great
men do constellate, or genius does cluster; and second, an explanation of that
fact in    terms of degree of development of patterns of the style type. A third
consideration may be added; namely, the reflection that only a fraction of all
the men congenitally equipped for genius ever actualize as such. Only a frac-
tion are ever found out, or allowed the rank,             by history. This fraction is the
same as the proportion that the number of generations recognized as fruitful and
genius-studded, in all lands, bears to the number of barren, geniusless genera-
tions. This proportion can hardly be reckoned as greater than               one in four, and
may be as Uttle as one in ten, if we take into account all the regions and eras
of the world in which it is customary not to recognize any geniuses as having
occurred.
       There is a point of impressive significance here. Human biological heredity
runs good enough to produce, once in every so many hundred thousand or
million births, an individual so highly gifted as to be capable of becoming one
of the lights of our species, a benefactor or a creator whose work will Uve in
history;    and yet the nature of our culture manages to neutralize or frustrate
from seventy-five to perhaps ninety out of every hundred such great geniuses,
or to depress them into mere second-rank talents or transient leaders of soon-
forgotten days. Ideally considered, this is a tremendous waste from the point
of view of those concerned with            human achievement. It certainly invites the
consideration of eugenicists, to whom it offers the pessimistic prospect that even
if   they should succeed in improving the heredity of our species, three-fourths
or more of the gain would be lost again by the shockingly wasteful way in which
civilization to date has operated.'

      * Gallon computed 248 in a million, or i in 4032, as born in Attica 530-430 B.C.

      " This over-all   wastage of 75 per cent or more of the finest congenital talents born in
the human species       may seem to constitute a blasting indictment of human culture. But
without culture, the waste would be a complete 100 per cent. Culture is admittedly still
an imperfect instrument.
148                                    PATTERNS                                      § 139


        Logically, of course, what we have in this situation about genius   is   a dis-
tinction    we have already considered in connection with race (§ 86, 90)        :   that
achievement and capacity for achievement are different things, and that they
do not correlate in any outright one-to-one or other simple manner. We assume
that achievement presupposes inherent capacity, though even here it is a prob-
lem to be investigated how close the correspondence comes to being a i co-per-
cent one. We certainly cannot assume that capacity is always actualized in
achievement.
        One difference between the race problem and the genius problem is that
differences in ability between races are still somewhat uncertain, and, being dif-
ferences of averages, are likely to prove small; whereas individual differences
within one race and culture are well substantiated as considerable by psycho-
logical and practical tests. Moreover, it is relatively easy to compare individuals
of practically identical physique, culture, economic stratum,      and social oppor-
tunities and yet find marked differences between them; whereas races are never
the same in culture, social environment, and opportunities.
        Recognition of the fact that potential capacity may not be inferred in regard
to race outright from accepted achievement, especially      not negatively, began to
be well and widely established by 1900. But recognition of the parallel non-
correspondence as regards individual genius did not come until well along in
the twentieth century. And the significance of the clustering of both genius and
cultural florescence has at times even yet failed to penetrate      where an unhis-
torical attitude of mind prevails.

        One possible misconception will be guarded against by its mention. The
naiive view of course is that greatmen do great things. The greater achievements
of civilization are therefore "explained" by the great men's happening to come
along.    Why they come along when and where they do hardly seems to call for
further explanation in a pre-culture-conscious period. But once we are aware of
culture and begin to take note of its workings, the simultaneous clustering of
genius and of style-pattern fulfillments is one of the outstanding manifestations
of history, and seems to lead inevitably to the conclusion of the interrelation of
genius and pattern. The admission of this interdependence may put some curb
on our notion of genius. We can certainly no longer look upon genius as some-
thing wholly unaccountable, heaven-sent, exempt from the laws of nature, opera-
tive solely according to its own uncontrollable will. Genius is reduced to a
phenomenon, and therewith relatable to other phenomena. But genius is thereby
not abrogated or denied. The genius remains the superior man, even the su-
premely able one. But he is such at birth by the bounty of the variability of
organic heredity; and he is such at death by the grace of the condition of his
culture, which has allowed and helped       him to realize his congenital potentiali-
ties.   In short, understanding of    how culture operates does not in the least
"abolish" individual superiority. It merely helps to explain greatness while using
it   also to explain better the patterns of culture.
5   '4°             THE MEANINC; OH SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS                          I49


             140. THE MEANING OF          SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS
        Allied both to pattern florescences and to genius clustering is the fact that
many inventions have been made independently by two or more men, and
often even simultaneously. If this happened just now and then, and were true
of only a small minority of all inventions,      it    could be called coincidence and
attributed to accident. But as soon as simultaneity and independence of origin
characterize any considerable proportion of inventions or discoveries, it is evident
on the basis of the law of averages that some specific factor must be operating
in that direction.   Now the number of cases is not small Ogburn and Thomas as
                                                                  :



long ago as 1922 had listed 148 instances. It is therefore of interest to under-
stand what is at the bottom of the phenomenon, and why it went unrecognized
so long— until about the time of World War I.
    The reason for the nonrecognition seems to have been the reluctance of
our minds to see anything superpersonal in matters that involve persons. Ac-
ceptance of impersonal forces lying outside the individual, but driving him to
this achievement or that failure, appears somehow to infringe on our personali-

ties,to delimit our freedom. Particularly do we tend to resent such invasions
when they concern great intellects.
    After 1700, everybody who knew anything of the history of science was
aware that Newton and Leibnitz had both devised the calculus, and each at
firstwithout knowing of the other's discovery. It was their respective followers
and compatriots who fought over priority and insinuated bad faith.
    In 1845, Adams and Leverrier separately predicted the discovery of the
planet Neptune. Adams's computation was worked out a little the earlier, but
Leverrier's was published first, and the planet was promptly seen where he had
said it ought to be.
        In 1858, Darwin and Wallace presented parallel papers at the same meeting
of the Royal Society, setting forth the idea of natural selection as a factor ac-
counting for the evolutionary formation and change of species. Darwin had had
the germ of the idea twenty years before, but hesitated to commit himself pub-
licly.    When the same idea occurred to Wallace, who was exploring in the East
Indies,     he promptly wrote   it   out and sent     it   to   London. This both forced
Darwin's hand and strengthened his confidence, with the result of the com-
panion papers as an immediate compromise fair to both men, and the publi-
cation of Darwin's Origin of Species the next year.
        The year 1900 saw the discovery of the basic laws of heredity — was really
                                                                             it

a rediscovery, but     more of that later (§152)    —by three several biologists: De
Vries, Correns, and     Tschermak.
        These four instances, all of them relating to fundamental discoveries in
science, will at least suffice to take the phenomenon of simultaneity out of the
range of mere coincidence. The list on the next page, which could be increased
150                                           PATTERNS                                       S 140


indefinitely, will reinforce the principle. If practically all of the cases cited are
from modern Occidental civilization, that is because invention records which
are authentic, full, and exactly datable nearly all hail from that civilization. Also
it    will be seen     from the list that technological invention, scientific discovery,
and even geographical discovery all behave much alike in this matter of simul-
taneity   —in line with their shading into one another otherwise, as              set forth in

§145-
                  SOME SIMULTANEOUS DISCOVERIES AND INVENTIONS
Telescope: Jansen, Lippershey, Metius, 1608 (§ 137, 152)
Sunspots: Fabricius, Galileo, Harriott, Schciner, 1611
Logarithms: Napier, 1614; Biirgi, 1620
Calculus: Newton. 1671, publ. 1687; Leibnitz, 1676, publ. 1684
Problem of three bodies: Clairaut, D'Alembert, Euler, 1747
Nitrogen: Rutherford, 1772; Scheele, 1773
Oxygen: Priestley, Scheele, 1774
Water is H2O: Cavendish, Watt, 1781; Lavoisier, 1783
Steamboat: Jouffroy, 1783; Rumsey, 1787; Fitch, 1788; Symington, 1788 (§ 155, 186)
Theory of Planetary Disturbances: Lagrange, Laplace, 1808
Pepsin: Latour, Schwann, 1835
Telegraph: Henry, Morse, Steinheil, Wheatstone and Cooke, about 1837 (§ 187)
Star parallax first measured: Bessel, Henderson, Struve, 1838
Photography: Daguerre and Niepce, Talbot, 1839 (§ 187)
Planet Neptune: Adams, Leverrier, 1845
Surgical anaesthesia by ether: Long, 1842, results disregarded; Jackson, Liston, Morton,
  Robinson, 1846; N2O, Wells, 1845
Sunspot variations correlated with disturbances on earth: Gauthier, Sabine, Wolfe, 1852
Natural selection: Darwin, Wallace, 1858
Periodic Law of Elements: Mendeleev, Meyer, 1869
Telephone: Bell, Gray, 1876 (§ 187)
Phonograph: Cros, Eldison, 1877 (§ 187)
Liquefaction of oxygen: Cailletet, Pictet, 1877
Rediscovery of Mendel's Laws: De Vries, Correns, Tschermak, 1900 (respectively on
  March 14, April 24, June 2; see § 152)
North Pole: Cook,'" Peary, 1909
South Pole: Amundsen, December, 1911; Scott, January, 1912
Flight orientation of bats due to hearing reflections of uttered sounds: Griffin and Galam-
     bos, U.S.A., 1941-42; Dijkgraat, Holland, 1943      —during total severance of communi-
     cations in war years


       A list like this tends to instill a conviction that inventions may be in-
evitable,    within certain Umits; that given a certain constellation and develop-
ment of a culture, certain inventions must be made. Such a conclusion involves
       ^° That   Cook's discovery was untrue varies the principle of simultaneity without in-
validating it. Fifty years earlier   it   would probably not have occurred to anyone even to
pretend the discovery; twenty, perhaps even ten, years earlier, the claim would have been
received with such incredulity as to discourage a false claimant; 1909 was the psychological
moment for a fake attempt      —the whole world was agog      for the discovery that Peary   was
actually consummating.
§   MO            THE MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS                       I5I

the recognition of supcrindividual forces   —historical agencies or social currents
transcending personalities. This is a matter which will be taken up again, and
more fully, in connection with the nature of invention, in § 145-155, especially
152. Our more immediate concern here is with the clustering of able inventors
around an important invention or series of related inventions, like the clustering
of able or great men in a particular art or any phase of a nationally delimited
culture growth.   The two sets of clusterings are strikingly similar; and it is
evident that they are both related to the development of culture patterns. The
patterns   must have a certain potentiality, and they must have reached a stage
of "fruitfulness," before we can expect great men, great productions, or great
inventions. But once geniuses, achievements, or inventions begin to arrive, they
may be expected in bursts of concentration.
                               CHAPTER NINE

                            Culture Processes


141. CULTURE PROCESSES            I42. PERSISTENCE     I43,   MOTOR HABITS       I44.    OTHER HABIT
CHANNELINGS        I45.   INVENTION       I46. NECESSITY       I47.   ACCIDENT        I48.   INVENTION
AND PLAY       149.   ANTECEDENTS        I50.   CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS                 I5I.

SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE          I52.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN               I53.     INVENTION OF
INSTITUTIONS      I54. INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION                 I55. INVENTION BY REDUC-

TION-SEGREGATION          156. CULTURAL LOSS       I57. DISAPPEARANCE OF        USEFUL ARTS       I58,

EFFECTS OF ISOLATION:         SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS                  1 59.    DISPLACEMENTS
160. KINDS OF LOSS        161. PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES



                                  141.   CULTURE PROCESSES
          PROCESSES of culturc we mean those factors which operate either toward
BY      the stabilization and preservation of cultures and their parts, or toward
       growth and change. Changes, in turn, may consist either of increments,
such as new developments, inventions, and learned traits acquired from outside;
or of losses and displacements. Beyond these, there are minor alterations or fluc-
tuations that are neither particularly additive nor deductive, as when the wheel
base of automobiles is shortened, or the floor is lowered, or the engine is placed
behind.
    The main value of these formal distinctions of kinds of process is logical:
they help us organize a large mass of facts into some sort of preliminary order.
For that reason the topical sequence of consideration             :   persistence, invention, loss,
in this chapter, and change in the next, will be followed here. But as cultures and

their parts actually live, thrive, decay,          and alter, and as they influence one an-
other, these several processes, which in the abstract seem so neat and distinctive,
                                             and interwoven. All of them
are found to manifest themselves in association
           work at once, so that the same phenomenon may be seen as an
are often at
example of two or three of them. This constant interrelation of processes is
characteristic of culture. Their segregation has something artificial about it, and
is justified   chiefly by convenience.

     For instance, one might expect innovations to cause displacements: for the
steel knife to crowd out the stone knife.            But the latter may survive in ritual; or
S    141                          CULTURE PROCESSES                                I53

the stone tool may have become associated with certain       motor habits that it is
awkward or unprofitable to change, as when the Yurok Indians eagerly took
over our American knives for most purposes, but during a couple of genera-
tions retained their flint ones for dressing and splitting salmon. If there is such
a retention alongside the addition, the culture of course     now possesses two
traits instead of one. Yet   we may not assume that this always happens, else cul-
tures would regularly grow additively or cumulatively. They do sometimes: our
Western civilization undoubtedly has more content now than it had a thousand
years ago. But it is probable that there are occasions when losses can and do
exceed additions: for instance, in Italy during the first seven or eight centuries
of the Christian era.
      What happens in particular cultures may of course happen to their sum,
to   human culture in the aggregate. The total quantity of this probably does tend
to increase, but certainly at     uneven   rates in different periods   and   areas, as
already discussed in § 127. Variation and fluctuation of culture content are evi-
dently more typical events than its steady increase. If any generic inherent force
making for progressive cultural accumulation existed, it would be difficult to
explain the fact that there still remain backward and lowly "primitive" cultures
of meager content.
       We may conclude that while innovations sometimes result in displacements,
they sometimes do not; but that losses also can occur without gains. While there
is   a relation between the two currents, they are separate enough to justify their
separate consideration.
     Even changes and persistences blend into each other. The normal way in
which culture continues is for one generation of a society to transmit its culture
to the next generation, the process occurring in time, since societies and cultures
are normally attached to an area. But when one culture transmits some of its
                      —
content to another when for instance porcelain or papermaking diffuses from
                                                                    —
China to Europe, or glass or surveying from Europe to China the receiving
culture has changed by acquiring something new, though the process of trans-
mission is now through space instead of time. But from the angle of the total
culture material in the world, there has been merely a continuance of a trait,
accompanied by its geographical spread, conceivably without any change in the
trait itself,   or only minimal change. Ultimately a diffusing technique or insti-
tution or system may even die out or be displaced in its homeland, but survive
where it was imported; as Christianity withered away in Palestine, and Bud-
dhism in India, but they continue to flourish respectively in Europe and China.
In Europe, however, Christianity crowded out all other organized religions;
whereas in China, Taoism and Confucianism have maintained themselves along-
side Buddhism.
     These instances will indicate what is meant by the statement that con-
ceptually distinct processes tend to come intertwined, and to interact, in the
actual operations and history of culture.
154                               CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 14^




                                 142. PERSISTENCE

       It has been asserted that the first problem of any culture is that of its sur-

vival or persistence, much as     any society is always confronted by the problem
of surviving. This allegation seems truer logically than important factually.
If a culture perishes,    there is an obvious end to its problems of adaptation and
modification. But this does not by any means involve every culture's constant
striving to avert disaster— least of all   an awareness of being perpetually faced
by a life-or-death problem. Nor are societies in chronically acute jeopardy. Their
case is rather like that of individual organisms. These also have indispensable
needs, but mainly they are organized to function as physiological successes,
and on the whole they do so. The same with human societies and their cultures:
normally they make a go of it, at least for a time. What is more, most peoples
expect to make a go of it. They do not expect that they themselves and their in-
stitutions will    have crashed to ruin by next year. Such overclouded, anxiety-
ridden states of mind would have something of the abnormal about them. Per-
haps the whole notion of their being usual is a reflection in the minds of some
anthropologists of the uncertainties, strains, depressions, and threats of the period
from World War I to World War II (cf. § 122).
       What is true is that ordinarily societies cling with attachment to their cul-
tures. Genuine revolutionaries are rare, the    world over. They characterize par-
ticular periods and limited areas. Reformers are more numerous; but even these
generally want particular improvements on top of a basic maintenance of the
scheme of things. And a large part of mankind just is fundamentally conserva-
tive  —
     which means that they like their culture and their personal stake in it.
This personal stake and its rewards might well be bigger for the average man,
and he is Ukely to be trying to make it a bit bigger; but mostly he does so
without any notion of changing the rules, except perhaps at a spot or two. This
is   not a statement of what should be, but an attempt to summarize the attitude
of most people, primitive, barbarous, and highly advanced, throughout history
and all over the earth.
       There are several reasons for this attachment of men to their cultures. One
of course is habit adjustment.    We have been molded by our culture until we
fit it,   more or less, have got used to functioning within its framework, and have
channeled such functioning into habits. Then there is always education of the
young, both spontaneous and deliberate. This inevitably exalts the ideals and
values of the instructing generation. In most countries and times, these ideals of
the elders are pretty generally accepted, without much criticism or serious revolt.
The folkways tend to persist; the mores are held to firmly, with release of emo-
tion if they are challenged. It must be remembered that the idea        and ideal of
progress, which we of modern Western civilization tend to accept as axiomatic
§       4^                              PERSISTENCE
    1
                                                                                  1   55

(§ 127), has not been in the least axiomatic to       mankind at large. To most so-
cieties the      notion has hardly occurred, at any rate not as a guiding principle.
They rather take essential continuance for granted: the golden age is in the
past, not ahead. There certainly       is reassurance and comfort in the idea of con-

tinuance, unless one has been         imbued with the contrary attitude that restless
improvement is a desirable thing, or a sort of obligation.
     The famous French sociologist Durkheim went so far as to maintain that
                                         —                           —
what the "most primitive" people meaning the Australians really worship
through their rites, sacrifices, and taboos is the bonds of their society and the
institutions of their culture. The totems and the ancestors and their impersona-
tions, the sacred spots and the hallowed paraphernalia of bull-roarers, the care-

fully screened mysteries      —
                            all these are not randomly worshiped ghosts, animals,

rocks, and fetishes, but symbols of the total tribal society of the past, the present,
and the future, and its successful adaptation in the universe through entering
into mystic ritual relations with the universe.       This interpretation perhaps fits
the Australians more tellingly than it would fit most primitives and nonliterates,
and is somewhat extreme even as regards them; but the view undoubtedly ex-
presses considerable truth, and it would be more widely accepted today if
Durkheim had not stretched it into a basic philosophy of all culture and society
that savored almost as         much of mysticism as did the beliefs of the savages.
There is no doubt that most religious cults stress strongly the continuity with
all the past, an accord or oneness of the individual or his group with the whole

world, and the basic changelessness of these relations.
         It is also   necessary to remember how children   —          —
                                                           and adults enter into as-
similation and participation with their society       and culture, as already touched
on in § 123. One of two main mechanisms for this is voluntary adaptation
imitation,   wanting to conform, learning from example. Some of this is con-
scious, or begins consciously; more of it is unconscious, or foreconscious. Perhaps
it would be fair to say that normally there exists a strong emotional bent, which

is latently conscious, toward participation, and therefore toward assimilation and

learning, but that the actual imitating by the young is mostly done without
much specific awareness.
   The second mechanism making for participation of the young in their cul-
ture, and their fitting into society, is education, learning by being taught or
trained. This is clearly in the main a conscious process, even though its impli-
cations may often be overlooked. In general, what elders teach the young is
ways of becoming what they themselves are and have attained; or what they
might have become and attained under the same cultural rules if their luck or
their ability had been better. It is evident that both mechanisms are calculated
to work toward perpetuation and persistence.
156                                CULTURE PROCESSES                                 § 143




                               143.        MOTOR HABITS
       Among the factors that make for persistence of culture, in whatever form
it    happens to have anywhere, are motor habits. Such habits become estabhshed
in all higher animals. Resting on congenital anatomical structure, they may be
modified, and are channeled, in accord with the circumstances of environment.
In the field of culture, motor habits become particularly conspicuous in the
technologies and the arts. As long as these arts are studied chiefly through their
products, such as museum specimens, the motor habits that went into the mak-
ing of the objects do not obtrude. But if it is possible to give attention to produc-
tion as well as to product, motor habits are quickly seen to be a definite factor.
For instance, whittUng, sawing, planing, and many other tool operations can be
done either by pushing or by pulling. The Japanese carpenter pulls the plane
toward himself, centripetally. The Western workman pushes it away from his
body, centrifugally. Probably one method is as good as the other in most cases.
But once a certain skill has become established in connection with pushing, it is
impossible for a given individual to be equally skillful when he substitutes the
pulling motion. He may attain such skill by deliberately trying to learn a new
habit, but meanwhile his work is that of a novice. As there is usually no reward
for a change, and likely to be        an obvious penalty, because of temporarily de-
creased quality of performance, the change is not made, and the individual re-
mains a lifelong addict to the particular set of habits that first became estab-
hshed in him. Just as he acquired these habits from older workmen, he is likely
to transmit them to his apprentices or pupils. Thus not only does one habit pre-
vail    among a certain population, and the contrary or a diflferent one among
another population, but such habits may persist for hundreds or thousands of
years. These habits are definite parts of cultures. The difference between pushing
and pulling a plane is as much a culture phenomenon as the difference between
smoothing with a piece of sandstone and with a carpenter's plane.
    There are a great many situations in which one way of performing an opera-
tion is about as good intrinsically as the other; but it is frequently more efficient,
or at least timesaving and effort-saving, to decide on one method and stick to
it.   Driving on the right or the left side of the road is a case in point. Where
traffic is   negligible or slow,   it is   quite possible to get on without any motor
habit or rule. In proportion as traffic is heavy and swift, it becomes indispensable
to make a decision once for all and then to establish the chosen habit as            an in-
dividual automatic reaction, as well as a law of the society. It is notorious that
since the nations of the world have felt it necessary each to enforce a choice in
the matter, they have divided, some in favor of right-hand and some of left-hand
driving.     Any reasons for one being intrinsically preferable to the other are
mainly rationalizations. What actually seems           to   have happened   is   that loose
tendencies toward passing oncoming vehicles on one side or the other became
§    M3                                M01X)R HABITS                                  157

crystallized as wagon traffic became heavier with the growth of population and
the improvement of roads, and were then transferred to the automobile when
the matter of uniformity of reaction had become imperative.
   It is interesting that once such a rule becomes set among a population it

may be easier to alter manufactured objects than to change the rule. The Eng-
lish began     with the horse -driver sitting on the right side of the seat and turning
to the left    on meeting another vehicle. He could thus see whether the wheels
of the two vehicles were clear. When horses and wagons and roads were intro-
duced in British Colonial America, the driver presumably continued to sit on
the right of the seat: he had an established motor habit on this point. Traffic,
however, was       at first so   sparse that apparently any rules of passing   fell   into
disuse;  and when finally, with the increase of horse-drawn vehicles, a rule or
custom became desirable, the right-hand pass of oncoming vehicles was some-
how chosen. This put the driver away from his clearing wheel; but apparently
this was felt only as a minor objection. Only after the automobile with its much

greater speed came on the scene, was there seen to be an element of serious
danger. Then the conflict was solved by altering the pattern of car construction
so that the driver was now put on the left side of his seat. The rule of swerving
to the right, in which instantaneous response to a motor habit is frequently vital,
remained unaltered.
    Even animals get their motor habits conditioned by human culture. In our
civilization onemounts to the saddle by the left stirrup. Many horses become
disturbed or alarmed by an attempt to mount them from the right. An animal
taught to obey the jerk line in multiple-team plowing will not know how to
respond to the rein, and vice versa.
      Differences in motor habits are not necessarily between whole cultures or
societies.   They may exist between groups within the same society, or between
the sexes. Among ourselves a man's coat or vest buttons from the left over the
right. The buttons are on the right edge.       The side that carries the buttonholes
laps over this from the left. The rule in women's garments is the opposite. The
left side carries the buttons and the right is laid over and outside it. The result
is   that   men execute most of the business of buttoning with their left hand,
women with the right. Habits get established, and transfer to the other hand
would bring awkwardness and irritation.
     In weaving cloth on a vertical loom it is possible to begin inserting the weft
either at the top or at the bottom. In a basket the direction of progress of weave
can be clockwise or counterclockwise. Here it is possible to set up explanations
to the eflect that most people are right-handed, and that it is natural to keep
the defter fingers free for the insertion and pulling of the weft while the left
hand holds or spreads the warps. A basket can however be woven at the near
edge, with the worker facing its outside; or it can be woven across its hollow,
facing the inside, in which case the progress of the same weft between the
weaver's hands would be opposite. Ordinarily perhaps a basket is manufactured
158                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                  §   MS
resting on what will be its bottom; but some tribes hang the foundation of the
basket up on a cord and work downward toward what will be the rim. In the
contrasting cases the     same   finger manipulations will yield progress in the
opposite direction. These several variations in technical manipulation actually
occur as standard among certain populations. They plainly are cultural differ-
ences, although they all preserve the         normal supremacy of the right hand. In
such instances, factors of organic equipment, such as normal right-handedness,
must be recognized if the total situation is to be understood. Yet the direction of
progress depends not on this alone, but specifically on how the basket is held.
A particular congenital motor habit rarely suffices to explain the whole method
of operation: this always remains partly or mostly cultural in origin.             Motor
habits have the limits of their range set by the human organic equipment, but
their specific determination is overwhelmingly by culture.



                        144.   OTHER HABIT CHANNELINGS
    There are some persistences in culture that recall habit formations in indi-
viduals and into which the factor of habit channeling undoubtedly has entered
through the constant overlapping of generations in every society. For instance,
in ancient Peru the southern coastal districts early got into the habit of making
their pottery vessels   with round bottoms, whereas the northern areas favored
flat   bottoms. This difference was consistendy maintained as long as native pot-
tery continued to be     made. Both Peruvian areas, as far back as we have              ar-

chaeological record of them, developed tubular spouts: single, double, or united
like a stirrup-shaped handle.     This   is    a trait   which   persisted throughout the

ceramic history of Peru.
       On the contrary, in ancient southern Mexico and Central America, habit ran
in the direction of providing bowls, pots,         and even jars with three legs. This
tripod arrangement has certain practical advantages              when cooking vessels are
to be set over the fire; but among the Mexicans it became a stylistic manner or

trend, because the supports were put on vessels whose shapes or ornamentation
shows that they were never set on the fire; and in some cases the legs have de-
generated into functionless lugs or ornamental devices. Moreover, in this same
Mexican region the idea of tripod support was extended to objects of totally
different uses, such as the metate for grinding corn, and the stool or seat. The
tripod habit    was already established two thousand or more years ago in the
earliest wares yet discovered,  and it maintains itself today in the household in-
ventory of Indians and peons.
       Farther north, in the United States Southwest, whose archaeological history
can also be carried back something like two thousand years, both spouts and
tripods are characteristically absent. They do occur occasionally, as spouts occur
sporadically in Mexico, and tripods in Peru; and these exceptions are significant
§   M4                        OTHER HABIT CHANNELINCS                                     I59

because they prove that the ideas of spouts or tripods were not beyond the
capacity or range of any of these pottery-making peoples.                They were in fact
tried,   but did not take exccjn each in the area where             it   became typicaL In
short, though traits hke tripods and spouts are relatively unimportant, they can
nevertheless be extremely persistent        and characteristic. From the angle of the
successful functioning of the native cultures of the three American areas, it was
of course immaterial whether they went in for spouts or legs or neither. Yet,
having made one        stylistic   choice or the other, they adhered to       it   over long
periods during which       more important features of government, technology, or
subsistence were altered fairly drastically.
     Such cultural happenings are comparable to the ordinary habits of a person
his nonessential mannerisms.        An individual early in his life acquires a particular
shrug or gesture, a posture or way of seating himself, a manner of articulation,
of forming or spacing his letters in handwriting. He goes through periods of
good luck and bad luck, his fortunes fall or rise; but the mannerisms persist.
This is not to say that habits in persons and cultures consist entirely of insig-
nificant idiosyncrasies. As a matter of fact, habit formation enters just as much
into the bigger and more important features of human Hfe and culture. But in
such cases we think of habit as character or attitude system; and these, being
large and complex things, not only are bound to be partially modified with the
wear and tear of time, but their persistent core is          less   easily extricated  and
defined. The smaller habits, those of the type of mannerisms, are               more easily
traced just because they are discrete,         and because, being of indifferent im-
portance, their very neutrality sometimes enables           them to go on          practically
unaltered for surprisingly long periods.
     Further examples on the cultural level are teapot-shaped               vessels,   with a
double -curved spout and a handle, which in Japan have an archaeological his-
tory stretching back of the introduction of tea into the early Iron Age and even
the Stone Age; and pile houses in the regions around the Alps, as illustrated
by the Stone Age lake dwellings of Switzerland, the Bronze Age terramare of
Lombardy, and by modern Venice. The North American side of the Atlantic
was a clam-eating coast in prehistoric Indian times, as attested by shell mounds,
and is so today. By comparison the mussel was neglected as food, and still is,
except for a partial change in tastes recently introduced by French and Italian
immigrants. On the European side of the same ocean, on the contrary, the clam
is little esteemed   and the mussel is eagerly eaten; and this was true in the Stone
Age as it is today. This difference may be due in part to the quality of the
species available, or to environmental factors; but it cannot be wholly accounted
for on such grounds because the same species of mussel, Mytilus edulis, occurs
on both sides of the Atlantic        —in fact has a nearly world-wide distribution.
Hence it would seem that the factor of long-term taste habits has contributed
to the picture.
l6o                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                                    §   MS

                                      145.   INVENTION

      The most incisive form of cultural addition is invention, the finding things
out, or, etymologically, "coming into"             something new.
      In studies of culture the word "invention" is used with a somewhat wider
meaning than its current popular sense. To the man on the street "invention"
denotes a new machine or technological process. In anthropology and culture
history it includes this and more. We can for instance speak of institutional
inventions, such as the matrilineate, kingship, moiety organization, representative
government, or written constitutions. If it seems that this is stretching meanings
unduly, because institutions are social growths, usually accepted gradually, so
are machines social growths, having antecedents and being accepted gradually,
as we shall see. Then there is intellectual invention           :   a scientific discovery, a new
philosophical idea.      We can just as properly speak of the Copernican invention
as the Copernican discovery ; perhaps more properly, because if the theory should
ever be found incorrect, it would remain an invention although disproved as a
discovery of the truth. From here            it   is   only a step to the discovery of a new
planet, and from that to the discovery of the South Pole. The point is not that
all   these inventions are exactly identical in character, but that they grade into
each other. Above         all,   that they behave       much alike, as regards their causes,
manner, and effects. It is thus wiser to direct attention to the common features
of the behavior of societies when they do something new, rather than to spend
much attention on distinctions that are mainly logical.
      There is one idea it is necessary to be rid of in order to understand the
process of invention in general. This is the assumption that our contemporary
Western habit of seeking or planning inventions is at all normal. Deliberately
planned or sought invention, in fact, is nearly lacking in most of the history of
civilization. It      began timidly to come up in Europe around 1300 or 1400, in-
creased in the i6oo's, but did not become systematic and important until the
nineteenth century. It is therefore an exceptional feature of our own civilization.
In fact it would have been extremely difficult to plan much invention until both
theoretical science      and practical technology reached a development, about the
seventeenth century, such as had never before been attained.



                                       146. NECESSITY

       The old byword of necessity being the mother of invention must be heavily
discounted. It is true only in so far as ordinarily there must be a need, or at least
a use, for a new thing before it will be devised, and especially before it will be
accepted by a society. Necessity may therefore be a spur; it is never a sufficient
cause by    itself.   Above all, need is a relative and subjective factor. Your need
may not be mine. We feel that we need three meals a day. Many ancients ate
§ 147                                      ACCIDENT                                     l6l

and primitives cat only two and are content. Some obtain food so irregularly
that they may not average much more than one meal a day; when they get
enough, it is eaten up. These same people will cheerfully eat three times if they
arc fed; but they hardly feel that they must or ought to have meals so often.
Their circumstances and habits are different, hence their orientations and ex-
pectations also diflfer from ours.
    A Negrito wants a little sloping roof over his head;          it   does not occur to him
that he wants a house with walls. If a river          is   to be crossed   and recrossed, he
may build a suspension bridge that shows him possessed of mechanical in-
genuity. But a house instead of a leanto windbreak would be extra    work and
would give him nothing that he really wants. His family is small, his posses-
sions few, and in several days or weeks he expects to move elsewhere because
food will be exhausted where he is now. So he does not sense a need that we
might regard as imperative.
    On the contrary, most primitives obviously desire certain things on which
we are much less intent. They strongly want close and constant association with
their kin. The floating laborer of our society who leaves his home folks, drifts
about without ever seeing them again or without rearing a family of his own,
is as good as unheard-of among them. If a savage leaves his home, it is to settle

down and marry among another group.
    Similarly with religion,  which all primitive peoples evidently feel a need
of, since   they   all          and the overwhelming majority of individuals
                         possess one,
                                  —
seem genuinely to believe in not to mention the much greater number of men
in societies that are beyond the primitive. Yet many Russians of today, and a
fair number of people  among ourselves, get along comfortably without religion.
One might contend that the Soviet social program constitutes the prevalent
Russian religion. But though a program that leaves no room for God or the
soul, which does not recognize anything supernatural, may function emotionally
as the equivalent of a religion, though it may surround itself with satisfying
social rituals and with sanctions, it obviously does not quite constitute a religion.

    In short, necessity is so largely a function of orientation, of goals already
established by the extant culture, that it is too variable a factor to be invoked
very often to explain invention. It is wants that determine what people do, and
wants are states of mind, largely determined in their turn by already existing
culture.

                                        147.   ACCIDENT
    On the other hand, accident is unquestionably one factor in invention and
discovery. There are a number of cases in the history of medicine. Sulfanilamid
was first made as far back as 1908 as part of a dye fixative. In 1935, the dye was
found to be powerful against streptococcus infections; research then isolated
sulfanilamid as the active agent. Penicillin was "invented" as a result of Flem-
ing's working with staphylococcus cultures and noting that where these became
l62                                CULTURE PROCESSES                              § 147


infected with mold the adjacent colonies of bacteria were dissolved away. The
shock cure for dementia praccox was discovered through a schizophrenic's being
given, by a nurse's error, an overdosed insulin injection for the diabetes that
he also had. He almost died, but recovered improved, and the way was pointed.
Pasteur was led to the theory and the method of immunization by happening
to inject an overlooked and stale bacterial culture of chicken cholera and finding
that it failed to kill. It then occurred to him that an attenuated culture might
immunize. By contrast, it may be pointed out that for several generations medi-
cine has felt the urgent need for a nonoperative, non-radioactive treatment of
cancer, and has brought all the planned resources of several laboratory sciences
to bear on the problem, without being able to find a solution.
      Daguerre solved a crucial problem in the invention of photography through
forgetting that he had an open vessel of mercury standing in a cupboard. Into
this cupboard, because it was dark, he put away overnight an exposed bromide-

coated silver plate. In the morning, the latent image had begun to develop.
Daguerre, in a flash, suspected fumes from the mercury, and trial confirmed his
suspicion.   Other chemicals in time came to replace mercury vapor, but the
essential and hitherto undiscovered factor of "developing" invisible images had
been found (§ 187). Yet to see the situation in its entirety, it must be remem-
bered that Daguerre was a conscious inventor, long seeking a way to a specific
goal. That is why he was able to profit at once by his fortunate accident   :   he was
alerted to take advantage of it.
      Malus's discovery of the polarization of hght came from his happening to
be looking at a crystal as he turned it idly in his fingers against a reflection of
the rays of the setting sun in facing      windows; he noted that the refraction
altered perceptibly with the turning. If     he had held the crystal against un-
              —or even with reflection the rays had not been coming in
reflected light                             if

nearly horizontally — there would have been no       Malus had
                                                    alteration.   head    his
                 phenomena at the time, so he promptly verified his chance
full of refraction

observation, and determined its meaning by experiments. Another physicist,
preoccupied with different problems, might have filed the observation and only
followed it up years later, or forgotten it. The average layman would probably
have thought the phenomenon odd and have done nothing about it. It is evident
that the degree of experience and the direction of interest of the person to    whom
the accident happens is at least as important as the accident itself.
      Thus, one F. P. Smith was testing ship's screws. An unduly long one hit
a snag, broke off, and the boat went faster. This accident might not have been
profited by at all except for happening in the course of trials deliberately aimed
at invention.

      Similar was Goodyear's accidental discovery of hard or vulcanized rubber
by heating with sulphur, a process he invented in 1839 and patented in 1844.
Yet the "accident" only happened after Goodyear had been in the rubber-goods
§   m8                              invention and play                                   163
business and had failed because of the deterioration which articles of rubber
underwent. He had in fact previously experimented to prevent this deterioration.
     Farther back      in   the history of culture there are a     number of instances
on which direct evidence is lacking but which suggest the factor of invention
by accident, or as a by-product of some other effort. Rye, for instance, is be-
lieved first to have been a      weed in wheat or barley fields of western Asia. As
the cultivation of wheat was carried farther north, or to higher altitudes, the
hardier rye throve at the expense of the wheat. There are regions where the two
are put in together: if the wheat fails in a bad year, there is at least a partial
rye crop to    fall   back on. In    still   colder climates, rye, on account of   its   de-
pendability, came to be sown pure as a crop in its own right. In the same way,
oats seem to have begun as a weed in fields of emmer wheat.
     So with the fire drill. It is an uncertain enough implement; in most primi-
tive communities only the more adept individuals attempt to use it. It requires
wood that is neither too hard nor too soft and is both seasoned and kept dry, and
especially a rather delicate balance of manipulative strength and skill. This
makes it unlikely that anyone who noted that friction produces heat, and who
deliberately attempted to apply the principle in the fire drill,       would have suc-
ceeded. Without previous experience or teaching, it would be perhaps a thou-
sand chances to one that the trial would fail and that our putative inventor
would discard his invention. It seems much more probable that in the boring
of a hole not only would warmth be felt, but sooner or later the ground-out
wood dust would collect in a little heap and send up a wisp of smoke and
show a glowing spark; whereupon it would only be necessary to repeat the
operation with a new purpose. Much the same holds for the other friction de-
vices, fire plow, fire saw, and fire cord. While there is no proof that these

inventions were actually       made as unintended by-products, it is mechanically
plausible that they were. In any event, it is inescapable that the "invention" had
antecedents.
     The occasional part that accident plays among apes in the solution of prob-
lems that are akin to simple inventions has been discussed in § 28.
     That accident has an occasional hand in invention is certain, but its im-
portance must not be overestimated. Without awareness of want or problem,
favorable luck will be wasted.        It is   again true that states of mind determine
inventions, in individuals and in societies. Only as against this background does
accident become significant.



                             148.   INVENTION AND PLAY
     Inventions motivated by play impulses are fairly common. The old "high"
bicycle,   with a very large wheel, was purely an instrument of sport.             When
about 1890 the modern type, with two equal and smaller wheels, then called
safety bicycle, began to appear, it was hailed with acclaim. Bicycle parades were
164                                 CULTURE PROCESSES                            §   H^
held, bicycle racing became        an intercollegiate sport, century runs were sched-
uled every Sunday, hundreds of clubs were organized, then federated into a
great League of American Wheelmen. It was only later that the bicycle began
seriously to be used as a means of getting around on business. From this posi-
tion, in America, it was again partly displaced by the abundance and cheapness

of automobiles; but in Europe, where relatively         few people have been able to
afford motorcars of their own, the bicycle has remained standard as a middle-
class   means of local    transportation. In 1944,   when the American forces re-
entered a western Europe denuded of railroads and gasoUne, it was about the
only civilian means of locomotion.
      The history of the automobile is parallel. It too began essentially as a
vehicle of sport, luxury, and recreation.
      Ballooning, the    first   form of aviation, commenced partly    as a scientific

demonstration and partly as an adventure. The practical and economic utiliza-
tion of all aircraft came much later.
   The first invention of the bow and arrow may fall into the same class. A
bow must have passed beyond a certain threshold of effectiveness before it can
have any utility as a weapon. It seems dubious whether any primitive, starting
from nothing and thinking up a bow and arrow by insight, could give it the
several points of efficiency needed for killing even a small animal. Besides, cer-
tain manipulative skills are required in addition to aim, such as an arrow grip
and a string release. Our hypothetical inventor out of the blue would therefore
quite likely have given up his idea as unworkable on first actually trying it out.
On the other hand, a string on a bent stick is under tension and will twang.
Just such a "musical bow" is used by many primitive peoples as a sort of "Jews'-
harp" or jaws'-harp, set against the teeth. The same strung stick could also be
bounced in a game, or have sticks bounced off its string. From that it would be
a short step to sliding or shooting light sticks at a near-by mark. Now, with
something to build on, both in the way of a working instrument and manipu-
lative skill, a little more strengthening or improvement of both     bow and arrow
would much more easily result in a workable weapon. This reconstruction is
wholly speculative, and no assurance can be put on any step in the process
outlined. The suggestion is merely that something of the sort is likely to have
been the development, because the invention in toto, at one stroke, seems over-
difficult mechanically; and the play factor, perhaps aided by accident, seems the

most likely to have entered into the transitional stages. The influence of pattern,
of existing similar forms, must also be reckoned with, as antecedents not only
                                                                           :




a musical or game bow, but the spring trap or noose holding down a bent-over
sapUng. In both cases taut cords and the elasticity of wood are utilized. Un-
fortunately,   we have no more actual knowledge of the origin of the sapUng
snare than of the bow.  We do know that the bow as a weapon is not really early
in prehistory. Its first record is late Palaeolithic or Mesolithic (§ 274-276), and it
§   149                                    ANTECEDENTS                                   165

was preceded in Europe by a well-developed spcar-throwcr in the Magdalcnian
(§269).
       A
       second prehistoric instance             is   American. It has long been known that
even the most advanced native cultures of the                  New World— Aztec, Maya,
Inca   — totally lacked several basic technological devices that had long been im-
portant in the Eastern Hemisphere. These included ironworking, stringed
musical instruments, plows, and wheels.* In 1944 wheeled toys of pottery were
reported from excavations in the Panuco River region in Mexico, near Tampico.
They consisted of effigies of dogs with the paired legs perforated, presumably
for insertion of a slender rod or reed, on the ends of each of which pierced
pottery disks were jammed. The axles have decayed, but the baked clay figures
and sets of disks remain. These are indubitable little four-wheel wagons in prin-
ciple,     though applied to toys (or possibly           cult objects)   on the order of the
stuffed lambs or wooden horsies that our children drag around. Subsequently it
was noted that similar pieces had previously been discovered scatteringly all the
way from Michoacan to Panama.
     As compared with all the other instances here discussed, this case is incom-
plete. The principle of the device was achieved in play, but it failed to be ap-

plied for utility. Actually this nonuse of the wheel after its discovery makes
native America stand out in sharper contrast with the Old World. Literally and
mechanically, the ancient Mexicans made the invention; socially speaking, they
refused it   — threw   it    away.
      Genetically,     all   the discoveries    and innovations of pure science and fine
  —those intellectual and aesthetic pursuits which are carried on without
art                                                                                    refer-

ence to technology or      —may be credited to functioning of the human play
                              utility

impulses. They are adult sublimations, onto a largely supermuscular level, of the
sensorily exploratory and kinaesthetic activities that constitute play in children
and mammals. They rest on the play impulse, which is connected with growth
but is dissociated from preservation, comfort, or utility, and which in science and
art is translated into the realm of imagination, abstraction, relations, and sensu-
ous form.

                                        149.   ANTECEDENTS

       The bow is of interest, not only because of its presumptive relation to play
before utility, but also because it illustrates the necessity of antecedents to

almost any invention. These antecedents, prerequisites, or conditions must be
present— both before an individual can make a workable invention, and before
a culture can accept it. These antecedents are of the utmost importance to recog-
nize, because     we men are by nature romantic and unhistorical-minded, and,
except under intellectual discipline, we prefer and shape for ourselves emotion-

     ^ There were indigenous spindle whorls, but these were only disk buttons or weights

on a rod twirled free by hand. They might at best be called near-wheels. The axle did not
spin in a bearing, and the wheel edge engaged nothing.
l66                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                                 S 149

ally       appealing stories of how inventions are brought about by sheer resolve,
superhuman insight, dire necessity, or mere blind luck. On analysis every in-
vention on which    we have information proves to depend on antecedents, as
regards both individual creation and social acceptance.
     The essential feature of the modern automobile is the propulsion of a
wheeled vehicle by an explosion engine. Wheels were known for thousands of
years, the explosion engine for decades, before the combination was made. It is
completely certain that the idea of combining a vehicle and an explosion engine
occurred to hundreds of men long before any automobile ever ran. The problem
was not to put one and one together, but to make them fit workably. This in-
volved all sorts of complications, which had to be mastered gradually.             We need
not go into the mechanical complexities of transmission and gearshift; simpler
features will illustrate the point. To be effective, the gas explosion must occur
in an enclosed chamber or cylinder against a piston whose plunge outward
moves the machinery. How introduce an intermittent flame rapidly into this
tight cylinder? The most feasible answer is an electric spark, and this is what
has chiefly been used in gasoline motorcars. It could be used when automobiles
came along, because by then first static electricity, next current, and then electro-
magnetism had been discovered. Until these prior discoveries had been made,
the principle or abstract idea of an automobile could have been invented, but
hardly a car that ran." The difference is like that between Leonardo da Vinci's
dreams of flying machines and the Wright brothers' realization at Kittyhawk.
Leonardo merits high credit for his imagination; but he was four centuries too
early. His time could not have produced a machine that would fly. It possessed

too few scientific and technical antecedents.
     Patents, by the way, are not issued for an idea, but for a specific device,
process, or machine that is presumably workable, and which is concrete enough
so that it can be drafted or a model can be supplied. If the Patent Office believes a
proposed device to be unworkable, it refuses the patent. It is true that if a device
includes a new idea, this idea also becomes protected by its patenting; but only
secondarily, by inclusion. It is easy to see why the law takes this stand. Without
it,   there    would be a scramble to pre-empt all possible new ideas, largely by
people incompetent to translate them into effective execution. Patents would be
held by those working out combinations of words instead of working out parts
of machines. The point is significant for the understanding of culture history.
       Sometimes the prerequisite antecedents are indirect and unexpectedly re-
mote. The really first automobiles did not have gas engines, but were steam-
driven. This was as early as 1770 in France, soon after 1800 in England, long
before the gas engine was invented. Some of these early road machines have been
preserved and may be seen in the United States National Museum Annex. They

       2   Some progressive dates are: workable gas engine, Otto, 1877; Selden basic patent,
1879; practical automobile, Serpollet in France, 1889; first gasoline motor of oresent motor-
car type, Daimler, 1892.
§   149                                   ANTECEDENTS                                 167

look something like monstrous steam rollers. Trcvithick's car of iHfj3 ran on the
streets of      London with lo-foot drive wheels. By 182^ tuhular boilers had been
introduced. These road cars were not a practical success, and for several reasons;
but one of the reasons was that roads were bad. Locomotives, which       is what

these contraptions really amounted to, were accordingly put on rails, where
they no longer shook to pieces, could go much faster, and could better haul
cars. Thus the steam railway was born about i(S29; is really was a transfer from

the idea of the free-ranging automobile, which was then dropped for nearly a
century. The idea of rails was much older than that of self-moving engines.
Wooden rails for hand-pushed cars are said to have been used in small-scale
mining operations in Germany as early as 1546, and certainly were used before
1700 at Newcastle; iron-shod ones in 1716, and cast-iron ones in 1767, all these
last in England. Passengers were hauled in horse-drawn cars on rails near

                     —
London in 1801 the same year that Trevithick carried them in a steam-driven
locomotive      —a   full   twenty-eight years before Stephenson's steam locomotive
proved practicable on the Liverpool-Manchester rail line.
        It   should be added that several factors were involved in the nonsuccess of
the early road locomotives. In England, where industry had become heavier and
more mobile than in France, and roads were far better than in America, the
directors and promoters of steam railways exerted competitive pressure as soon
as the railways had proved successful and were promising to             make money. Be-
ginning as early as 1832, they induced turnpike trustees to exact prohibitive
tolls from road machines. When this was not sufficient, they got legislation

passed which put a 4-mph ceiling on any road engine-vehicle             —a rule that was
not relaxed in England until 1896, when the gas-engine automobile was already
successfully racing across France.          Such blocking of the development of inven-
tions by use of influence is not mere wickedness. The railroads did represent a
growing investment, much larger than any for road, machines; and money is
like life in seeking self-protection. Indeed, the early railway-builders were genu-
inely farsighted in their fears, as the later automotive competition beginning
in the decade 1920-30 was to show.
        A weakness of railways      is   that they involve heavy capital for right of way,
roadbed, track, and maintenance, and that they reach only a limited               number
of points. Recognition of the desirability of a mechanical vehicle that could
range freely on all roads was therefore bound to recur. Shortly before 1900, the
immediate ancestors of our modern automobile began to appear, in three forms.
One used the newer explosion engine already discussed; another, the old steam
engine, though in a shape extremely light for the power produced, with 1000-
pound-pressure flash boilers; the third, a storage-battery electric motor. For years
the three forms competed, until the gas engine won out through greater adapta-
bility to      most demands. One thing, however, helped the modern automobile,
even in its infancy, as against its precursor of a century before: the solid rubber
tire,     which eased some of the jolts as speed increased. This tire had come in
l68                                 CULTURE PROCESSES                           S   ^49

toward the end of the horse-and-buggy days for pleasure vehicles: "Bring out
your rubber-tired hacks." Soon the hollow, inflated rubber tire took its place;
this had developed with the low or safety bicycle a decade or so before, and had

there proved its advantage and feasibility. Without rubber and pneumatic tires,
the automobile would have had to take a racking pounding at speeds of more
than six or eight miles an hour on most roads of that time; but now the auto-
mobile's tires were awaiting it. Undoubtedly if tires had not been ready, they
would soon have been developed; but the progress of the automobile would in
that case probably have been delayed some years.
     A simple case of antecedents, though an ancient one, is the calendar,
which could not have been devised without recorded observations and counts.
Reference is to a genuine calendar that recognizes a specified number of days
and of moon appearances within the year, and attempts to reconcile the three
factors     —                   —
        days, moons, year which are not related in integral numbers. Even
                                      true, it must be preceded by observations
if such a calendar is only approximately

whose cumulative count is carried on for many years, probably for several life-
times. This in turn involves some system of notation or record. Hence any com-
plex calendar can hardly be expected to have preceded writing by very long.
          Greek astronomy underwent a splendid development for some centuries,
then slowed and ceased progress. The Greeks had no real clocks with gears,
pendulum, or escapement. They had only water clocks depending on drip, and
sundials.       They knew optics and the lens in principle rather than in practice,
because they do not seem to have ground glass. Hence they had no telescopes.
Their other observational instruments were of the simplest. Looking back now,
it   is   evident that Greek intellect and imagination had developed astronomy
about as far as they were able to until clocks and telescopes were available   —and,
let us add,      until a mathematics with a computationally efficient number-symbol
system like our positional "Arabic" numerals was also available. It was by lack
of these antecedents that the further progress of       Greek astronomy was neces-
sarily checked. As a matter of fact, when basic progress in astronomy began to be

made again, it was by Copernicus and his successors some centuries after clocks
(§ 184)      and position numerals (§ 189) and algebra were in use. Within another
century the telescope was invented (§ 152) and was immediately utilized by
Galileo and others. Similarly, contemporary astronomy builds largely on the
photography and the spectroscope that the nineteenth century devised.


                  150.   CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS
    So important is this matter of antecedents that it is often difficult to deter-
mine reliably just what constitutes an invention or when it took place. The more
the situation is analyzed, the larger do the antecedents loom, and by comparison
the less outstanding does the new step or increment appear. This is contrary to
the popular view, which condenses a complex and gradual process into a single
§   150                  CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS                         169

dramatic act by one individual, with whom we can identify ourselves emotion-
ally. Hence the anecdotes about    Newton and the apple, or Watt and his mother's
teakettle,      which we are taught as children. We profess not to believe these
stories seriously, but they nevertheless tend to influence our thinking.

        It is   true that there is always insight at work   when something new is de-
vised or understood. It is no doubt also true that usually it is great men, genu-
inely superior individuals,       who have these insights. But there is also a long
chain of antecedents involved, in every case of which we have knowledge, with-
out which the insight and genius could have done nothing in the given situa-
tion. This intricate and largely impersonal       build-up is precisely the anthropolo-
gist's    or the historian's business to elucidate for true understanding of      what
happened; but it is horribly unromantic, and the lay mind shrinks from it, just
as a child could not grasp it. The popular mind loves being off duty as regards
criticism and skepticism,and has invested the whole matter of invention with
an atmosphere of fascinating mystery. It imagines a great intellect rushing along
out of nothing like a new comet out of space, and making a complete invention
at one stroke. The more inexpHcable this is, the more satisfying it is as a day-

dream story. In reality, however, we may say that most so-called inventions are
not a single act but a cumulative series of transmitted increments plus a series
of new elements when these become possible in the culture in which they appear.
        Kuznets neatly demonstrated this rule in a type study of the plow sulky.
This is a plow with wheels. The addition of the wheels undoubtedly made 't 1
new kind of plow, which we can define, and distinguish from other plows.
Kuznets went over data extracted from United States patent records on the
number of patents issued each year that had to do with plow sulkies       —new parts,
improvements, refinements. Each year after the initiating invention in 1865 the
number of new patents grew more rapidly, then began to level off, reached a
peak around 1882, then diminished, declined rapidly, and dwindled away by
1923. There was little more to perfect on the plow sulky, and inventiveness
turned to replacing it by new types of plows. The year-by-year curve of addi-
tions to and improvements of the plow sulky suggests a somewhat skew "normal"
frequency distribution.
        Now it cannot be maintained that all inventions develop as regularly as
this.   A physical or an economic catastrophe may come along and chop off the
curve; or a new and subversive invention may displace a still growing one.
The line of development would also look different if one chose a wider cate-
gory, say plows in general. In that case the line       would be a composite of the
curves for inventions of handled plow, share plow, plow sulky, disk plow, and
so on;     and it would presumably run more nearly level but with many minor
fluctuations. Also, in the absence of Patent Office records, we cannot be sure of
the precise       growth of many inventions. Yet what analysis of the plow-sulky
history does       show is that many inventions are not single acts of mind, but
170                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                            § 1 5°


cumulative results. They are social events, and therefore they usually are gradual
events.
       In the last analysis, the fundamental invention in the plow sulky was the
combination of two antecedents, the plow and the wheel, and two very old
antecedents at that. The rest of the history of the invention consists of improve-
ments and modifications; in other words, developments or consequences of the
original combination. A great deal of invention seems to boil down to just that.
   The more analytically facts are gone into, the more difficult is it to isolate
many really basic inventions. More and more do they resolve into combinations
of old elements, or into modifications that are reapplications of other old ele-
ments. What is new is often a new function, which is culturally significant be-
cause it is socially accepted, and which we can name. Such are the plow sulky
and the automobile, the bow and arrow, and the fire drill. Mechanically, it
is   often hard to delimit an invention. The mechanical principle or structure of
the shooting bow is the same as that of the drill bow, the game bow, the mouth-
harp bow. The bow becomes a bow when it is shot as a weapon. It is its use, its
human function, that makes it a weapon, its name, "bow and arrow," that gives
it   entity. For most of us, other than engineers and inventors, the cultural history

of the bow is more significant than         its   mechanical history. Similarly with the
automobile. Mechanically, the early nineteenth-century steam road-locomotives
were motorcars or automobiles, as much so as a White Steamer of 1908 or a
Chevrolet of 1948. But they failed to be successful, they went out, and culturally
the history of what we call the automobile begins in the decade before 1900
when flash-boiler steam models and gas-engine makes began to be produced.


                              151. SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE

       This brings us to the matter of social acceptance of inventions. We may
lay   it   down as a definition that, anthropologically, sociologically, and histori-
cally,an invention is not an invention until it is accepted in a culture. Until
then it exists merely individually or mechanically; it actualizes historically only
with its social acceptance.
       It is notorious that a great   many successful inventions have been claimed by
and for different nations. Which is the right one is often difficult to decide.
Where nationalism enters into the problem, it becomes still more difficult. Asked
who the inventor of the steamship was, the average American will answer
Fulton; the Britisher, Symington; the Frenchman, Jouffroy. A Spaniard may
even propose Blasco de Garay, who is wholly mythical as regards the steam-
boat. Each is reacting to what he has been taught. But Fulton had well-known
predecessors, bothAmerican and European. The story is set forth in fuller
                      it might be said here that what Fulton really did was
detail in § 185-186, but
to build a steamboat which convinced people that it was or could be made
economically successful. Historically, the definition of the inventor as the man
§    '5'                                SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE                                            I7I

who makes a utilitarian invention pay, or succeeds in persuading others that it
will pay, has a great deal to be said for it, especially in our contemporary civili-
zation with its heavy economic and technological slant. For all times and places
the definition is a bit narrow, since some successful innovations do not yield a
money profit, and some cultures have neither money nor profit. Broadened
accordingly, the definition reads that an invention                 is   only potential while         its

idea remains in the head of an individual, but that it becomes actualized when
it   begins to be socially accepted into a culture.
        The bars to adoption are of several kinds. First there is the direct economic
preventive.    We know how to extract gold from the ocean, or power from the
tides, but it costs more, in      money, to extract them than the gold and the power
are worth. Then there        is   the already discussed matter of antecedents, as with
Leonardo's ideas of flying machines. In 1500 Europe was technologically not
far enough along to execute his ideas.              Next is the factor of resistance. A new
religion usually encounters an established one.            An attempt to induce Americans
to eat taro meal for breakfast failed because they already had fixed eating habits
and a sufficiency and variety of foods, so an unexciting novelty made no appeal.
An efficient private express system may block institution of a public parcel post,
or vice versa. The two are competitive in serving nearly the                         same ends, and
economic, political, or monopolistic pressure will be directed against the new-
comer. Finally, there are innovations that may seem intrinsically desirable to
nearly everyone, but which are bound to exact a heavy toll of temporary con-
fusion and disorganization        :   a radical reform of the calendar or the alphabet, for
instance, as discussed in § 170 and 212.
        Converse conditions of course further the adoption of changes. An estab-
lished religion that has lost          its   hold, chronic food shortages, times of distress
when reorganization is in majority demand                — all invite     reforms that normally
include innovations and long-delayed inventions.
        A cultural novelty always encounters existing cultural conditions, and                      it is

these which determine whether, when, how, and in what form it gets adopted.
These preconditions of course are so variable from instance to instance that
it is   difficult to attribute the acceptance of particular inventions to their intrinsic

merit. In the realm of machines there certainly                is   something pretty         close to
intrinsic or absolute merit, in the degree of physical                    fitness,    efficiency,   and
economy. But even as between machines, their acceptance is always in part con-
ditioned by their relation to the local culture in which they are invented or
into    which they are introduced. Witness the story of the steamboat in § 185.
In nonmechanical matters, innovations are of course even more influenced by
the culture they are trying to enter.
        In this matter of their fate, or at any rate their date, being determined by
the cultural soil on which they fall, inventions from inside a society and                          dif-

fusions from outside it (§ 171) are much alike.
172                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                  S ^S*



                   152.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN

       The frequent simultaneity of inventions has been discussed in § 140 as a
manifestation of pattern growth, but it is obviously also a matter of antecedents.
If the prerequisites for an invention are lacking, it cannot be realized, even if the

idea should crop up. On the contrary, once the prerequisites have been supplied,
if   desirabiUty of a contrivance continues to be felt, a whole series of individuals
are likely to work on the problem, so that the prospects are considerable that two
or more of them will find a feasible solution. In familiar metaphor, we say that
the discovery is now in the air, or that the time is ripe for it. More precisely, in-
ventions are culturally determined. Such a statement must not be given a mys-
tical connotation. It does not mean, for instance, that it was predetermined from

the beginning of time that type printing would be discovered in Germany about
1450, or the telephone in the United States in 1876.         Determinism in this con-
nection means only that there is a definable relation between a specific condition
of a given culture and the making of a particular invention.
       The history of science is full of instances. Sunspots were first discovered in
161 1, independentlyand in different countries, by Galileo, Harriott, Scheiner,
and Fabricius. The specific antecedent is highly definite: the telescope was de-
vised in 1608. The telescope, in turn, has three claimants to        its   invention. All
three were Dutch, probably because the manufacture of lenses       was developed
farthest in Holland at the time. Only a little later, Spinoza, now remembered as
one of the great philosophers, was earning his daily bread as a lens-grinder.
The compound microscope also originated in Holland; and the discoveries
through it of animalculae, egg development, blood circulation, insect anatomy,
and the like were made later in the i6oo's by two other Dutchmen, Leeuwen-
hoek and Swammerdam. All this means that the culture of seventeenth-century
Holland included a pattern in which lenses figured with more weight than else-
where. In short, the Dutch were lens-minded and lens-making, which was the
antecedent that led to the telescope, and this in turn was the antecedent to the
discovery of sunspots.
       To a certain extent we may even speak legitimately of the inevitability of
inventions   —provided we mean by      this nothing more     than that, given an exist-
ing sense of the desirability of a conceivable device, and the presence of the
needed antecedents, the device will necessarily be invented soon. Given enough
knowledge of optics, technological       skill   in   making lenses, and astronomical
curiosity, sunspots and the moons of Jupiter will be discovered promptly— if not

by Galileo, then by someone else. Given knowledge of electric current and elec-
tromagnetic induction and of sound vibration       —especially with telegraphs in
successful operation for thirty years   —and the idea of the telephone bound to
                                                                             is

occur to a number of technicians. It is only a question of who will first work
the idea out feasibly. Will it be Bell or Gray in 1876, cvr someone else in 1877
§   '5^                     SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN                           I73

or 1878 or perhaps as early as 1875? To the individual inventor the "Who?" is
all-important, because it means who is to get the prize. To his society, and to
the world at large, the       "Who?"     really a matter of indifference —except for
                                          is

sentimental partisanship      —because the invention was going to be made anyway
about when and where it was made.              We cannot always see this fact at the mo-
ment, and still less can we judge in advance whether all the necessary antece-
dents have been gone through with and the economic requirements satisfied.
But after the event, especially at some little perspective from it— provided it is
not so long ago that the record has again begun to get dim or lost we can     —
recognize the piling-up of the antecedents until the invention or the innovation
follows as their consequence. See for instance the histories of mills, of the
steamship, of the telegraph and telephone, in another chapter (§ 183-187).
      This view of the inevitability of inventions is now pretty generally accepted.
That it is not yet common popular knowledge is due to the persistence of what
may be called the "great-man theory" or fallacy. No one denies that there are
great men and that they do great things. The fallacy is to infer from this that
everything important in history must have had a great man as its specific cause
From the fact that the telegraph and the telephone are extremely important in
the mechanics of modern living, it does not follow that Morse and Bell were
outstandingly great men; though obviously they were more than mediociities.'
It is the personalizing, anthropomorphizing habits of nonscientific thinking that

lead us loosely to assume not only that such men were supremely great, but that
they were so much greater than all their contemporaries that we might still be
doing without the benefits of their inventions if they had not been considerate
enough to make them. This is patently absurd, since they had rivals treading on
their heels, and in fact sometimes stepping out ahead. Let us examine another
instance or two, where the circumstances are unusually clear.
      We have seen (§ 140) that Alfred Russell Wallace was the independent co-
discoverer in 1858 of the "Darwinian" concept or hypothesis of natural selection
as a mechanism explaining the          change and origin of species and therewith of
continuous evolution. At that time Darwin had had the idea for twenty years,
and had discussed it with a few of his friends; but, not sufficiently winning
their approval,       he hesitated to publish until his hand was forced by Wallace,
Suppose that Darwin had died during his two decades of indecision. Wallace's
would almost certainly be the name now on our tongues. Suppose he too had
died, say in 1857. Does it seem more likely that in that event biologists would
have gone on indefinitely believing in special creation for each species ? Or that
within a few years some third man would have had the concept of natural
selection occur to him and have announced it? The idea of evolution was "in
the air"   —   as a   matter of fact it was more than that, Herbert Spencer having
developed it before Wallace and Darwin. Their explanation after all is only that

      ^ Morse was also an able portrait-painter.
174                               CULTURE PROCESSES                              § 15^


            mechanism by which the general process of organic evolution is
of a specific
supposed to have worked. Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, and Lamarck, had
already had the idea of developmental transformation. It is evident that natural
selection was really a link in a chain, one idea among several whose union
made a broad system of evolutionistic thought possible. All of which together
would seem to build up to this that science and philosophy having got where
                                    :




they were in western Europe around 1858, it was inevitable that the notion of
natural selection should be thought up by someone within a very few years of
i860 at the latest.
       By contrast we have Aristotle actually imagining and mentioning the idea
of natural selection as something logically thinkable, but immediately dismissing
it   as something not worth testing against evidence. The Greek way of thinking

favored the finite and the definite;      its   world view was not evolutionistic. The
set of the culture pattern   —the "spirit" of the Greek times—was against anything
hke natural selection, and so it was rejected, and remained out for two thousand
years. Incidentally, thinking of the idea when he did can be credited to Aristotle
as a mark of his individual genius. But his rejection of it is not to his personal
discredit, because that      was the    result of his   Greek environment and    social

heritage.
      The case of Mendel, founder of the science of genetics, is extraordinary
because his genius almost did never get recognized. In 1866 Mendel pubUshed
in the proceedings of a learned society at        Brno an account of his experimental
breeding of peas. In this he announced the basic quantitative laws of heredity,
and correctly: they have been much elaborated since but still stand. Except for
the Swiss botanist Nageli, who went unheeded, no one took any notice. Darwin,
Galton, and hundreds of other biologists were studying heredity, but they either
missed seeing Mendel's paper or failed to realize its significance. Surely this is
a case of the time being not yet ripe: Mendel was ahead of it.        He died in 1884
as an abbot, but scientifically an obscure person. In fact, he     was so discouraged
by his failure to impress anyone with his discovery that he is said to have
abandoned belief in it himself. Then, a generation later, in 1900, within three
months three biologists, the Dutchman De Vries, the German Correns, the
Austrian Tschermak, who were studying heredity, and evidently were now
severally approaching the point of view that Mendel had reached in the sixties,
made his discovery over again (§ 140), and clicked to its importance, Correns
also rediscovered  Mendel's forgotten publication, and announced it. Literally
and personally, the Mendelian laws thus date from 1866; culturally and socially,
from 1900. From the angle of understanding human history and the workings of
civilization, which is the effective date.?

     This array of evidence may seem to depreciate the great man, to make him
merely a function of his culture. This is both so and not so. As compared with
popular thinking, it is largely true, because popular thinking wants to drama-
tize and build plots around conquering heroes. But recognition of cultural forces
§    153                        INVENTION OF INSTITUTIONS                          I75

or drifts is obviously quite compatible with recognition of genius or individual
superiority. They can and do coexist.      We can be sure that no important inven-
tion is ever made by a dub. If he made one by accident, he would not know it;
but some more intelligent person might see the significance and communicate
it,   thereby becoming the real discoverer.    We can be just as sure that there are
superior individuals, whom we call highly talented and geniuses, as that there
are inferior ones who are incompetent and unintelligent. It is the talented and
the geniuses who make inventions. But they make them only when and if their
cultures permit; and they make only the specific inventions that their cultures
allow, within a narrow range. Other inventions have already been made,             and
still others   are as yet impossible, given the culture as it is. Biography is a recog-
nized literary genre, which has usually been assumed to have a laudatory pur-
pose, and of late has tended frankly to assume semifictional dress. Biographers
thus are free to cut out any cultural analyses that would make the human interest
of the plot drag, or again to admit bits of culture as picturesque background.
If however our        purpose is to understand the history of human civilization, the
cultural factors loom as decisive, just because they are the larger determinants.
They determine what, where, and largely when and how. The individual deter-
mines the precise date, the particular manner or coloring of the event, and the
mnemonic label of his personality and name.


                         153.   INVENTION OF INSTITUTIONS

        At the bottom of every invention there is an idea or a principle, whether
formulated or not. Fundamentally, therefore, invention is one in kind, whether
it    relates to   implements and machines or to institutions and beliefs. When a
concept like that of divine kingship first appears in human history, it is, in our
sense of a new idea, an invention, though an anonymous one.        We know nothing
of the inventor or the circumstances that led  him to originate the idea, but it
exercised a profound influence on millions of men from ancient Egypt to modern
Japan. Against this, its persistence into recent centuries in Europe is but a frag-
mentary survival. This king-godship became one of the bases of an extensive
politico-economic-religious system or major type of culture in protohistoric times
(§286). The first sure record of the invention's being accepted is in Egypt. It
                                                    —
must have been a stardingly original invention first to conceive that a human
being was a god and then to persuade people to believe it.
     Among modern institutional inventions may be mentioned the form of
ballot that is officially prepared, marked in privacy, but deposited under con-
trol: a system devised to minimize intimidation and fraud. It originated in

Australia, whence its name after its spread to the United States.
     There are also the initiative and the referendum, which come from Switzer-
land. Their roots are mediaeval, in the small cantons where every citizen could
personally participate in government, much as in a Greek democratic city-state
176                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                § 153


or a New England town meeting. In modern form, the referendum was first
worked out by the minute, rural, and conservative canton of Schwyz in 1848.
The idea received impetus when larger, liberal, and urban Ziirich accepted it in
1869. Five years later it was written into the Swiss federal constitution; and in
1891 the initiative followed. South Dakota in 1898 was the first American state
to adopt both institutions.
      An American contribution is the written constitution. There were Magna
Cartas and the like before, but they were essentially confirmations of concession
or privilege. The American constitution was an attempt not to modify or retain,
but to create a new political order, and in unambiguous terms free from the
interpretations of usage or custom.      It   took over from existing English practice
certain features, such as the bicameral legislature.       But it developed as a new
feature the differentiation of representation in the two Houses of Congress
                                                                             by    —
political unitsand by population size. Also new was the explicit co-ordination
of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. But perhaps
the most radical innovation of the American constitution was its outrightly
creating the basic foundation of a political structure.       By contrast, the English
constitution is a cumulative growth. As such, therefore, it is unwritten:        it is   a
sort of direction followed through centuries of development. The American con-
stitution, on the contrary, being made        up at one stroke, had to be explicit and
written out. The parallel shows that conscious, abrupt efforts toward production
of new culture form and content may have functions and results closely similar
to semiconscious, gradual efforts, and that as processes the two may intergrade.
      Analogous    to these political   inventions are socioeconomic ones such as
banks, credit, double-entry bookkeeping, social security and old-age pensions,
installment mortgages. There is no difference in principle.
      All these institutional inventions cited spread widely. In fact it is their spread
beyond the point of origin that has made them historically important. In thus
showing invention and diffusion as closely associated, the cases are typical. Just
as an invention becomes culturally significant only upon its social acceptance, so
an innovation by one population obviously becomes significant in world civili-
zation in proportion as it is accepted by other populations.



                  154.   INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION
    There is one type of situation in culture history that is interesting because
diffusion and invention enter into it equally. It can be called either stimulus
invention or idea diffusion. In ordinary diffusion, as of the just-mentioned Aus-
tralian ballot or the automobile, both the principle and its mechanism are taken
over by a receiving culture from the inventing one. Occasionally, however,
there are difficulties about acceptance of the mechanism, or the mechanism has
not been fully learned. The idea or principle may then also fail to be accepted.
But again, the idea may exercise an appeal that causes it to penetrate. An effort
§   154                    INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION                             I77

may then be made in the receiving culture to devise another mechanism that
will produce the desired result. Thus an invention, or reinvention, is stimulated
by contact transmission or diffusion.
      It is   in the nature of such events that they tend to leave      little   historical
trace of the processes at      work. But there is documented evidence of several
cases, and there are a number of probable ones.
      Porcelain   is   a pottery containing a feldspar clay, kaolin,   which on high
firing vitrifies all through the ware, instead of only on the surface like a glaze,
and hence is brilliant, hard, and waterproof. The Chinese gradually evolved
porcelain around iioo after a long series of groping experiments. In these step-
by-step inventions accident may well have played a part, as well as blind trials.
By the time Europeans came into direct sea contact with China soon after 1500,
the porcelain art    was highly developed there. Its products were brought to
Europe and admired; but they were costly. Attempts to imitate porcelain were
made, but with only partial success. This was because European ceramics were
still only in the stage of development of Chinese ceramics some centuries before:

they operated with surface glazes.         The   seventeenth-century delftware, and
similar developments, represent this incomplete         European     imitation. Finally
deposits of the necessary ingredient kaolin were found in Europe, the techniques
were mastered, and in 1708-09 true porcelain was reinvented by Bottger and
Tschirnhaus in Dresden. That is why we eat off "china" plates today. But with-
out a mark having been set by the previous Chinese invention, Europeans would
have had nothing to shoot at, and conceivably they might not have devised
porcelain until much later.
      In the early nineteenth century a half-breed Indian called Sequoya in his
native Cherokee, and John Guest by white people, realized the value of writing.
He was illiterate. Perhaps this is what made it seem desirable to him that his
people should possess an instrument comparable to that of the white man. Had
he been sent to an American school he would probably have been content to write
English as a substitute. He wrestled with the problem for years. Finally, about
1 821,    he evolved a Cherokee writing of which his fellow tribesmen were at first
incredulous, but which proved to be entirely adequate and simple to learn, and
which they adopted and used. The characters are derived from English in fact       :




Sequoya had in his house a spelling primer, which he could not read, but many
of whose letters he used for his own purpose with entirely different values.
Eighteen of the Cherokee characters are straight English capitals; some are
modified or extended or inverted capitals; a few are lower-case                  letters   or
numerals; about a third or a quarter of the          total of   86 are freely invented.
That Sequoya's feat was however a genuine and singlehanded invention is
shown by two facts. Not one of the characters has the same value as in English;
and all the characters denote syllables, not letter sounds. Thus A is read as "go"
in Cherokee, B as "ya," C as "tli," D as "a." We have thus a true and real in
vention, with a high degree of originality; and yet we also have the assurance
178                              CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 154

that but for the influence and example of the aUen culture, the invention would
never have been made. It is another instance of "antecedents," though unusual
ones.
      An entirely parallel invention of writing was made by a West-coast African,
shortly before 1849, for his native Vai language. He had had a bit of missionary
schooling in his youth; but he made the invention in a dream, in middle life.
It is also   a syllabary, as against the alphabetic system of English that had stim-
ulated him. But the      number of characters is over 200, and they bear no re-
semblance to English, nor of course to Cherokee. The names of primitive in-
ventors are rarely known, so this one is cited   :   Doalu Bukere.
      Stimulus diffusion accordingly is also stimulus invention. Therein lies its
interest.

      This is perhaps not one of the most frequent processes in culture. However,
its nature is   such that its results look wholly novel and original even when they
are not; and the factors involved tend not to get into the historical record and
often become quickly forgotten. The number of occurrences of the process may
thus be considerably larger than appears. Several instances can be cited in which
derivation by diffusion has actually been suggested by one and another culture
historian without their being able to find direct evidence of the derivation. Yet
the resemblances and the space-time tie-up are such that the operative mechanism
may quite possibly have been reinvention stimulated by previous foreign exist-
ence of the trait. Such possible examples are

    The seemingly independent invention of pottery by the early Basket Maker-
Pueblo (Anasazi) in northern Arizona-New Mexico at a time when pottery surely
was already being made in central Mexico (Archaic) and perhaps in southern Ari-
zona (Hohokam; see § 323)
      Monks in Christianity, some centuries later than Buddhist monasricism, with
convents, celibacy, begging, and tonsure
      Development of Greek grammar some centuries after Sanskrit grammar, and of
Japanese two centuries after Latin and Dutch contacts
      In converse direction, Sanskrit drama following the Greek
      Quantitative meter appearing in Arabic poetry, and then by known transfer in
Persian and Turkish, after it had long been established in Greek and Latin

      None of these can at present be either proved or disproved as examples of
stimulus diffusion, but there seems an inherent probability that some of them
may turn out demonstrably to be such.


                 155.   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION
      In general, more invention means more machines and more institutions
more physical and social apparatus to be handled. This somewhat dismaying
prospect is partly relieved by a type of invention that works through simpUfica-
§   155                   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION                                     I79

tion or reduction. Perhaps "extraction" or "segregation" more nearly describes
the process. Metaphorically it would be a .sort of curdling or clotting-out.
       The most striking case is the alphabet (§206 and 207). Previous systems
of writings consisted of idea signs, word signs, syllable signs, and, in the case of
Egyptian, of sound signs also (§202-205). Moreover, a word might be spelled
but according to its sound and then an ideogram for it be added, as if to make
sure that one representation         would be read if the other were missed              —see the
example in Figure 20. Not only was the writing of particular words cumber-
some, but each method of writing required several hundred symbols. Thus
Egyptian hieroglyphic comprised 460 characters, cuneiform Babylonian around
600, Indus Valley writing nearly 400. As against this, the true alphabet rests upon
the realization that       if   pure minimum-sound symbols           — true   letters   —are con-
                                i.                   2.

 Hieroglyphs

    Transliferafion                     ^(^                "t   ,^         ®               (p)

 Pronunciation                         p^t                ®nt^-k         [ n®b ]          p®t
 Translation                          heaven              you-are        lord-of         heaven




      ^twb®nf                                     wb®l<                                 s®
 l<h®ft              ub^n-f                               ub«n-k                    S®-anl<b
 when                he-rises                          you- rise                   make -live

      FIG. XO.       MIXED PICTOGRAPHIC AND PHONETIC ELEMENTS IN
                            EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHS
      Phrases from a page of Egyptian hieroglyph papyrus.       The circled P denotes a picto-
graph or ideograph; the rest of the writing is by pictorial consonantal letters. In i,
heaven is written alphabetically and confirmed by a conventionalized pictographic "deter-
minative" (the vault of heaven); in 2, by pictograph alone.          The first words of 2 and 3
are   wholly phonetic: pictographs for the ideas of "when" and "you are" would be hard
to devise.    The grammatical suffixes -/ and -)^ added to uben, "rise," in 3 and 4 illustrate
another reason for the development of consonant letters. In the first of these, the confirm-
ing pictograph (sun with rays)    is put in the middle of the stem uben; in the second,

between     and the suffix. In the first words of 2 and 3, the letters in the word read
             it

downward; elsewhere, mostly horizontally. The true alphabet was devised by a process
of segregative reduction out of mixed-method writing such as this.
l80                               CULTURE PROCESSES                               S 155


sistently used, all the characters for syllables,   words, objects, ideas, and "de-
terminatives" or classifiers can be discarded; and anything that can be spoken
can also be written, and with complete intelligibility, by means of from two to
three dozen simple signs. It took two thousand years for this realization to be
achieved. In one sense the cardinal quality required by the inventors of the
alphabet was resolution, the courage to break with the multiple reinsurance of
ways of denoting meaning that was characteristic of the older mixed picto-
graphic-ideographic-phonetic systems. In a rough sort of sense, the invention
was like a cripple's finding he could walk free when he threw his crutches
away.
      If the Egyptians missed a bet by failing to discard all their    writing symbols
except their 24 true letter-signs scattered among the rest, they did achieve an-
other mental simplification: the invention of a pure solar calendar (§ 291). The
"natural" tendency seems to be to take cognizance of time by nights and days,
by moons and their phases, and finally by years and their recurrent seasons.
The difficulty bred by this is that the moon's revolutions around the earth and
the earth's around the sun do not gear. There are more than twelve lunations
in a year, but considerably less than thirteen. They average a bit over 29'/4 days,
so that a twelve-moon year is nearly 11 days short.          A rough correction can be
made by putting a thirteenth month into every third year. Yet not only does
this have the inconvenience of the years being quite unequal, but the correction

is still   short by three and a fraction days. More elaborate intercalations are more
accurate, but also more cumbersome. But no such system can be wholly ac-
curate, because earth and moon revolutions are incommensurable. Hence the
Chinese, Mohammedan, and ritual Jewish calendars, which really observe the
moon, are always beginning the year at a different absolute and seasonal date.
The simplification made by the early Egyptians consisted in disregarding what
                                                                 —
the moon was actually doing, and substituting months arbitrary periods of
thirty days. There were always twelve of these in the year, plus five supple-
mentary days; and the Egyptian year accordingly always was of the same length
                                                                   —
and always began at the same seasonal or astronomical time except for the few
hours' gain that we correct by a leap day.     We   still   follow the Egyptian plan of
months' being independent of the physical moon and its phases, though we do
not use the supplemental days, and        we have our months of unequal length
"Thirty days hath September," and so on. The cardinal act in the devising of
the Egyptian calendar, and a feature that we retain, was the discarding of the
moon's revolution from any relation to the earth's revolution or year.
    Another example of the process is the way in which astronomy and astrol-
ogy were originally associated in one system in Mesopotamia, as discussed below
in connection with the origin of the week (§ 196-197). It used to be thought that

the segregation was effected wholly by the Greeks, who discarded the omens and
portents and developed the pure science. It is now known that in late Mesopo-
tamian days, after the fall of Assyria and especially after that of Persia, there was
§   »55                      INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION                              l8l

a school of genuine or pure astronomy in Babylonia on which the Greeks were
more dependent            —both for observation and for interpretation— than their           sclf-

centeredness had led us to believe. But however the credit may fall between the
two nationahties, they did manage to curdle a purely naturalistic science out
from a previous amorphous, naturalistic-supernaturalistic mass of knowledge
and beliefs regarding the heavenly bodies. This astronomy maintained itself for
a number of centuries; but about the time               it   stopped progressing, by      Roman
Imperial times, it was reinvaded by a new wave of magic. This was astrology,
of the type still followed by a remnant of the mystically incUned and the credu-
lous among ourselves.           The earlier Mesopotamians had been concerned mostly
with eclipses as portents. The later astrology crystallized chiefly               at   Alexandria
and dealt with the continuous fortunes of men as determined by the positional
relations of the planets, or rather of the seven moving heavenly bodies visible
to the human eye. From then on until about 1600 astronomy was astrology-
ridden, among ancients, Arabs, and Europeans. Occasional astronomers dis-
avowed the astrological component, more accepted it, some were ardent over it.
It was close to 1700 before scientists were once more unanimous in repudiating

astrology as wholly nonscientific.
     The relations of alchemy and chemistry were similar except that here there
was no ancient attempt at autonomy of a self-sufficient science. The result was
that a wholly naturalistic chemistry never emerged as a productive and sys-
tematic activity anywhere until in the most recent centuries of European civili-
zation. The magico-mystic ingredients in alchemy were the elixir of life, the
philosopher's stone, and the transmutation of metals into gold. The search for
these transcendentals was not calculated to encourage preoccupation with ordi-
nary "base" substances and their humble quantitative properties. In the West,
alchemy first appeared in the turgid atmosphere of Imperial Roman Alexan-
dria about contemporaneously with planetary astrology.* In the East, substan-
tially identical beliefs were        rampant in China apparently a little earlier, during
the first half of the Han period of 206 b.c.-a.d. 220. Alchemy still had some repute
in Europe as late as the sixteenth century.
          The type of inventive change by reduction or extraction has been called
"etherealization" by Toynbee.      The connotations of that word seem inappro-
priate,     and perhaps unfortunate. But it is evident that the process deserves a
name. It is not a process of outright specialization, though                 it   somewhat re-
sembles differentiation by specialization. For instance, medicine begins with
general practice, from which after a time eye-ear-nose-throat treatments separate
off.      With added knowledge, instruments, and skills, certain doctors begin to
limit themselves to the eye and are called oculists. The               remainder for a while
go on as a unit, but in time the aurists perhaps again split off as specialists. In
       *This   is   the   usual version. Another interpretation   makes the Alexandrians crude
chemists concerned with producing deceptive imitations of gold. Both accounts may be true.
l82                               CULTURE PROCESSES                                 § 1 55


this medical specialization there is no discarding or repudiation of one element

or ingredient; they are all developed further, and therewith           it   became advan-
tageous and desirable for individuals to choose among the subspecialties. In the
process here discussed, however, the essential step      is   that   an encumbering in-
gredient, which is either unnecessary or false, is got rid of. There is accordingly
a reduction of total compass of a system or activity through a segregation of its
more valuable or efficient elements from its inferior or impeding ones.
     Apparently, a process somewhat reminiscent of this reduction-segregation
is observable in technology. In the main this technological happening is obscured

by the fact that many machines grow more complex as they develop, because
their functions      and powers increase. But as each kind of machine approaches
the limits of its inherent possibilities as a type, it tends to revert to simplicity, to
emphasize economy of means, and to achieve what engineer and artist would
agree in calling beauty of design and function. An example in point is the
clipper ship       coming to its peak in the very days when steam was beginning
to supersede sails. The superb swords of Japan in an era of cannon are another
instance.    We have here a field of social process that has been inadequately ex-
plored, but in which interesting possibilities can be glimpsed.



                                 156.   CULTURAL LOSS
      Popular romance maintains a half-belief in supposed lost arts of the ancients,
such as hardening of copper to equal steel, miraculously Hfelike embalming of
mummies, and the like. Actually, it is likely that no art of serious consequence
has been lost from total human civilization. Copper can be hardened by alloys
most of which the ancients did not possess; it can be somewhat hardened by
hammering, a quality which we know as well as they did but do not utilize
precisely because we have very much harder steel. Lenin's body in Moscow is
probably preserved much better than any Egyptian master embalmer would
have known how to preserve it. And so on.
      There is considerable cultural "loss" that is actual, but it relates to particular
cultures rather than to human culture as a whole.         Most of it, as will be seen
presently,    is   displacement, properly speaking: a   new custom, art, worship, or
belief crowds out an old one. Utilitarian arts, such as hardening copper, dyeing

with cochineal or with Tyrian shellfish, retire to a humble spot in the techno-
logical   background as metallurgy improves steelmaking and chemistry devises
anilines. Most of what we shall have to consider as cultural "losses" possess this

character of replacement or displacement. In addition, particular societies do at
times undergo genuine or downright losses of specific items of their culture,
owing to environment, loss of materials or skills, shrinkage of population, im-
poverishment, and other or unknown causes. Some instances of both kinds will
be briefly analyzed.
§   157                        DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS                                183


                        157.   DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS

      In 1912 Rivers demonstrated a series of convincing examples of the dis-
appearance of useful arts in Oceania. The things given up were of unquestion-
able utility: canoes, pots, bows.     The canoe went out of use in Torres Island
in Melanesia,       was replaced by sailing rafts in Mangareva. In a series of Mela-
nesian islands     —Malikolo, Pentecost, Lepers, Ambrym—potsherds are found in
the ground, but pottery has not been            made in the historical period. In several
areas the bow was still known recently, but it was used only as a toy, in sport,
or in small-game hunting of rats, birds, or fish            —not in war. These areas of
fighting without        bow and arrow covered nearly all Polynesia except Tonga
and Samoa; in Melanesia, most of New Britain, New Ireland, and the Ad-
miralties; and some of the coast of New Guinea. The causes of the several
disappearances were various. Lack of material was the least common cause. It
would be applicable chiefly to canoes, but was not the reason for abandonment
in either Torres or Mangareva. Sometimes the guilds or families of tohunga or
craftsmen who had been taught magic as well as manual skills by their elders
died out. This happened to the canoemakers in the Torres Islands, and to the
stone-adz producers in Woodlark. Sometimes in Oceania a single community
specializes in manufacturing one article, such as pots, and supplying it by trade
to a large area. A catastrophe overwhelming such a village might result in the
whole area's coming to use wooden vessels instead of pottery. As to the bow,
there was generally no large game in the Oceanic islands to sustain one custo-
mary economic utility of the weapon. Of warfare there generally was enough,
but it was sometimes ceremonial rather than waged for practical advantage.
And in Polynesia war tended to be dominated by standards of bravery, chivalry,
or manners of fighting: fashion exalted the hand-to-hand club.
     All in all, the array of cases is significant in showing that the actual his-
torical behavior of cultures cannot be predicted from an a-priori notion that

practical utility    —economic motivation— invariably determinative.®
                                                 is

      There also are conditions of natural environment under which particular
utilitarian activities can wither away fast. In 1818 the explorer Ross discovered

some two hundred Eskimo along the east shore of Smith Sound in northern
Greenland— later also named Peary's Eskimo, or Eta or Polar Eskimo, because
they live farthest north of any permanent human community, at Igita beyond
latitude 78°. Ice and cliffs had long cut them off so effectually that they no

      '   One consideration that Rivers did not stress is that the Oceanian continent of native
AustraUa also lacked canoes, pottery, and bows, and almost universally so. Australia seems
to be a case not of having possessed and lost, but of never having had the inventions   in—
the main perhaps of not wanting them (see § 253, 310). Nevertheless, the proximity of
Australia to    New Guinea, Melanesia, and Polynesia makes it seem that the two negative
distributions    may be connected, according to the principles of distributional evidence set
forth in § 223-224.
184                                  CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 157


longer had clear knowledge of any other people. They possessed no kayaks          —the
decked-over boats of skins stretched on a light wooden frame which were so
widely prevalent among the Eskimo that it is assumed that all once had them.
This group lacked them because driftwood does aot carry into Smith Sound.
From 1818 on, they got wood from Ross, and from subsequent explorers and
whalers; but still they made no kayaks: they no longer knew how. About 1868
a vigorous,       restless   Baffinland   Eskimo took   his family,   pushed north with
sledges, crossed Smith Sound on the winter ice, and found a new home among
the Polar Eskimo.            Then the kayak reappeared among them: this newcomer
from a region of driftwood and knowledge of the kayak taught them how to
make it. During the fifty years preceding this Baffinlander's coming the Polar
Eskimo had again got the necessary material through the whites. But this had
not helped them, because the design and art of joining a seaworthy frame had
been forgotten in the preceding centuries of their isolation.
    Technological skills can generally be taught only imperfectly by words.
There must be visible example and, above all, manual practice. That is one
reason why the teaching of chemistry and other science insists on laboratory
periods. Useful technologies         do not tend intrinsically to disappear faster than
other parts of culture; the weak link in the matter of transmission of technolo-
gies lies in the      acquirement of manipulative practice, the formation of motor
habits. Interfere with these and the continuity of the art is broken   and may be
lost.

        It   was a deficiency of environment that was at the bottom of the Polar
Eskimo's losing their boatbuilding ability. But having once lost the skill, the
fresh accession of the         needed wood did not suffice to cause them to reinvent
the art. And meanwhile their lack of boats helped to pen them in their habitat.
        However, nature gave the Polar Eskimo something else. Three large
meteorites, now carried to  New York City, had fallen in their habitat. From
these they managed to           whack off slivers of nickel-iron with stones; these they
beat to an edge and set end to end in a groove in a bone handle and thus made
themselves iron knives— something that no other Eskimo group had, except for
rare pieces of drift or trade iron coming from Asia into Alaska. Here then we
have both an invention and a loss connected with the same environment              —an
apt illustration of how complexly culture operates.



  158. EFFECTS OF ISOLATION:                SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS
        Small, isolated peoples are especially interesting because of the unexpected
things that happen to them. While contacts remain open, complete losses are
less likely to occur. Wholly localized increments, and fixations at an ancient

level,       are also less expectable under    open   contacts, because   knowledge and
customs have a chance to spread both in and out.
§   158    EFFECTS OF ISOLATION: SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS                185

       On Southampton Island, at the entrance to Hudson Bay, Hvcd a second
Eskimo group who had lost boats from their culture. They were therefore cut
off    from intercourse with the world unless other Eskimo, or subsequently
whalers, ventured to them. They did have a makeshift substitute for alongshore
hunting: inflated sealskins that they paddled, riding them like hobbyhorses. But
with only these they could probably secure nothing more than occasional small
seals. Their maindependence accordingly was on a large herd of wild reindeer
thatroamed the two-hundred-mile-wide island. With this herd once eaten up,
reduced by disease, or impossible to get at, the Southampton Eskimo were
doomed. In fact, this fate overtook them in 1902, when they starved to death.
All in all, their tools were not those of the other eastern Eskimo, but represented
a   somewhat deteriorated form of what is called the Thule phase of Eskimo
culture. This phase is estimated to have flourished quite widely in the American
Arctic around a.d. i 000-1300, after which it became superseded elsewhere by the
more modern or historical Eskimo culture. It looks therefore as if the Southamp-
toners, once they had settled down with their simplified and boatless version of
the Thule culture, managed to get along and survived for centuries before dis-
aster caught up with them.
     The Polynesians of Easter Island, though they must originally have come in
canoes, were also nearly boatless   when discovered, because of lack of logs or
planking. They had a very few small canoes, carrying from two to four persons,
ingeniously sewed together of many patches and splinters of wood. The island is
only ten by thirteen miles in size, is grassy and windswept, and very isolated. It
Ues sixteen hundred miles from Polynesian Mangareva, twenty-two hundred
from South America. Tapa-bark cloth was nearly as scarce as canoes, because
the paper mulberry withstands the cool winds of Easter Island only with con-
siderable coddhng. Breadfruit and coconuts are wholly prohibited by the cli-
mate; but bananas, sweet potatoes, taro, and yams were grown. All in all, the
                                                   —
Easter Islanders had a purely Polynesian culture as their speech was a pure
                    —
Polynesian dialect with its richness considerably thinned down by their small
numbers and by environmental lacks and limitations. But the culture was
thinned down more or less all over, without notable total losses at any one
point. There were the usual Polynesian gods, chants, myths, kings or chiefs,
wars, human sacrifice and cannibalism, houses, stone platforms, dress, foods,
and the. rest, in a somewhat meager provincial form.
     What is really remarkable about this isolated culture is not so much what
it had lost as certain unique positive increments that must have been local de-

velopments. Three of these stand out. The first was a peculiar bird cult culmi-
nating in a ceremonial race that was the great event of the year. The second
feature was wooden tablets incised with lines of figures that look remarkably
like a script and appear to have had some connection with prayers or chants,
but which could not be read, and probably were not true writing but decorative
symbols similar to large petroglyphs painted in connection with the bird cult
1 86                              CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 1 58


The third specialty consisted of gigantic rude statues of tuff rock weighing from
four or five to twenty or thirty tons. These statues have partial parallels else-
where in Polynesia in small stone carvings or fair-sized wooden ones. Conse-
quently they represent a heightening of degree        — the largest statues occurring
                                  —
on one of the smallest islands rather than a radically new idea. But the bird
cult and the tablets are without real parallels elsewhere in the Pacific and are
accordingly indicated as having been devised in the isolation of Easter Island.
In    this case, therefore, loneliness   had several unique and conspicuous results,
though they are probably balanced by many minor losses or impoverishments.
    The period during which Easter Island was occupied is not known, but is
estimated to have been less than a thousand years rather than more. Assuming
an average population of 3000, for which there is warrant in the reports of early
white voyagers, we must credit this small number of islanders with considerable
originality in having evolved their specializations in perhaps from five to eight
centuries. Withal, the originality puts no strain on credibility, as do some of the
fantastic theories   which blow up the Easter Island situation into extreme im-
probabilities   —sunken land bridges, vanished prior     races, or "writing" mysteri-

ously preserved from the Indus Valley script of five thousand years earlier.



                               159.      DISPLACEMENTS

    On the whole, "loss" appears often to consist of a displacement by something
new, rather than being an outright disappearance or a mere meking-away. And
the displacement is often only partial. Thus we still have candles and oil lamps
though gas came in a century ago and electricity in turn has been generally
                  The older elements survive, though with diminished or
substituted for gas.
specialized scope. The total culture is thereby so much richer than before. Much
of the enormous variety of our technology is due to this preservation of the old
alongside the development of the new. The established culture trait loses most of
its   functions but retains part, or even acquires new ones. It is a use that is lost
rather than the trait or item itself. There is, especially in contemporary civiliza-
tion, a constant    tendency for utilitarian devices that are dispossessed by new
inventions to persist in art, sport, luxury, religion, or symbolism.
       Thus, in North America the automobile has virtually displaced the horse for
transportation of both passengers and goods. Yet the horse is still used consider-
ably in certain situations, such as for small-farm plowing. It holds its own with-
out diminution in racing, horse shows, rodeos, circuses, polo, and as a form of
pleasurable exercise. All these serve the ends of sport or play.
       Similarly the bow still exists in our culture, but archery has become purely
a sport.
       Woodcuts used to be the ordinary method of illustrating books; only ex-
pensive works had steel engravings. Photographic reproduction has entirely
displaced the woodcut for practical purposes. Even apart from screen plates that
 §   159                                DISPLACEMENTS                                 1
                                                                                          87
 render light-and-shade values with transitions, the ordinary pen-and-ink draw-
 ing, which can be done by the artist in a fifth of the time required for cutting
 a block, gives the same effect, and if necessary a much finer one. Has the wood-
cut therefore disappeared? As a practical means of actually illustrating in print,
yes. But it survives, in fact is having a bit of a cult, as an art form, as an aesthetic

expression, as a conscious revival of         what is antiquated and simple and com-
fortable and rude, something like eighteenth-century furniture or imitations of
primitive utensils.     We do not live by utility alone.
       The horn lantern was used when people were poor and glass was expensive
as well as brittle. There was always a cow's horn available, and in winter there
were evenings in which the farmer could steam and pare and trim it. Glass
being much clearer, as soon as its price came down through industrial improve-
ments and mass production, it drove horn out; except that occasionally we still
buy sheets of horn for our electric bulbs to shine through with a "natural"
mellow amber glow while we talk in the living-room. The glass that was once
available only for the wealthy has now become universal; horn, once the poor
man's refuge, has become an article of luxury. Many of the losses of civilization,
especially in our own of the past century or two, are really displacements, or
even inversions of function, like this.
       A curious analogy is found in the history of the dog, the almost universal
domestic animal. Except where he is of specific value for transport, hunting,
herding, or watching, most cultures other than our own may be said to tolerate
rather than to protect him; he fends for himself and becomes a scavenger. There
are a few groups of primitive tribes that are exceptional in being dogless. There
was at least one of these groups in South America and another in native north-
ern California. In this latter area the dog was by no means unknown, but one
might have to travel through several Indian villages to encounter one or two.
These had been bought or traded from outside, and they were pampered, fed,
allowed in the house at night, named, and given formal burial when they died.
They were too soft and valuable to be used for hunting. They seem to have
been so scarce as to have had no chance, ordinarily, to breed; so the supply had
to be kept up by import from outside. This primitive luxury manifestation
strangely parallels contemporary New York, where tens of thousands of child-
less couples keep a dog in their apartment, and at night have the maid or a

husband lead him about a bit to foul the public street. It is the attitude of over-
cherishing a pet that is common to the two cases. How did these CaHfornia
Indians come to have their attitude? Evidently it was because they were essen-
tially dogless and knew no practical use for dogs when they did get them. They

may have been this way for one of two reasons. Either they had never in their
past history acquired a full-scale dog-keeping habit, or they once followed it and
it   went into disuse   —a case of   loss, or more exactly of near-loss displacement into

a luxury. The latter seems more likely in view of the near-universality of the
dog among American Indians, and the fact that the few non-dog-raising tribes
l88                                     CULTURE PROCESSES                          § 1 59


in California must for thousands of years liave been in some contact and com-
munication with the much more numerous dog-keeping tribes (§ 165).
      Displacements involving both loss and innovation occur also in situations
other than those of attitude or function. With cosmetics there may be substitu-
tions of bodily topography. Many primitives paint the body as well as the face.
The ancient Egyptians concentrated on the eyelids, the nineteenth century on
the cheeks. Lipstick was unknown. After this had come in, interest shifted to
the lips, at first timidly; but after a time the cheeks were toned or browned
in order to exaggerate by contrast the vivid redness of the lips. Painting of the
nails also developed       —a new area that primitives seem to have overlooked; but
at least   it   is                                       on the face. We tend to
                     a reversion to cosmetics elsewhere than
think first, in all such cases, of the new or intruding item;   it is what attracts

interest; but of course every innovation ordinarily involves a loss too. The whole

cosmetic custom went out once in our culture, with Puritanism. It might go
out again, though perhaps next time possibly as a change of taste rather than
from moral scruple.
                                       160.   KINDS OF LOSS

    There remains the more general, seemingly philosophical problem of how
large a factor cultural loss is or can be. For instance, can the loss be entire for
one feature? Beyond that, could losses be universal, so as to lead to cultural
death.? Actually, the questions are ambiguous.
     First of all, entire loss of features from what ? From the particular culture
of a particular people.'' In that case, the answer definitely is Yes. For instance,
"we" have lost slavery in the past century. That holds for the United States.
But does it hold for the totality of human culture, past and present, everywhere.?
Such a loss will obviously come more slowly: witness Ethiopia, which is still
de-facto slaveholding. And in many cases, even if universal loss had occurred, it
might be hard to establish. Things have a way of hanging on long in the
remote places; or they persist undercover, in the subcultures of unsophisticated
social strata at home       :   as astrology, crystal-gazing, voodoo, and magic do among
ourselves. Then, as we have just seen, an item of culture may be displaced by a
novelty from most of its uses, even from its primary use, but persist in one of its
uses, or even acquire a new luxury or play use.
      Second, it is necessary to narrow the question by defining what it is that is
being lost. Is it culture content or culture form.?         A specific element, a system,
a pattern, or an attitude  Or indeed do we mean that a whole culture may dis-
                                  .?




appear.? In the sections on progress (§ 127-128), we have seen that among those
civilizations        which by common consent are reckoned as higher there has been
an indubitable drift to discountenance behavior motivated by magic and ani-
mism, as well as that which is psychically infantile and unsocialized in its in-
humanity and its crude emphasis on the physiological. We may expect, and
most of us will certainly hope, that this drift toward the gain of reason, taste, and
§   l6o                             KINDS OF LOSS                                        189

humanity at the expense of practices based on more infantile motivations will
continue. But wc certainly cannot prove that       it   will continue indefinitely, nor

can we assert that there might not be conditions which would reverse the trend
and cause increase o£ what is now diminishing.
    On the basis of a breakdown into more precisely defined questions, some
generalizations can be made as to loss.
      Specific items, such as painting the eyelids, or       hammer-hardening copper,
are more Hkely to be lost, by outright giving up or by displacement, in any one
culture or in all human culture, and to be lost more rapidly, than broad, varied
activities such as fishing or   animal husbandry, or than large systems such as a
religion or a method of writing. The counterpart is that the small trait generally
also gets accepted more readily than a big complex. This is logically obvious;
and the chief significance of the point perhaps is to help us guard against deal-
ing alike with noncomparables-—little things and big, isolated bits and ramified
networks.
      Replacements, modifications, and substitutions are, broadly speaking, more
characteristic of the changes of organic evolution; additive increments are more
typical of the changes of human culture (§ 5, 127). But this difference            is   prob-
ably most accentuated in artifacts, tools, and technologies, where a whole array
of devices serving similar but not quite identical purposes can easily exist side
by side with advantage and without conflict       —say tenons, pegs,        nails, screws,

rivets, lashings, which all   hold parts together. Religions, writings, or social sys-
tems may also coexist— witness the three "religions" of China and the two writ-
ings of Korea (§ 221); but between such there is likely to be strain or conflict,
and time is required for an adjustment, if one is worked out at all. And partic-
ular items are likely to be rejected or forced out where they are in conflict with
a  dominant socioreligious system: blood sacrifice in Christianity or Moham-
medanism, for instance, or cross-cousin marriage in our Western society. But it
is hard to imagine any socioreligious system so averse in principle to crank

handles or screws as to force their abandonment from its culture.
      The contrast of the organic process as substitutive, of the cultural as ad-
                                                              mean that organic
ditive, is broadly true, but it must not be forced so far as to

novelties occur only as substitutions     —that   is,   as   accompaniment of      losses

while cultural novelties are regularly incremental. It         is   true that   when birds
evolved out of reptiles they gave up a pair of running limbs to acquire a pair
of wings, whereas when men learned to fly in airplanes it was not by sacrificing
arms      —nor even wagons, railroads, and motorcars. From the point of view of the
history of birds themselves it is true enough that they acquired flight by a trans-
formative substitution. But from the angle of the evolution of life as a grand
total there was also an increment: running reptiles and flying birds where there

had been only running reptiles before. And much the same had happened mil-
lions of years before when some branch of the ancestral anthronods, having
developed air-breathing and come out of the water, somehow got two pairs of
190                                    CULTURE PROCESSES                               § 160


wings and soared away as insects. The natural tendency in dealing with animals
is   to consider what happens to a particular line of descent in        its   evolution, but
in dealing withman to view a cultural change as if it affected the totality of
human culture. And not without reason, since an innovation may and some-
times actually does spread to all cultures, whereas the wings developed by birds
remain confined to descendants of birds: they cannot possibly spread to non-
descendants. In short, the contrast of basic process of organic evolution and
cultural evolution     is   valid     and fundamental; only it must not be pushed to
exaggeration by comparison of a single line of organic development with the
whole breadth of cultural development. Culture also has its substitutions,
                                  —
and therewith its losses especially the single or particular culture as viewed
separately.



                161.   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES
      When we come finally to the question of cultural death, it is particularly
important to define the problem so as not to get enmeshed in what is really
a metaphor. There is presumably             no possibility of all human culture "dying";
that is, disappearing from internal causes. Of course, the cooling of the sun, the
loss of our atmosphere, a collision of the earth or its atomic explosion         —any such
event that extinguished the            human race — would automatically extinguish all
culture with it.   But that would not be an inherent or a spontaneous death. It
may be assumed that culture has sufficient survival value for our naked, unarmed
species so that if any branches of man, for whatever reason, got into the way of
somehow consecutively diminishing or destroying their own stock of culture,
they would inevitably be eliminated in competition with those branches which
advanced or even only maintained theirs.
      At the opposite end of the scale, as concerns culture traits or items      —customs,
techniques, beliefs   —   it is   obvious that these get changed, replaced, and lost, but
that there is no need of applying to these matter-of-fact happenings any               term
so metaphorical, so charged with emotional connotations, as "death."
      The situation in connection with which the phrase probably arose and has
a possible meaning is the passing away of particular national cultures. If there
really is a "decline and fall" of civilizations or peoples, there might well also be
a "death." What seems to be actually involved in such cases is the dissolution of
a particular assemblage of cultural content, configurated in a more or less unique
set of patterns belonging to a          nation or a group of nations. Such particular as-
semblages and constellations do unquestionably "die out"; that is, they dissolve
away, disappear, and are replaced by new ones. The elements of the content of
such cultures may have previously spread to other cultures and survive there.
Or their place may be taken at home by elements introduced from abroad. Or
they may survive, with or without modification, at home, in the different con-
figuration that gradually takes the place of the old one as a successor culture. All
 § l6l                   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES                            I9I

 thai goes out of existence or "dies" in such cases     is   a particular, characterized,
over-all configuration or pattern grouping.
    Thus there can be no question that the culture of ancient Egypt is "dead"
though a more precise formulation would be that its specific pattern assemblage
has long since ceased to function or exist anywhere.         We even know a good deal
of the circumstances of the dissolution. Toward 1400 B.C. there was a last great
flourishing of the Egyptian patterns. True, there had been a premonitory sympn
tom a few centuries before in the irruption of the Hyksos, the first conquerors
of Egypt, even though transient ones. But there had been recovery from this,
and on the rebound the greatest military might, expansion, wealth, excellence
of art, and development of thought were attained by the Egyptians.              The in-
herent patterns of their culture may be said to have been fully realized or to
have been saturated then. After that, with pattern potentialities exhausted, there
could be only diminished or devitalized repetition; unless the patterns can be
reformulated in the direction of a new set of values    —which would be equivalent
to recasting the civilization into a new one or into a thoroughly         new phase of
one. This latter did not happen in Egypt; so more and more sluggish, mechani-
cal repetition    within the realized but fully exhausted patterns became the uni-
versal vogue. After about 1200 b.c, general decline is evident. There were civil
wars and rival dynasties, failure of art, and evidently of wealth, with only tempo-
rary checks.      The last line of fairly successful rulers maintained themselves
through Greek and other foreign mercenaries, while foreign ideas seeped in.
From 700 B.C. on, Assyrian, Persian, Macedonian, and Roman conquests suc-
ceeded one another, with the upper classes increasingly Hellenized, and finally
all classes    Christianized.   By a.d. 600 the old civilization had disappeared sub-
stantially as completely as now.       No one worshiped Osiris or the hawk-headed
Horus, no one could read hieroglyphs, no one mummified his dead, no one was
Pharaoh. The Arab conquest and Islamization beginning a few decades later
merely superimposed one more stratum on the cultural layers under which the
old native civilization was already buried forever. The moment of "death" may
be impossible to specify, just because the process of "dying" went on so long and
is   so continuously evident.
    Egyptian culture as a unique nexus and entity thus went out of existence.
But the society to which it had been attached went on. The Hellenized Egyp-
tians of Cleopatra's time, the Hellenized Christian Egyptians of a.d. 500, the
Mohammedan Egyptians of a.d. iooo, and those of today are no doubt mainly
the bodily descendants of those Egyptians who first shaped their distinctive
civilization   around 3500-3000 B.C. Especially is this true as regards the mass of
the population, the rural fellahin. The stream of biological heredity rolled         on
through the millennia with only minor alterations; above it, civilizations grew,
dissolved, entered, and replaced one another.
   The components of the old Egyptian civilization did not perish equally.
Here and there bits of it persist into the thoroughly different culture aggregate
                                    CULTURE PROCESSES                                §   161
192

of present-day Egyptian culture: perhaps a water-bucket sweep,             an ass under
his load. Other elements, like the hieroglyphs        and burial pyramids, have long
since been abandoned everywhere in the world. Other content traits still exist in
one or another of the contemporary living cultures, including our own. If it is
difficult to name such, that is only because the expansive phase of Egyptian cul-

ture productivity took place so long ago     — ended more than a thousand years
                                                 it

before Western civilization began to germinate   —that transmitted elements have
reached us indirectly, at second and third hand, in much altered dress. Original
Egyptian traits perhaps first became Asiatic, then Minoan, Greek, finally Roman,
before they filtered into incipient Occidental culture, with reselection and re-
modeling all along the slow, devious route. But elements, ideas, or stimuli of
probable Egyptian origin are recognizable in our own calendar, writing, religion
(influences contributory to the concepts of monotheism, dying god, afterlife,
Madonna with child), architecture, plant and animal husbandry; and others re-
appear in modern native African cultures (§311).
      This picture seems typical of what ultimately happens to cultures. Their
content is partly superseded and replaced; partly it diffuses through space and
time, in ever new settings and with endless remodeUngs, selections, and recom-
binations. The ethnically or nationally individuated pattern aggregates of cul-
ture material     —what we ordinarily     call   civilizations   or culture wholes   —also
change, though slowly. But beyond a certain point it is no longer a matter of
wear and tear with them, of better or worse fortunes, but of either gradual
dissolution or gradual ossification of the nexuses which have held them into an
active integrated whole. Even before they have become mainly loose pieces or
skeleton, another and       younger civilization is usually ready to step into their
place; or,   if   there is none such in the vicinity, a   new civilization may slowly
integrate out of the debris of its indigenous predecessor.
      At any rate, such is, in outline, what history tells us of the aging and death
of past cultures. The corresponding societies, the culture-carrying groups, have
a way of going on; much of the cultural content continues to exist and function
somewhere, and may amplify; it is the particular set of patterned interweavings
of content characterizing a civilization that breaks down.
      The question that inevitably comes to our minds is whether such an end is
necessary, or whether our own civilization    may perhaps escape it. An honest
answer seems to be that available precedent is pretty soUdly one-way, but that
history is never a sure basis for prophecy, since conditions can never be exactly
repeated and precedents are therefore always only partial. For instance, there
might be a new influence of culture-planning. Of this we have so far had only
rudiments as by-products of contemporary social planning; for most social plan-
ning to date aims essentially to freeze most of the existing cultural values while
trying to distribute their benefits more satisfactorily among the members of the
society —or among       all societies.
§   l6l                   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES                           193

      What is of interest in this connection is the contemporary trend of other
cuhures to assimilate themselves to Occidental civilization, of Turks, Arabs,
Indians, Chinese, and Japanese to "Westernize" in their ways of life and stand-
ards.     Mankind has never before been essentially unitary in culture. It is not
yet unitary; but at the moment it is traveling fast that way. A good many per-
sons, as diverse as ardent Christian missionaries. Communists, generalized ideal-
ists, until   1945 even Fascists and Nazis, look forward to the universality of civili-
zation    — implicitly their kind of civilization—as a goal and a boon. But there      is

this consideration:       Suppose we attain a single, essentially uniform, world-wide
civilization that has supplanted the many diverse ones of the past. And suppose
that in attaining this       one civilization we achieve   its   aims, realize the values
potential in     its       What then when the exhausted, repetitive stage is
                       patterns.
reached, and there is no new rival culture to take over responsibility and oppor-
tunity and start fresh with new values in a different set of patterns —what then ?
      There is no precedent, and no answer, optimistic or pessimistic, can be
proved for this future contingency. But the question is worth thinking about.
                              CHAPTER TEN

                             Culture Change


162.   TYPES 'tJF CULTURE      CHANGE     163.    SUBSISTENCE         AND POPULATION CHANGES
164. FASHION CHANGE        1 65.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREED-
ING     166. LABILE SOCIAL   STRUCTURES     167.   AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE               168. CUL-

TURAL fatigue: TABOO IN HAWAII             169.    CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION
170. CHANGE BY REVOLUTION            I7I. EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION                I72. RESISTANCE

TO DIFFUSION       173. MARGINAL CULTURES         174. MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS            175.
INTERNAL MARGINALITY          176.    ACCULTURATION           177.   ACCULTURATION WITH AND
WITHOUT DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                 1 78.   JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES
IN ASIA     179.   VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION                    180.    NATIVISM, RE-
VIVALS, AND MESSIAHS       181. ETHNIC REVIVALS            1 82.   ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY



                         162. TYPES OF       CULTURE CHANGE
         FAR we have considered culture as if it constituted a kind of world of
SoBrahma,           Vishnu, and Siva representing creation, preservation, and de-
        struction: that being, in a sort of way,    what invention, persistence, and
loss might be called.     But in the actual physical world, as compared to a logical
one, there is a lot of change that ultimately is neither creation nor destruction,
but just change. In fact change is more frequent and more certain in the natural
world than either creation or destruction. Most physicists would deny both crea-
tion and destruction for energy as well as matter; but they would say that what
physics is concerned with is changes and redistributions of energy and matter.
So in culture too there are a great many happenings, such as the growth of swing
music, of informal manners and casual greeting, of sitting with legs crossed,
which are undoubted changes of recent decades and yet would be hard to fit with
sense into any rigid scheme of invention-persistence-loss. Nor are such changes
all trifling: drifts   toward or away from totalitarianism or democracy, or funda-
mentalism or liberalism, or industrialism or laissez faire, are of the same order
as these examples, in that they are gradual and growthUke instead of happening

in jumps or steps.
       We have accordingly to consider also cultural changes of the kind com-
parable to growths. For convenience of approach, we can separate off,                       among
 ^   '63                SUBSISTENCE AND POPULAllON CHANCES                               I95

 such changes, those which arc due mostly to internal factors and thus seem
 "spontaneous" in a culture, and those due chiefly to factors external to a culture
 and therefore induced in it.
        Among changes from inside we have, first of all, alterations on the sub-
 sistence-economic-technological level such as the Neolithic Revolution (§ 262),
 the Industrial Revolution of recent centuries, the increasing urbanization of con-
 temporary times, and many smaller shifts. These seem to be disunguished by
 what may be called a distinctive circular causality, about which more in a mo-
 ment. Another large group of changes can be attributed to the biological play
 impulse in its cultural expression. These include fashion fluctuations, but also
 many that are not ordinarily classed under fashion. Affective factors     —      restless-

 ness, strivings, boredom, repugnances, fatigue    —are often involved in this group
of phenomena. In fact, the emotional associations are sometimes quite dispropor-
tionate to the seriousness of the actual change, so that we are here skirting the
field of social   psychology. Finally, we have growth changes, leading gradually
to new religions, different idea systems, social reconstructions, basically altered
culture patterns. Revolutions, whether affecting one institution or a whole cul-
ture, form an extreme and special form of changes of this last class.

       Changes from the outside relate either to culture elements or           traits,   the
spread and introduction of which is usually called diffusion; or to the spread of
larger pattern systems or complexes, such as the alphabet or Islam; or to the
increasing contact of culture wholes, with attrition, penetration, and adjustments
of these. This last type of externally caused culture change can be subsumed as
acculturation, that word being construed as having outgrown its originally nar-
rower meaning of assimilation     —as will appear in the   final sections of this chapter.

       In the technical literature of anthropology certain similar features occurring
in cultures of different periods, or of widely separated areas, are attributed to
processes called independent parallel development and convergence; but other
similarities are attributed to contact, dissemination, diffusion, or dispersal (§ 108,

109, 223). Parallels and convergences are due to internal or "spontaneous" growth
factors; diffusions, as just stated, represent influences    on a given culture from
others outside it.



                163. SUBSISTENCE       AND POPULATION CHANGES
    There is a group of basic factors that can have deep influence on the fortunes
of societies and may affect the whole of their cultures. These factors include
serious alterations in the environment, sufficiently heavy growth of population
within a given territory, and fundamental changes in subsistence technique. It
is   evident that these factors are, strictly, subcultural, except for subsistence; and
this, of course, not only is basal in culture, but in the case of farming and stock-

raising the subsistence provision amounts to the creation of an artificial or man
controlled floral and faunal environment.
196                               CULTURE CHANGE                                §   163

       An environment may alter with climate; or a people may abandon an old
habitat, or be driven from it. If their new home is environmentally different
enough to enforce a change in methods of subsistence, the rest of their old cul-
ture may alter profoundly. It does not follow that the new situation is inferior;
it   may be better or worse.
       Changes in culture due to natural changes in environment undoubtedly
occur.   But this explanation for cultural change has probably been propounded
ten times for ever/ actual case of such change, especially in the long subarid belt
from North China to southern and western Africa. Here there has been a mania
or a fashion to posit pluvial periods followed by dry ones, with change from
fertile lands to steppe and from steppe to desert, and with populations swarm-

ing out in consequence, or shrinking and impoverishing. If we go back far
enough, there is no doubt that such climatic alterations have occurred. Yet it
should always be recollected that ten thousand years is only a minimal unit in
geology but an enormously long time in human history. Consequently, the two
kinds of evidence barely meet; and it is where the evidential contact is poorest
that the sparks of imaginative theory fly thickest. The explanation has certainly
been worked hard, all the way from the Old Stone Age in Kenya to Jenghis
Khan coming out of Mongolia, and there are very few scholars who really have
enough control of all the data to separate the valid from the invalid guesses.
There does seem to be general agreement that North Africa was moister about
ten thousand years ago than it is now. But it is difficult to be sure of the extent
of this change, or its precise effects on culture, which is infinitely more plastic
and capable of rapid change than slow-moving climate is.
     The transition from PalaeoHthic to Mesolithic culture in northern Europe
is now generally associated with the cUmatic change at the end of the last glacial

period, which allowed forests to grow where there had been tundra, steppe, or
grassland before (§ 276). The change in vegetation and fauna at the time seems
well attested. That it was also the cause of the cultural change is plausible, but,
in the nature of things, less certain history is full of new culture phases without
                                      :




environment being involved.
      More localized changes are sometimes well established. About 1425 the
herring suddenly shifted their run and began to do their main spawning in the
North Sea instead of the Baltic. The Holland fishermen profited economically,
the Hanseatic Germans were the losers; and after about 1500, the Dutch, who
till then had always trailed the Belgians in the Low Countries in prosperity and

therewith in cultural productivity, began to draw abreast of them, and finally
to forge ahead.
       The general effect of increased population on culture has already been dis-
cussed in § 118 and 121. This is an expectable influence, a sort of reasonable a
priori. It is validated at least partially   by the fact that we find no very rich or
advanced cultures among small populations.
§    163                    SUBSISTENCE AND POPULATION CHANCES                                   1^7

    That man-made new environment, the utilitarian domestication of animals
and plants, which in prehistory is sometimes called the Neolithic Revolution
(§281, 282), certainly provided a subsistence that for the long pull was more
dependable than gathering and hunting had been, and it seems to have been
followed by an increase of population. This new turn of culture became notice-
able first in the Near East, the general region of southwestern Asia, and was
followed there within a millennium or two by town life, building in brick, per-
manent structures for worship, metallurgy; and, in another millennium, by
                               records (§ 286). We are now, around 3000 B.C.,
cities, rulers, states, writing, and

at    the beginning of history, in the narrowest sense of that word, as well as of
higher civilization, in the Near East; but Europe of the time was only beginning
to enter upon its first acquaintance with farming and the Neolithic. The regional
difference is almost certainly due to the fact that ancestral grains and animals
native to western Asia were first domesticated there. Here, accordingly, it was
that the population gradually             grew denser and that an advanced and partly
urbanized type of civilization developed, while the diffusion of farming outward
from this center was only commencing.
       It is characteristic     of this kind of culture change which advantageously af-
fects subsistence that its causality tends to be circular,^ or self-reinforcing, at least

for a time. More and surer subsistence leads both to population increase and to
specialization of skills and occupation. The specialization again makes for more
stock of wealth, more varied and larger consumer demands, more concentrated
productivity, and the chance for further population growth (see § 118).
       Circular causalities similar to that of the ancient Near East seem to have
been set going also in India and China and, more slowly, in Europe. Fairly
soon after agriculture reached these areas, it was followed by metallurgical and
other crafts, towns and states, and a population increase. In native America,
again, massed populations, cities, conquest empires, and metallurgy characterize
the areas between           Mexico and Peru where farming was probably oldest and
certainly most intensive. All these cases also are findings based on archaeological
evidence.
       However, these growth developments              —except the American one—were              all

interconnected in some measure, as the identity of                   some domesticated plants
and animals shows. They must therefore be construed as at least partly derived
one from another. Consequently they cannot in fairness be counted                         as inde-

pendent instances each reconfirming a law or generalization.
       In fact, it appears to be the surety of ample food supply that is the primary
factor in these circular situations, rather than             farming as such. This is shown
by the population of indigenous northern America, for which                        fairly specific

estimates are available. These are easily highest for ancient nuclear Mexico widi
its   intensive tillage: 7 to 8 people per square mile, or over 700 per unit of a him-

       ^ It   might well be called spiral in many cases, but the technical term is "circular."
198                                  CULTURE CHANGE                            § 1 63


dred square miles. North of the Mexican high-density center, the figures drop to
26 souls per hundred square miles in the farming areas, and still further to only
about 10 in the nonf arming areas as a total. So far we have corroboration. But
from the nonfarming tracts there can be segregated out a narrow strip along the
Pacific coast from Alaska to California, where the density was 65 per hundred
square miles, as against less than 6 in the rest of the hunting-gathering areas. In
this Pacific-coast strip the dependence was on sea and river fishing in the north,

on gathering of acorns and seeds in the south. Neither procedure is likely to cut
seriously into reproductive supply, whereas steady hunting on land does quickly
exhaust game, as soon as the number of hunters becomes considerable. So popu-
lation density was able to mount among the fortunate fishing and gathering
tribes along the Pacific coast until it was two and a half times greater than the

over-all among the farming tribes north of the Rio Grande. To be sure, most of
the eastern groups were not too assiduous in their farming, leaving it mainly to
their women, while the men hunted or warred. Also, farming had come to them
out of the tropics probably not very many centuries before, and it was still
unaccompanied by the cities, states, metallurgy, and calendars which had de-
veloped in Mexico along with, or soon after, agriculture. The relation of the
farming Indians of the eastern United States of a.d. 1492 to those of Mexico
was evidently quite like that of the Neolithic people of Europe around 2500
B.C. —                                                        —
      when population was certainly not yet dense there in comparison to the
populous and hterate kingdoms of contemporary Egypt and Mesopotamia. Left
undisturbed for another thousand or two thousand years, these eastern and cen-
tral United States farming Indians might have caught up; but when discovery

overtook them, they were clearly less populous than the Pacific-coast fishermen,
and probably not quite as far along toward a rich and diversified culture.
    There is no doubt that, given time enough, and on the average, farming
will lead to very    much heavier concentrations of population than are possible
under gathering, fishing, or hunting. Compare, again on the basis of loo-square-
mile units: native Australia, gathering, 5 inhabitants; but Italy 39,000, Japan
50,000,    Belgium 75,000 Kiangsi province 87,000, Java 90,000. In all of history
there has never been a genuine city in a nonfarming culture. All that the fore-
going citation on the northern Pacific-coast Indians proves is that the relation
is   not wholly automatic in favor of food-producers as against food-gatherers.
Nonfarming at its optimum may be accompanied by heavier population than
farming that is newly learned, indifferent, or inefficient.


                              164.    FASHION CHANGE

        A series of cultural activities seems ultimately rooted in the organic play
impulses, which are most developed in the young of mammals especially   —
among the carnivores and the primates (§ 15), These cultural activities include,
first   of all of course, organized games and sports of all kinds; in addition, such
§    164                              lASHION CHANGE                                         I99

expressions of play and relaxation and humor as may be more loosely standard-
ized in the folkways. Definitely to be included, as nourished at least partly from
the same organic root, are science and the arts and fashion        — the sciences and arts
perhaps more so in proportion as they are less colored by utilitarian purposes.
Obviously, this is not saying that the fine arts and pure science are just play: they
are serious endeavors and mostly hard work. Yet in their primary nature they
are neither individually nor socially utilitarian, but are ends in themselves, and
in a way pleasures in themselves, and in this respect they resemble play; just as
the impulses toward, say, curiosity, or rhythm, which go into science or music,
are also found in play. Science        and art may be conceived as cultural sublima-
tions, on the adult level, of hereditary physiological    impulses whose manifesta-
tions in childhood we unhesitatingly class as play.^
       Even more directly than science and art does the realm of fashion, with its
constant seeking for something new, exemplify cultural play activity.      While
fashion change may be sought with considerable eagerness,                 it   is   generally re-
garded with a certain lightness— we might literally say with a playful attitude.
Also like play, fashion is followed most actively when there is a surplus of food,
                        —
energy, and leisure wealth, in cultural terms. In connection with fashion we
think first of variability in dress styles (§ 138) ; but it is evident that there are
changing fashions in houses, furnishings, gardens, and automobiles. In fact, it is
not difficult to recognize some degree of changeable fashions in political and
religious beliefs and in institutions. The sciences, especially the newer ones, are
subject to waves of fashion. The layman, standing respectfully outside, is likely
to be unaware of this: the latest "edict" of science is to him the latest truth. Run-

of-the-mill scientists may share this opinion: they are like the dressmaker who
believes that this year's mode is at last the complete combination of beauty, com-
fort, and serviceability    —forgetting that   if it were, next year's   fashion would have

nothing left but to undo the ideal. The scholar with perspective of his subject
is   aware that ideas and methods come into vogue and pass out, in his field as in
others,    and that part of his business is to distinguish the evanescent fad from
permanent progress. In short, there is hardly a field of culture that is not subject
to some fashion variation.

       It is difficult to say   where fashion ends and where custom, or style in art,
begins, becausecustom and style also change. A possible differential criterion
would construe fashion as change for the sake of change, while style and custom
alter respectively under the pressure of inner developments or of outer                  circum-
stance. But the concepts are continuous, and sure distinction can be made only
at the ends of the scale.

      Not that any of these adult manifestations can be directly reduced to genetic and
       2

physiological causes.They always have cultural antecedents and their immediate determi-
nants are sociocultural behavior. It is only their ultimate basis that is organic and com
parable to play.
200                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                S   164

      When some detail of dress is given a new cut this year, and already begins
to be crowded out by a new cut or trimming next year, there is no         doubt that
we are wholly within the domain of fashion, in fact in its very froth. If, how-
ever, in the second year the new cut or color or embellishment comes back into
stronger favor and is more accentuated, and for the next three or five or ten years
it   becomes increasingly emphasized or exaggerated, and only then begins to be
soft-pedaled, until   it   fades away after another three or five or ten years   —have
we here a fashion growth or style growth? As a matter of fact, in § 137-138 we
have seen that there are features of dress fashion, such as proportions of sil-
houette or figure, which trend in one direction for fifty or more years, and are
as long in   moving back. Underneath the inconsistent year-to-year fluctuations,
or those of a few brief years, women's skirts, for instance, do steadily become
increasingly fuller or increasingly shorter for a half-century at a time.         Such
drifts in   duration are somewhat Hke the economist's "secular trends" which
underlie the fluctuations of the few-year business cycle.
       Such long-term fashion swings are also comparable to growth in art styles.
In painting, neoclassicism, romanticism, impressionism, expressionism, cubism,
have each lasted no longer, or less long, than some of these trends in Western
dress; and the degree of change effected by them is no greater. The total form
and effect of Occidental clothing in 1815, 1865, and 1915 seem about as different
as canvases painted in the classic manner in 1790 are different from the romantic
ones of 1840 and these from the impressionisms of 1890 and surrealisms of 1940.
The main difference is that we like to think of picture-painting and art exhibi-
tions as serious and dignified, and of clothes and fashion shows as frivolous. But
the behavior manifestations of the two sets of phenomena are         much alike, so
                                                     work are similar. One
that we are justified in assuming that the processes at
might even suspect the genuineness of the greater formal or avowed respect
accorded the painter's activity. Presumably for every ten people in our civiliza-
tion really exercised about a change in the manner of paintings there are a thou-
sand who participate personally in changes of dress style, and who would be
intensely perturbed if poverty or a sumptuary        law prohibited them from con-
forming.
      Landscape design or gardening is in an intermediate situation, as regards
the attitude of our culture. It possesses a certain dignity because it is an expres-
sion of luxury and requires at least a measure of prosperity as a threshold. The
tenement dweller contents himself with two or three geraniums in tin cans on
               The reasonably well-to-do, when the city is not too crowded,
the fire escape.
have a garden. The wealthy go in for landscaping a park. The same changes
however occur. In one century gardens are formal in the Italian or the French
manner. In another they are informal or rustic on the English model. Yet even
a small garden cannot conveniently be entirely made over each year like a dress,
so   annual fashions are lacking. But there are fluctuations that are measurable
in relatively brief periods. Rock gardens have a  vogue for a decade or so, and
§    165    VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL HREEDING                           201

then people become tired and pull them up. Pampas grass had                  its   day, but   is

now scarcely any longer to be found except on neglected or avowedly old-
fashioned properties.
       Dress-designing being an art, even though not a very highbrow one, has
style as well as fleeting fashions. It   is   distinctive in that everyone in the society

is   affected by it, and in that its products     wear out and must soon be replaced.
It is perhaps for   these reasons that there is in it a greater element of rapid minor
change than in the other arts, and that we are attuned to being highly aware
of these superficial changes. The processes at work in dress styles presumably
are not very different     from those in other art styles. A dress fashion is in its
nature datable from its appearance. But so are sculptures and paintings datable
to art historians   —within a century    if ancient, usually   within a decade if modern.
This of course not only implies change, but that the change                 is   more or less
regular in the sense of being steady.
       Why it should be in the intrinsic nature of style to change, ordinarily, is
a complex problem, which is still largely unsolved,            though at least part of the
answer lies in the domains of cultural pattern and its control or achievement by
virtuosity.   At any rate, the essential instability of styles strengthens the indica-
tion of the genetic relationship of the arts to physiological play impulses. Pure
fashion of course is an even more immediate manifestation.



    165.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREEDING

     Akin to fashion changes in dress and art are certain striking variations in
the purposes for which animals were presumably first domesticated and for
which they are still often bred by nonliterate or retarded societies. The range of
this variability from people to people through space is similar to the range of

fashion changes among one people in time. Also, many of the manifestations of
this variability    resemble fashion in being dependent on nonutilitarian moti-
vation.
       We look upon stock-raising as part of farming, as an industry or a useful
business. That it is such among ourselves is of course no proof that it began as
such, that the original motivation in the keeping of animals                was utilitarian.
There are in fact grave doubts that it could have begun that way. Too many
cultures disregard too many of the potential utiUties. All of southeastern Asia
uses no milk, butter, or cheese; also no wool, except for whole sheepskins in the
fleece.    In most of their early distribution horses were not ridden until long
after they    were driven. The pig was an unclean animal and was not eaten in
ancient Egypt, by the Hebrews, or in Islam. Practically             all   Negro tribes keep
      wherever the climate and the tsetse fly permit; but none make cheese,
cattle,

some churn butter for body ointment instead of consumption, and the majority
are so eager to build up their herds that they rarely eat beef.
202                                CULTURE CHANGE                                   § 165


        All in all, the utilization of domesticated animals in ways that seem rational
to us was so incomplete in ancient times, and is so incomplete today among back-
ward peoples, that Galton, Hahn, Laufcr, and others have stressed nonrational
          —
factors affective or sentimental considerations     —as dominant in early stages of
this activity. The motivations range from desire for pets, companionship, or

play to the needs of ritual and magic on the one hand and wealth symbolism
and prestige satisfaction on the other.
     Among the South American forest Indians, monkeys, parrots, and almost
all and any kinds of small animals were freely kept as pets, though there were

no species domesticated for utility, and in parts of Brazil even dogs were lacking.
In some parts of native California dogs were valued for deer-hunting; in others,
they were kept chiefly to be eaten; in still others, they were merely tolerated and
allowed to fend for themselves. In another California region, we have already
seen (§ 159) that dogs were rare, imported as articles of luxury, pampered, and
watched over. This regional Californian diversity illustrates neatly the vagaries
of which primitive culture is capable    —
                                      the workings in it of fashion and fad by
locale instead of by period, we might say    —and how motives of      utility,   of affec-
tion or display, or of indifference, can replace each other.
        Negro kings have been known to keep whole packs or menageries of the
greater    game animals. The Romans imported them largely for slaughter in
their circus games. The wild elephant has long been tamed in India and Farther
India for work and transport, but still more for war and royal show. In Burma
and Siam albino specimens had almost sacred status as embodiments of supreme
kingship. Farther India, by the way, is another area in which pets are in favor
monkeys and young gibbons. On the contrary, in this its presumptive original
home, the common fowl is little esteemed for its eggs, which are few, or for its
meat, which is tough; but since two thousand years ago its thighbones have been
in demand for divination. Bristles are stuck into the blood-vessel foramina of
these bones and the directions of protrusion throw light on the issue in question.
In the pagan parts of Indonesia, chickens are in primary demand for ritual sacri-
fice,   including divination from their bile sacs; in the Islamic and Christian
areas, the pitting of the cocks in fights overshadows other uses. Indonesia and the

adjacent southeast corner of Asia, so far as it is still pagan, perhaps contain the
principal contemporary survivals of the once much more widespread identifica-
tion of ritual sacrifice to the gods with meat-eating by the worshipers     —an asso-
ciation once in force as far west as the Mediterranean (§ 128, 192). It would be
too much to assert that people first bred cattle and pigs in order that they might
sacrifice them. Nevertheless, over a large part of the domesticating area an early

double custom grew up of eating ordinarily only such tame flesh as had been
dedicated to the gods, and of consuming every offering so dedicated. The civi-
lized nations of today might still be following this custom if it had not been dis-
placed by Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism.
   1   66                             LABILE SOCIAL STRUCTURES                               2O3

            It is perhaps the fact that kept animals    muhiply which has led to their being
prized as reserves of              weahh   — not only among pastorals who own       little   else,

but among settled farmers, as among the Greeks and Romans. The word "pe-
cuniary" is from the Latin pecus, cattle, just as "monetary," "money," derives
from Moneta, an epithet of Juno, in whose temple the Romans happened to
mint their coinage; the two terms illustrate the passage from a livestock to a
money economy. Negro East and South Africa has not yet effected this transi-
tion. In favor of cattle as wealth is the fact that they are visible and conspicuous

and lend themselves to prestige display and gifts. Thus it is that their social val-
uation           is   definitely greater than their actual subsistence utility,   among many
Negroes.
            With the Ruwala of Arabia, mares have acquired a similar prestige posi-
tion, while the camel and its milk   what these Beduin (§ 120) live by. Except
                                               is

                                                             and would perish
for occasional raiding, horses are quite useless in the desert,
if turned loose. But they are carried along with bnrley that has to be bought

from alien farmers and which they ihare with the household. In dry times, water
for them has to be carried in by camels. Their pedigrees are kept. They are an
untold worry and trouble; yet a single mare is valued at perhaps twenty riding
dromedaries, and many a man owns only a fractional share in one. Once more,
this Ruwala situation is obviously an excrescence of development, rather than

a condition typical of the origin of stock-raising.            But with the attached a£fects
and motivations so varied now, they are unlikely to have been solidly and uni-
formly utihtarian in the beginning.
        Thus it is clear that men do not live by meat and bread only. They breed
animals for their flesh and milk and hide and wool and traction, but they also
breed them for religion and sport and social climbing and companionship and
show. And from people to people, and from time to time, these ends intertwine
and replace one another in almost endless recombinations: the changes are lit-
erally the play of culture.            We can understand even the most alien of the atti-
tudes, but we cannot explain               more than a part of them from utilitarian need.
The livelihood and profit motives have no doubt mainly sustained the con-
tinuity of stockbreeding through history. But its many other associations and
motivations lend the greater interest to the changeable activity, as we view it
in world-wide retrospect.^



                                166. LABILE SOCIAL       STRUCTURES

        When we pass from dress and animals and arts to institutions, we en-
counter a flood of impermanences and variabilities which suggest that we may
still       be   at times    within the sphere of the play-derived, though unconscious,

      And of course many of the innovations and shifts in respect to domestic animals can
        *

also be included among the play inventions of § 1^8.
204                               CULTURE CHANGE                               S 1 66


activity of culture.   Among primitives, such kbility or instability is most often
extreme in social structure; among lettered peoples, in political forms.
       Consider for instance the situation among the several Brazilian tribes of
the Ge family. Among the Canella or Ramkokamekra there are four separate
and crosscutting moiety organizations    —a moiety being a half of a society    for-
mally set off against the other half for whatever reason or purpose. This is very
much as if among ourselves there were a compulsory segregation of the popu-
lation into first   Democrats and Republicans;    next, Catholics   and Protestants;
third, people  born in odd-numbered and even-numbered years; and finally,
partisans of the American and National baseball leagues, with distribution so
regulated that Democrats and Republicans would be about equally distributed
between Catholics and Protestants, and similarly all down the line, so that the
membership of one complementary pair of moieties would never coincide with
the membership of another pair, but would crosscut all the other moieties as
much as possible. The first pair of Canella moieties is matriUneal and matri-
local   —follows the mother in descent and residence—and regulates marriage
exogamously. The second pair of moieties is concerned with racing and hunting
during the rainy season. It is not concerned with marriage but is totemic     —that
is,   certain animals or natural objects are symbolically representative of each
moiety. And membership in the moiety is determined by names given by older
individuals, theoretically the cross-uncle or mother's brother for boys, the cross-
aunt or father's sister for girls. The totemism of this second pair of moieties is
conceptually extended over all nature. The third set of moieties consists of two
pairs of age classes, each age class comprising all males jointly initiated within
a given period of years. This third pair of moieties also functions in competitive
sports, but in the dry instead of the rainy season. The fourth set of moieties has
membership again based on bestowed names, but the names this time are the
property not of uncles or aunts, but of three groups or subdivisions within each
of the moieties, and of two clubs or four societies. The groups       own assembly
houses that occupy prescribed situations in the circle in which the village        is

built; and they and the clubs function ceremonially in connection with men's
initiations. So far the Canella tribe.

     Among the linguistically related Apinaye, there is only one set of moieties,
matrihneal and matrilocal, whose houses are locaUzed in the village circle, but
who are not at all concerned with marriage. They compete in sports and are
concerned with ceremonial, and are characterized by possession of a series of
personal names bestowed by uncles and aunts. Marriage is separately regulated
by four unlocahzed f{iye or "sides," where A marries B, B with C, C with D,
D  with A, for men; but for women, the rule is the reverse, or really, comple-
mentarily the same,    A marrying D, and so on. These "sides" are not clans, be-
cause clan descent is the same for boys and girls but boys belong to the "side"
of their father, girls to that of their mother. Moreover, the four "sides" group
into two implicit or unavowed intermarrying moieties, one consisting of      A and
§    l66                        LABILE SOCIAL STRUCTURES                           2O5

C, the other of B and D; for A and C both marry with B and D, but never with
each other.
       Still   another   Ge tribe, the Shcrcnte, have exogamous moieties that are
patrilineal and patrilocal and are divided into six clans localized in the village
circle, which seem to correspond partly, but only partly, to the six subdivisions

of the Canella ceremonial moieties.
       Still   another tribe, the Kaingang, associate with their exogamous moieties
the totemic division of nature that the Canella associate with their nonexoga-
mous rainy-season moieties.
       It is   evident that a long array of social forms have been luxuriantly devel-
oped by these Ge tribes: the moiety, moiety subdivisions, their localization within
the circular village, their seasonal functioning, totemism, exogamy, unilateral
descent (both patrilineal and matrilineal, or even both simultaneously accord-
ing to the sex of children), group ownership of names, bestowal of names by
individuals of the uncle or aunt relation, competitive sports, ceremonial asso-
ciations, and      grouping of initiates into age classes. Underlying all these forms
is   the principle of grouping of persons, whether dual or multiple. However, the
very luxuriance of kinds of groups has led to a variety of ways of combining
them, and probably to the constant devising of new kinds of groups, which
made possible still further combinations, or transfer of functions from one set
of groups to another. It is difficult to review the structures of these Brazilian
tribal societies    without a strong impression of their instability: of remodeling,
innovation, and experimentation having been active.
       Inasmuch as the four tribes speak varieties of the same Ge language, they
must be connected in their histories. The diversity of their modern social organi-
zation must accordingly represent changes after a period when they were more
alike. They still share conspicuous remnants of an indubitably         common original
pattern, but each has enormously altered or rearranged this. Evidently, once the
interests of a culture      become weighted in the direction of social structure, the
culture may make the most unexpected combinations and even inventions of
social forms.

       In scattered parts of native America there was practiced the custom of the
ant ordeal. This was a ritual discipline or       test of fortitude,   and consisted of
laying the victim or novice on a hill of biting ants. The act itself was uniform;
its   setting, context, and motivations were quite diverse. Thus, the South Ameri-

can Rucuyenne applied the ordeal to boys undergoing their ceremonial initia-
tion. So did some of the Tupi tribes south of the      Amazon— as did the far-away
Luiseno in California. But back in South America, the Saliva administered the
ant ordeal to their new chiefs on assuming office. The Arawak of Guiana used
it    in mourning; other Guiana tribes, in hunting ritual. It is evident that a dis-
tinctive and rather invariable unit of practice, the ant ordeal itself,      must have
a history of quite varied associations     — has been bandied about from one
                                             it                                     re-
206                                     CULTURE CHANGE                                    § 1 66


ligious       ceremony to another almost like a shuttlecock. Again we see lability
prevalent: looseness of organization rather than stability, fixity, or permanence.
      However, elaborate forms need not appear simply because a                     society      is

primitive. The Eskimo, the Great Basin Shoshoneans, and many other societies
are instances of simple structures free from formal organizational features. The
factors at work in producing these relatively unstructured societies may be con-
nected with subsistence difficulties; they need not be. Extremely interesting is
the discovery among the same clanless Shoshone of the custom of pseudo-cross-
cousin marriage,* in semblance of the cross-cousin marriage favored by so many
other peoples: the favored Shoshone mates are stepcousins, no blood kin at all.
This was certainly a strange practice              to   think up. Relatives continue to be
avoided, but imitation relatives are sought as mates.             Who could deny inven-
                             °
tiveness to primitives ?
      In fact, the ingenuity and imaginativeness of the social structure of much
of primitive life is the essential moral of such facts. Many of the institutions are
true luxury products. They almost certainly serve some function; but it may be
a minor one, while major ends are left formally unprovided for.                  A great deal
of the picture suggests the play of earnest children, or the inventive vagaries
of fashion. This in turn strongly suggests the high instability of many of these
social constructs.      This     instability   cannot ordinarily be absolutely proved, be-
cause our historical knowledge of primitives rarely has much depth; but it is
indicated by the totality of the data.
      PoUtical organization, on the contrary, is something that primitives have in
general not achieved to any notable degree.                 When unlettered peoples have
achieved it, as in Africa and Peru, we tend to exclude them from our concept
of what is primitive. By complement, high civilizations have throughout history
regularly been accompanied by considerable degrees of political organization.
The causes of the difference are probably complex. But weakness of techno-
logical controls and therefore of economic resources among primitives may be
suspected as an important factor. If so, a generic nexus of technological develop-
ment through economics with political organization can be inferred. Primitives
being weak in the former, they remained weak in the latter. Instead, they threw
their cultural interests         and energies into the forms of social structure, into the
institutions concerned with the nearer interpersonal relations.
      In the grand vista of cultural growth, accordingly, technological and politi-
cal developments, which characterize the successfully more complex civilizations,

      * Cross-cousins are the children of brother and sister —whose   sex differs or "crosses"
as contrasted     with parallel cousins, who are the children of two brothers or two      sisters.

We do not make this disdncdon in our culture, either in law, inheritance, or reckoning
of kin    —
        in fact are usually unaware that it can be made. But among many nonliterates, and
even in India and China, the distinction is important. Cross-cousins are often favored as
spouses where parallel cousins are forbidden.
      ^   Some African cases of luxuriation are mendoned in § 312: coexistence of patrilineal
and matrilineal reckoning.
^   '67                          AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANCE                             207
are secondaryand late products reared upon social forms or devices centering
immcmorially around kinship. Some measure of these kinship forms persists
into higher civilization because kinship       is   biologically inescapable   and perhaps
equally inescapable psychologically. But the kinship structures of complex civili-
zations are often reduced, almost always divested of excrescences and luxuriances
of pattern; they have        become humble, simple, subserving real ends.          We no
longer practice pseudo-cross-cousin marriage nor descend from our mothers into
moieties in which we receive names from our uncles. Instead, we buy automo-
biles on the installment plan       and elect officials to police and tax us. The inven-
tiveness and instability so evident in the social        forms of primitive societies arc
largely transferred in higher civihzation to the technological, economic,             and
political fields.



                          167.   AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE
      Is   it   right for a man to marry his stepdaughter?     Here again there is great
variabihty between cultures and at times considerable change within cultures.
Christian countries in which established religion strongly influences the law of
the land have generally barred the practice. Sometimes the prohibition has per-
                                                For the forty-eight American
sisted after disestablishment of the state church.

states the situation in 1940 isshown in the diagrammatic map. Figure 21. A
century or so ago probably all American communities ruled such marriage irre-




            PERMITTED
        PROHIBITED
     S) QUALIFIED
                   LEGALITY OF MARRIAGE WITH A STEPDAUGHTER IN THE
                                    48 UNITED STATES
208                                  CULTURE CHANCE                                     S 1 67


ligious, immoral, and illegal. Most of the older and relatively conservative East-
ern and Southern states still forbid it. But times have changed and twenty-six
of the forty-eight states        no longer prohibit the       practice   —which means   it   is

legally tolerated.Yet two of these salve an uneasy social conscience by going
out of their way to specify extramarital relations with a stepdaughter as punish-
able.

      Of 167 tribal and subtribal groups of Indians investigated between Van-
couver Island and the Rio Grande, three-fourths definitely frowned upon step-
daughter marriage and presumably prevented it. Some 10 per cent disapproved,
but without attempting to do anything about occasional violations. About an-
other 10 per cent of the tribes disliked but tolerated the idea; in other words,
were two-minded about it. Finally, perhaps 5 or 6 per cent of the groups ad-
mitted stepdaughter marriage as a recognized form; that is, gave it institutional
sanction.    The custom is perhaps most common among the matrilineal and
matrilocal Navaho. If a man marries a separated or widowed woman who has
a small daughter,     he often, with her mother's consent, adds the girl as wife
when she grows up. Each woman has less work, and yet the output of the
menage is greater. The total tribal distribution of the custom, shown in Figure
22, is almost randomly scattering, with only slight tendencies toward areal segre-
gation. Highly random local distributions of this scattered type can usually be
interpreted as the result of conflicting influences,  and hence as indicating in-
stability. While   some tribes consistently banned the practice, others backed and
filled and kept changing their rules.

      Why this variability and change       ?   It seems to   spring from a conviction that
isone of very few major premises common to all cultures: that one does not
marry close kin. But variation begins with the definition of who are close kin.
Some peoples bar even third cousins as wives; others permit aunts and half-
sisters.   Some consider all clan mates kin, whether they are or not. Others not
only allow but favor the marriage of first cross-cousins, or again squeamishly
think they should be second cousins. Some religions, like the Greek Orthodox
Christianity,   and until recently the Church of England, class affinals by mar-
riage   —such as sisters-in-law—as kindred, though they are not blood relatives
at all. This is reasonable       enough because of the normally close association and
bonds with near affinal relatives; but it is scarcely logical, if incest has anything
to do with blood. It is of a kind with the Roman Catholic prohibition of mar-

riage with a goddaughter,     toward whom the relation is not even affinal, but
spiritual only.   On the other hand, if the incest prohibition refers to blood kin-
ship, permissibility of stepdaughter         marriage    is   logical   enough. Nevertheless,
many societies consider it unfit and shocking. Even where the practice is tol-
erated, there is often considerable individual repugnance to it; whereas in a few
polygynous groups      it   is   institutionalized.   The issue is evidently the sort of
problem one can argue and counterargue forever. In the end, it is settled by
some feeling or afTect that one has or does not have. This feeling may be quite
U67                           AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE                              209
Strong, or it may be ambivalent. Being a feeling about ideas, it gets involved in
logic. Nevertheless, the ultimate determination of the issue is aflectivc, not intel-

lectually realistic; and the motivation of affects is notoriously capricious. Culture

features of this type are therefore likely to remain open problems, to which the
answer keeps varying. Only when the point gets caught up              in   some   larger
organized system of feelings and ideas with big momentum is a consistent long-
term answer expectable.
       It is   not to be assumed that strong affect necessarily produces stability and
persistence.      One can feel vigorously and yet have his feelings change. This is




riG.     12..     STEPDAUGHTER MARRIAGE IN WESTERN INDIAN TRIBES
210                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                  § 167

true also of cultures. Disposal of the dead is a case in point.        Human cultures
have devised a great variety of methods      :   burial, cremation, water burial, setting

away in vaults or canoes or houses, scaffold burial, exposure or simple abandon-
ment, cremation with eating or drinking of the ashes by the relatives, temporary
                                                                      —
inhumation with either reburial or preservation of the bones not to mention
previous mummification, dismemberment, and other related practices. Now
while some societies have adhered for long periods to one basic method of dis-
posing of their dead   —ancient Egypt to mummification and mediaeval Europe
to                                 —others have been changeable. We are our-
     churchyard burial, for instance
selves in the midst of a drift      toward cremation. This may die out again, or
cremation may come to replace burial. Many primitives have apparently changed
often, to judge from the variety of practices found in adjacent groups
                                                                                —"scatter
distributions" again   —   in, say, Africa, or almost   any other continent.
      Here again affect seems to be involved. Death obviously releases immensely
powerful emotions; and a funeral, as the final act of a group toward an indi-
vidual,   comes to participate in this emotion. Once a method has become                a
preference or a custom, there is likely to be a strong affect attached to it. Witness
the vehement feeling of many people among ourselves in regard to cremation
versus burial, even while a progressive change is going on in the community as
a whole. Evidently the affect can attach to something new and remain as strong
as before.   There are also always likely to be parts of the population who are
two-minded, and others who are indifferent on that particular point            —^perhaps
precisely because they feel more strongly about other matters.
      In short, that people feel strongly in connection with a custom does not
per se mean either that they will adhere to it with persistence or that they are
about ready to abandon it. That a cultural practice is invested with emotion is
an important thing about it, but is not decisive for its stability or lability. What
decides between continuance or change seems to be whether or not a practice has
become involved in an organized system of ideas and sentiments how much it:




is interwoven   with other items of culture into a larger pattern. If it is thus con-
nected, even though the rooting be secondary and late, it has good expectations
of persisting, since large systems tend to endure. But a trait that is only loosely
connected and essentially free-floating can be superseded very quickly         — in which
case its affect may simply pass on to the new custom. Mediaeval Christianity
                                                                          —
was such a large, well-integrated system of ideas and sentiments with it both
stepdaughter marriage and cremation would have conflicted. Neither innova-
tion is therefore likely to make much headway in cultures in which Catholicism
remains the controlling force. Calvinism and Puritanism would also certainly
have felt both practices to be out of fit with their systems or points of view, and
would have condemned them. In consciously secularized countries, on the con-
trary, and in many primitive cultures, there is no organized sentiment system

with which these innovations would conflict. In such societies, accordingly, the
practices may easily become established, only to be easily superseded again.
S   l68                  CULTURAL fatigue: taboo in HAWAII                      211


               1   68.   CULTURAL fatigue: taboo in HAWAII
      In 1819 the Polynesians of Hawaii at one stroke abolished their rchgion.
This was five months before the first missionary landed on the islands, and was
therefore a voluntary act. To be sure, Captain Cook had discovered the islands
some forty years before and had been followed by a number of explorers, traders,
and whalers. Through these the Hawaiians had learned of the existence of
Christian beliefs. But it is unlikely that they understood them at all well. They
                                                                         —
had however seen Europeans repeatedly violate religious prohibitions taboos
without being even punished by the native gods, and that must have shaken
Hawaiian faith. Among the natives, this taboo system had grown very power-
ful and no doubt was sometimes felt as onerous. Women might not eat certain

foods, such as bananas and coconuts. It was absolutely irreligious and shocking
for men and   women to eat together. The king let himself be carried over private
lands because contact with his divine body would make the land taboo and un-
touchable by its owner. There were religious festivals that the population cele-
brated by remaining inactive indoors, so as not to break the taboo. The system
was heavily loaded in favor of royalty,      aristocracy,   and priesthood, but ap-
parently was coming to be felt as irritatingly restrictive by these classes also.
      Some years after Cook's discovery, an able chief began to rise to power and
finally fought his way to undisputed rule over the entire island group. This was

the famous Kamehameha I. He died without having departed             from the faith
                                                  Kamehameha II, was a
of his fathers or altered its regulations. His successor,
voung and easy-going man. The group that surrounded and swayed him now
decided to do away with the taboo system. This group included his chief formal
adviser or prime minister; his mother;      and another widow of the preceding
king, named Kaahumanu. The latter was a bold and ambitious person and per-
haps the chief mover in the conspiracy. As a woman she unquestionably had
much to gain by abolition of the taboo. Strangely enough, however, the high
priest of the islands was also active in the coterie, and in fact subsequently took
the lead in extending the      movement from mere abolition of the taboo to the
overthrow of the gods whose representative he was. This man seemingly had
everything to lose by the change, and it is difficult to imagine what he could have
had to gain. It is known that he did not profess to be a convert to the Christian-
ity which was in the offing. He evidently represented, therefore, an element in

the population that was psychologically ready for a breach with established re-
ligion, from internal reasons. Whether such a frame of mind could have devel-

oped before any Caucasian contacts, among Hawaiians who were beneficiaries
of the existing system, seems doubtful. The old Hawaiians, knowing of no re-
ligion but their own, would presumably have found it difficult to imagine or
invent any radically different form of worship. Nevertheless it is also hard to un-
derstand the high priest's motivation, unless he, presumably with many others,
212                              CULTURE CHANGE                               § i68


was tired of the established religious order to a degree that made him ready even
for a switch to something unknown. In addition, the whites enjoyed prestige for
their guns, steel tools, and big ships; and, by extension, their only vaguely known
religion was probably accounted superior.
     It was finally arranged by the conspiring royal entourage that the taboo

should be publicly broken at a great festival. This would amount to a religious
revolution from the throne. As the hour neared, the young king became increas-
ingly uneasy; but he was coaxed and steered to the final act. After the royal
ladies had first eaten forbidden foods in sight of the gathering, the king came
over and ate with them. At first incredulous, the multitude finally reahzed what
                                                                     —
had happened. Shouts went up, and were carried over the island "The taboo
is broken!" The high priest himself mutilated the images of the gods and set

fire to the temple. This action was imitated everywhere in a sort of frenzy. It is

difficult to say now what the real reaction of the population at large was. They

were certainly shocked and excited. Many of them must have been pleased. Some
surely felt outraged, and others were more stirred than participant. The king
was himself divine, so that the act must have resembled a sudden voluntary
abdication by the gods themselves. However, the king's power was also absolute,
and it is therefore likely that the mass of commoners received the event with
some docihty.
     The only overt opposition came from high quarters. Kekuaokalani, a
nephew of the late great king and next in hne of succession to the high priest-
hood, when he could believe his senses rescued one of the god figures and strode
with it from the assembly. He rallied a following of the pious and raised a
revolt. His adherents were numerous and determined. It is evident that the

innovation was not unanimously approved of by the population. Before long it
came to battle. Kekuaokalani was defeated, his following scattered, and the con-
servative protest came to an end. However, the fight is said to have been de-
cided by the Christian-made firearms which the king's side was able to muster.
A few months later the first missionaries landed, were received with open arms
and royal favor, and Hawaii as a whole rapidly became Christian.
     There can be Uttle doubt that we have here, in part, a culture change due
to new contacts. It is also evident that at least some of the reformers were
actuated by motives of personal advantage or convenience, though this does not
apply to all of them. But the main factor seems to have been a kind of social
staleness; the   Hawaiians had become disillusioned, and tired of their religion.
To this extent the incident is illustrative of what may be called cultural fatigue.
It is no doubt an extreme case of such an attitude. But it is probably not wholly

aberrant, and reactions of similar though milder type may be occasional factors
in cultural change.    French defeatism in 1940 was perhaps an example. Nor
would it be difficult to make out a case for social fatigue or staleness having been
operative in bringing on the French Revolution, in addition to exasperation over
abuses and cultural lag and the ferment of new ideologies. The attitude of the
5   169                  CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION                                   213
American people toward the depression of 1929 after it became profound sug-
gests the presence of a considerable factor of the sort, with the New Deal as a
reaction to it. Once an attitude of the kind develops sufficient strength, novelty
as such may come to seem a virtue and a boon.

      One    other consideration       is   worth mentioning. The overthrow of the
Hawaiian religion could not have been effected so rapidly and thoroughly if the
impetus had not come from a strong and respected government. Without this,
there would presumably have been prolonged civil war, and only a gradual
giving-way of the old order to the new. The Japanese Emperor's sudden and
successful renunciation of divinity in 1945 is a somewhat parallel case. In this
respect both events resemble those alterations or reforms of calendrical, writing,
and other pattern systems produced either by grand revolutions or by complete
autocracies, usually in their first flush of power, as discussed in § 170 below.



                 169.    CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION
    Organized religion has a way of being influential in the overturn and the
reconstruction of major civilizations. It works first toward cultural change and
then for conservation. Especially is this true of religions which set out to over-
run the world because they alone are "true" and all other faiths and cults false
and likely to taint even secular activities with which they have become asso-
ciated.   Most primitive and national religions have also started out, naturally
enough, with the assumption of their own verity and importance; but alongside
this they have had naive tolerance of other faiths as being also more or less true,

though of course not quite as good and true, or at any rate not as appropriate for
their own nationals.
      If one were    asked to specify the most important single characteristic distin-
guishing Ancient Mediterranean or Classical from our own Occidental civiliza-
tion—the culture of the Greeks and Romans from that of mediaeval and modern
                     —
Western nations it would almost certainly be Christianity. Our civilization is
patently derived, in large measure even descended, from the Graeco-Roman; but
it contains   very few specific carry-overs from the preceding pagan cults or faiths.
When the fourth-century Roman emperors, like Constantine and Theodosius,
turned Christian, the end of the old order, of the former world view, was in
sight. Within a century we have Rome "falling," and the continuous stream of

history is renamed "mediaeval" instead of "ancient," as a symbol of the trans-
formation.® The mythology and worship of the Greeks had of course been all
intertwined with their literature, art, philosophy, learning, and even manners.
Consequently Christianity in its three centuries of uphill fight tended to become
hostile, suspicious,     grudging, or at best indifferent toward Greek and Roman
      ^ In fact, until not so very long ago, historical convention   had "ancient" history ending
not in A.D. 476 but in 325 with Constantine, the founding of Constantinople, and the Church
Council of Nicaea.
214                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                    S 1^9


achievements in these activities. So it was natural for the Dark Ages to follow
the final supremacy of Christianity; and it was nearly a thousand years before
Christian Europe could even begin to rival the pagan Mediterranean world in
urbanity, knowledge, intellectual penetration, aesthetic performance,              and the
graces of life   —including bodily cleanliness. This      is   not saying that Christianity
was responsible for the long recession. These big historical situations are not ad-
judicated so simply as that. Just as soundly could one contend that Classical
civilization had exhausted    its patterns, was dying away within an empty shell,

and that Christianity moved in to fill the void, but required time to grow a
whole new civilization. However, this is sure: Irrespective of whether it was
more largely cause or effect, Christianity was the pre-eminent point of crystal-
lization for the civilization that superseded the Graeco-Roman one.
     A very similar influence in change of civilization could be made out for
Buddhism and Mohammedanism, the two chief competitors of Christianity as
"world religions." The three share the following characteristics
      1.   They are world religions not because they have encompassed the earth,
but because they aim to encompass it, to be world-wide and supernational, in
distinction from ethnic or tribal religions.
      2.Each is attached to a transcending personality, from whom the name for
the faith  is taken. The usual view is that these personalities as individuals

founded and made their religions. It is however also possible to see the founders
more largely as symbols necessary to this type of religion. Certainly more of the
total content of Christianity     —
                                as distinct from its "essence," which is in its very
                                   —
nature attached to his person was evolved or contributed by his followers and
successors more than by Jesus himself. St. Paul alone is sometimes said to have
added as much as Jesus did. The same is unquestionably true of Buddhism, and
quite possibly of Mohammedanism. Moreover, the fact that all three religions
originated in southwestern Asia within little more than a thousand years, and
followed outwardly parallel courses, suggests a pattern, and that something Hke
them was "in the air"     —that   is, that   the cultural set of the region and times was
pointing that way.
      3.   AU three religions are exclusive, in holding their truth to be incompatible
with any other, so that cobelief and coworship in another faith are impossible
(§ 132).    This doctrine seems to have been first worked out in human history
by the Jews as a gradual and hard-won attainment during that part of their his-
tory represented by the Old Testament, between 800 and 400 b.c. From Judaism
the attitude worked over into Christianity and Islam.             Buddhism has been the
least intransigeant of the three in this respect. It coexists in China with the state

religion or Confucianism,      and in Japan it even worked out certain accommo-
dations with the native Shinto.
      4.   All three religions, and speaking broadly only these three, have been
actively missionizing.
S 169                         CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION                               215
       Each of the three world religions developed an ecclesiastical organization
          5.

or church, which has been a potent factor in maintaining the religion and its
gains. Culturally, the ideologies have probably had a much more profound effect
than the churches; but the influence of the latter toward a firm anchorage
through temporal fluctuations, and even within the developments of the mun-
dane aspects of civilization, cannot be overestimated. Ethnic or national religions
often had temples, but generally no church as a unifying organization.
       6.      Side by side with the features of world-wide aim, exclusiveness, and an
authoritative church, there developed                 what may be called universal or world
languages. In these were expressed the sacred texts of each faith; and each tongue
became also the approved and classical medium of thought, learning, and often
literature in a self-sufficient and largely self-contained sphere or "world" (§ 102).
These languages are Greek for Eastern and Latin for Western Christianity
when northwestern Europe revolted against Catholicism in the Reformation,
one of its most significant acts was the immediate substitution of vernaculars
for Latin; Arabic          — rigidly adhered to in ritual—for Mohammedanism; Sanskrit
for the more numerous northern branch or Greater Vehicle of Buddhism, with
Pali for the southern or Lesser Vehicle of Farther India. With each of these is
associated also a distinctive alphabet.               The only other language that functions
today in its larger sphere in a way reminiscent of these "world" languages is
Chinese, whose writing is nonalphabetic.
       The foregoing is a summary formulation of an enormously large situation,
whose exactly authentic description would require endless qualifications and
requalifications. In particular, consideration would have to be given to certain
crucial border-line cases, especially in the Iranian and Chinese religions; ^ since
with enough transitions, the "world" type of religion just depicted would tend
to dissolve away. Provisionally, however, the type seems to stand. And so far as

it   does, the influence of religion on total culture, in the direction of both forma-
tive change and fixation, is evident. The world of Islam has always been recog-

nized as a separate sphere of cultural influence. European civilization, as we have
seen, breaks primarily into a pre-Christian                and a Christian phase. The culture
of India changes similarly  from the pre-Buddhist to the Buddhist to the post-
Buddhist period. Even in China and Japan, where old native elements have
persisted with unusual continuity and force, the greatest alteration perhaps is
that between the early, purely native form of the culture and the later one with

      "
          Iran had Zoroaster, probably a     little   earlier   than Buddha; and China, Confucius,
Buddha's contemporary. Zoroastrianism, also called Mazdaism or the Avestan or Parsi re-
ligion, differs from the big three in being nearly extinct, and in having never effectively
established      its                                    some of its minor and later off-
                       supernational church and language. But
shoots or divergences, like Manichaeism, and perhaps Mithraism, have tried to compete
with the great religions by rivaling them in organization and missionary activity. Con-
fucianism has a minimum of religious content and is a state cult instead of an ecclesiastical
church; else it too might have grown into a world religion.
2l6                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                       § 169


its   Buddhistic absorptions. It is in the fundamental reorientation of civilization,
in redirective change, that the great religions are outstandingly influential.



                          170.    CHANGE BY REVOLUTION
        Change by revolution may be construed as change suddenly precipitated,
with more or less violence, affecting a considerable total portion of a culture,
and due to an accumulation of arrears, or lag, in progressive change. Generally,
it isone or two fields or departments of culture that do the lagging. Thus the
lag was primarily economic in the French Revolution, in religion in the Refor-
mation and Cromwellian civil wars, in politics and religion in England of 1688,
and was due to war distress on top of economic disintegration in Russia of 191 8.
Once the revolution breaks through, however, other and neutral areas of the
culture are flooded too, sometimes with most inconsistent results, both intrinsi-
cally and as regards permanence       :   the metric system is instituted, religion abol-
ished, Lavoisier executed.       This extension of area of overturn was practically
lacking in the American Revolution, which is thereby characterized as atypical
of revolutions. In fact its main immediate achievement was the formal and com-
pleteacknowledgment of a political independence that had been partial but
unacknowledged before. This in turn was followed by the union of the colonies,
and the "invention" of a written federal constitution (§153). But these latter
were constructive rather than revolutionary acts.
        Several other features are characteristic of revolutions. One is that change
tends to be excessive, and is then partly given up again in early reaction. After
the revolution the French kept their metric system, but gave up their irrelevant
new calendar and the Goddess of Reason. These represented zeal for change in
the abstract, but there was no real call for them and they provoked resistance
and made for inconvenience. One of the first resolves of the Russian Revolution
was to abolish the death penalty! Then three letters of the alphabet were
dropped. This reform was not in the Bolshevik program, but it was a simplifi-
cation    and it has stuck. It is familiar history how the pure socialist doctrine
began to be increasingly modified in Russia after about 1935 with property own-
ership, differential salaries,    piecework premiums,      fees for schooling,        and the
like creeping back.    Free divorce and legal abortion were instituted early, but
were discontinued after the peak of change was passed. At first there was a
strong sense that all the older national literature, music, and         art,       except that
produced by avowed revolutionaries, must be capitalistically tainted the revolu-
                                                                               :




tion would therefore produce its own proletarian higher culture. This attitude
tended to persist while Bolshevik Russia felt itself an outlaw among nations and
none too sure of internal solidarity. But once the revolution seemed a perma-
nent success, and especially after the Germans had been stopped in their tracks
and it had real allies among the Great Powers, Russian nationalism rearose
§    170                         CHANGE BY REVOLUTION                            1VJ
Stronger than ever, and great Czarist poets, novelists, and composers      were pro-
claimed great once more. All these are type phenomena of what may be called
the ovcrswing and backswing of revolutionary change.
       It is   necessary to distinguish between the cultural and the social change of
revolutions,      though these tend to come intertwined. In every successful revo-
lution there is not only an improved reformulation of rules, but in addition cer-
tain people get property, power, or privilege that others   had before. This last
is what causes most of the heartburnings. It whets the appetite of many a
changer, and makes prospective changees bitterly resist reforms that they might
accept as fair and desirable if they could be made other than out of their pockets
and status. Protestantism arose as a religious revolution from the ranks, with an
ideology of return to primitive Christianity, substitution of conscience and
Biblical text for hierarchical authority, and the like. However, most of the con-
verted rulers, in and out of Germany, were surely influenced also by the op-
portunity to confiscate extensive church properties and to strengthen royal
power. And no less the peasants in Germany: the Reformation's change of ec-
clesiastical authority suggested to them the hope of politicoeconomic changes in

their favor. They rose and were put down with bloody massacres       —not as Protes-
                                   At least one group of Anabaptist sectarians
tants but as social revolutionaries.
extended their renewed primitive Christianity to include communization of
property and redistribution of wives. It need hardly be added that this move-
ment was premature and its leaders short-lived. Here we have both forces at
work: personal advantage of new classes of individuals, and revolution spread-
ing to additional aspects or sides of the culture.
       There is a class of changes tending to be regarded as desirable in themselves
by everyone but nevertheless difficult to effectuate except by revolutionary or
totalitarian     power. These are reforms in systems, such as calendar, spelling,
measurements, or law. With the passage of absolute time, or change in speech,
science,   and customs, such systems get to be increasingly differentiated from
the actual conditions to  which they relate, and therewith increasingly inade-
quate, patched over, and complicated. Nevertheless, a change is upsetting and
inconvenient, objectively as well as sentimentally, and therefore is deferred and
redeferred until made by force, usually when long overdue. Everyone is agreed
that the gulf between living English speech and English writing is so great that
a    reform which would make spelling coincide with pronunciation would save
millions of hours     —and probably even of weeks and months—of education an-
nually. What blocks such a reform is the immediate cost. Grownups would have
to learn reading and writing all over again     —
                                              which many could not afford and
few would want to do. The young would be cut off from everything now in
print until it had been reprinted new-style. Newspapers and magazines would
probably have to print everything two ways for a number of years          —and run
half as much matter. The crux of the difficulty would be that the acutest incon-
venience would fall on us, now, for the first ten years; the clear benefit would all
2l8                                     CULTURE CHANGE                                     § 170


be reaped by future generations. People in the mass don't come as altruistic as
that  —and perhaps      it is   just as well.

    But a Czar, a Pope, a revolution, a despot floated into control by a revo-
lutionary period, can and sometimes do jam such reforms through. Thus there
is   the Julian calendar reform effected by Caesar in 46 b.c, the Gregorian by
Pope Gregory XIII in 1582. Incidentally, since this latter correction came from
the head of the Roman Catholic Church, Protestant and Greek Orthodox coun-
tries tended to hold off from it; England accepted the Gregorian calendar only

in 1752, Russia in 1918.
       Somewhat analogous is British and American                     resistance to   the metric
system, which in the abstract is undoubtedly superior to the irregular national
systems, as shown by the fact that physical science, which is supernational, has
never wavered from it. Continental Europe, and then Latin America and most
of the world, soon accepted the system. The Anglo-Saxon nations, self-sufficient
through being in the lead technologically and industrially, have not yet done so.
To "go metric" would make for international uniformity and universal future
convenience; but it would also entail a double standard and some confusion
for a generation, or some years, in daily life and business in the United States
and the British Commonwealth.
       An ancient reform of spelling, if that term can be applied to a partly ideo-
graphic system, was supported around 1370                 b.c.   in    Egypt by the Pharaoh
Ikhnaton and      his    anticlerical    coterie of the   intelligentsia.    They introduced
monotheism, realistic sculpture, and "truthful" writing. Only the last stuck. As
regards motivation, it may be added that the priesthood of the sun god Amen-
Ra had become wealthy and powerful, and blocked the king and his reformist
friends as hard as these fought the priesthood.
       In most ancient and in most Oriental cultures, revolutions from above had
much the better chance of succeeding. Apart from some cases in Greek and
Roman history, successful and important revolutions from below seem to be a
specialty of recent Occidental civilization. The great and effective Meiji mod-
ernization of Japan beginning in 1868    was engineered wholly by elements in
the upper classes surrounding the     young emperor. The Chinese revolution
dating from 191 1 did not emanate so clearly from those in power and has
brought perhaps as much confusion as progress. The Bolshevik revolution was
a symptom of Russia's having been drawn increasingly into the Occidental
orbit, as its Marxian ideology was a direct import from western Europe. By

contrast, Peter the Great, two centuries earlier, was Westernizing his subjects
by force, like any good Eastern autocrat. He produced less profound changes
than the Soviets, but also much less upset and clash. A revolution from below
in Peter's day would have been foredoomed to fail.
     One of the most drastic revolutions was that which Kemal Atatiirk poured
on the Ottoman Turks after Wo/ld War I. Once the spearhead of the last
Mohammedan penetration into Christian Europe, the Turks had for several
§   I?*                      EXTERNAL CHANCE: DIFFUSION                                 219
centuries tried to remain stationary with Islam while Western nations changed
and strengthened. Atatiirk took over at the end of two and a half centuries of
recession, with the last provinces of the Turkish Empire gone, his people de-
feated and reduced to their homeland. He deliberately led them out of the
Islamic camp of culture into the Christian, in everything but formal religion.
Western government, law, dress, calendar, were adopted more wholesale and
more rapidly even than in Meiji Japan. Perhaps his most unparalleled overnight
change was from the Arabic to the Roman alphabet. This happened also to be
an immense improvement in its much better fit to spoken Turkish. But above
all itmarked a clear-cut break with Koranic law and attitude, and symbolized
the transfer of Turkish allegiance from the defensive culture sphere of Islam
to the expanding Occidental and international one. Like any capital operation,

such a major set of changes had to be carried out decisively and swiftly, if at all.
      Theoretically, revolutions, as redistributions of cultural structure and social
rewards within a society, are due to internal strains accumulating until a sudden
shift or tipover occurs.     However, the cases just considered show in increasing
measure external      infltiences   behind the internal    strains, until, in the last in-

stance, all the build-up of pressure is from outside and only the final climax of
conversion is interior.
      Therewith we can conveniently pass over to our second main group of
changes, those from without.



                      171.   EXTERNAL CHANGE! DIFFUSION
      When something new has been evolved in a culture, whether a tool or an
idea or a custom, there is a tendency for it to be passed on to the culture of other
societies. This is   much like the passing on of culture to the younger generation
within the evolving society, except for being foreign-directed instead of do-
mestic. In other words,       new culture is transmitted geographically as well as
chronologically, in space as well as in time, by contagion as well as by repetition.
The spread in area is generally called diffusion, as the internal handing on
through time is called tradition.
      When an invention passes from the inventor to other individuals, we call
that its successful cultural acceptance. Diffusion may be viewed as an extension
of the process, on a much larger scale, by which an invention or innovation       —or
sometimes even an older culture          trait   —spreads from the society in which       it

originated to new societies and becomes established in their cultures.
      Conceptually, the simplest form of cultural transmission is tradition       :   trans-
mission within a society through education by the elders and imitation and
learning by the young. Normally, education and imitation are not in conflict,
and therefore reinforce each other. Also, neither education nor imitation in
itself involves any element of innovation or change, both being aimed primarily

at perpetuation of the culture.
220                                CULTURE CHANGE                                §171

      In the case of areal transmission or spread of culture, the fact that the dif-
fusion takes place between different societies somewhat alters the processes at
work. Imitation or learning of course is still operative, but education mostly
drops out. Missionizing may take its place, but the impulse to missionize occurs
only in some societies. Moreover, it can scarcely hope to be as effective as educa-
tion.    Indeed it is chiefly when the missionary succeeds in controlling secular
education of the young that he becomes really influential.
      Even more important is the fact that, diffusion being cross-societal, new
elements of culture are involved    —new    at least to the receiving or learning cul-

ture. This novel culture material may meet with anything from eager acceptance
to bitter hostility.   But since it does represent innovation and change, the traits
that are being introduced will expectably encounter some resistance. After         all,

they are foreign to the pattern of the culture on which they are impinging; and
while some of the imported traits will happen to fit into the native pattern, or be
neutral, others will violate or upset it. Or their acceptance may have unforeseen
consequences that prove to be upsetting. It will accordingly be evident that intra-
society transmission of culture in time     must normally tend toward persistence,
but intersocietal transmission in space tend toward change.
        This difference can also be viewed from the angle of total human civiliza-
tion.    When cannon and, later on, steam engines were invented, they represented
a new increment in the whole of human culture as well as in European culture.
When subsequently cannon and steam engines were introduced into Japan, both
devices represented as much of an innovating increment there as they           had in
Europe, and their effects on war and industry were about as great. Yet from the
angle of human development as a whole, there was no invention or addition
whatever involved in the transmission to Japan, only a spread of things already
in existence. In short, from the point of view of the world as a whole, diffusions
can also be seen as continuations or persistences plus spread.
        Similarly, though invention and diffusion certainly are distinct concepts, yet
the resistance which an institutional invention or innovation often encounters at
home, both as to being made and as to social acceptance, may be identical with
the resistance set up against a diffusion from abroad.
     These illustrations will serve to show how processes that as logical or ab-
stract concepts are wholly distinct tend to appear intertwined and intergraded in

the actual phenomena of civilization as history unrolls them. The very same
cultural act or event can be construed equally as a continuance or an innovation,
according as it is viewed from the angle of the trait itself or that of the receiving
culture.
        However, whatever else diffusion does or does not involve, it does always
involve change for the receiving culture.
        The total part played by diffusion in human culture is almost incredibly
great. This is a corollary of what has been said before, in § 113, to the effect that
all   cultures are largely hybrid composites of material that once entered      them
§    '7^                   EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION                                      221

from outside. Naively, human beings do not realize this to any great extent. It is
of no advantage to a society, ordinarily, to have its members aware of the for-
eign source of most of their culture; nor is it a satisfaction to most individuals
to be reminded of this debt to aliens. So the facts tend to be forgotten, perhaps

more rapidly even than most events of history.
       In addition, there is a precritical impulse in us to look upon foreign customs
as things that flow spontaneously out of foreign peoples: Chinese "naturally"
worship their ancestors and defer to their fathers, just as they "naturally" talk
in singsong and naturally grow long black hair. This goes with the normal naive
assumptions on "race" differences and             inferiorities   (§80-81). So totems      and
couvade and bows and arrows and shell money and sympathetic magic were
long construed as more or less "automatic" emanations of the "natural" human
mind in its more "childlike" manifestations.
       This older view, or rather assumption, has had             to   be largely abandoned
under analysis. If our own civilization is due mainly to elements introduced into
itfrom without, there is no reason to believe that backward peoples would be
more spontaneously creative, especially since they obviously also incline to repeat
one another in certain grooves. Above all, more accurate study of the forms of
culture traits, of their related variants, and of their territorial distributions has
yielded so many instances of proved or highly probable diffusion of things like
totems and couvade and shell money that the explanation of spontaneous emana-
tion is rarely invoked any longer.
       In short, the usual intersocietal functioning of culture            is   somewhat like
most interpersonal relations. We more often learn from others than devise orig-
inal things ourselves. Therefore, when record has been lost of how culture traits
were acquired, a      specific,   part-for-part    resemblance between culture           traits,

coupled with evidence of sufficient other relations between the                  societies that

possess them, is now mostly accepted as presumptive indication of their spread
by diffusion, rather than of their wholly independent reinvention.
       Like anything else, this working rule or hypothesis can be carried too far.
On the average, it proves to be the soundest inference to make, in the present
state of   knowledge. Yet some diflusionists have gone so far as to deny alto-
gether, or practically, the possibility of separate reinventions; all likenesses are
claimed by them as due to diffusion. This stand seems arbitrary and unreason-
able. It is perhaps motivated by an      urge for rigor and simplification of process,
comparable to the simplicity of the precritical "spontaneity" explanation. How-
ever, this ultradiffusionist view has also been pretty well abandoned.
       Nearly all of the inventions discussed in § 147-149 and 183-187 also have a
history of diffusion. Most modern technological inventions tend to show a rapid
world-wide spread. New institutional devices, such as the referendum and the
Australian ballot of § 153, often are not accepted the world over: these particular
ones, for instance, obviously require democracy as a precondition. But so far as
institutions do have a history of widespread success, this is             one mainly of dif-
222                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                 § 17^


fusion with adaptive modifications. The same is true of philosophies, reUgions,
ideologies. In proportion as these are influential they tend to win an international
following, at least for a time. Democracy,         communism, fascism, are familiar
examples.
        To these illustrations from the full light of recent history, there can be added
endless cases of more ancient traits or systems: Christianity or Mohammedanism,
for instance, or printing. In the case of older technological inventions, the pre-
cisecircumstances of the first origin have often become somewhat misty, al-
though much of the spread is usually well attested. Such are the arch, gun-
powder, tea-drinking, bells in towers, Arabic numerals, chess, the 360° circle,
spectacles, water mills, clocks, and dozens of others. With these can be included

a series of plants first domesticated in the Americas, such as maize, potatoes,
sweet potatoes, tomatoes, Lima beans, and tobacco (§ 193), the cultivation and
use of some of which spread rapidly to certain parts of the Eastern Hemisphere.
The result is that we often speak of potatoes as Irish, and that whole archi-
pelagoes in the East Indies have come to eat more maize or sweet potatoes than
rice,   and so on. Double diffusion is indicated by our name for the turkey: the
domestication of the bird was native American, but it was carried first to Spain
and the Mediterranean, and from there reached England and then its colonies.
In consequence. North Americans mistakenly call an American bird after an
East Mediterranean country. The histories of wheat, millet, and sugar cane, of
chickens and horses, of pottery, of bronze, iron, and steel (§ 282, 284, 296, 298)
are also clearer as regards diffusion than as regards origin.
        Finally we come to elements of culture the beginnings of which may remain
forever hazy to us but the coherent distribution of which argues strongly for a
spread from one center of origin. Thus, none of the American Indian nations
possessed any authentic record of how or when they had learned to plant maize,
but it was found being grown all the way from central Chile to North Dakota
and Quebec, by perhaps 500 distinct tribes. It would be intrinsically absurd to
consider the possibility of each of these 500 tribes having made the domestication
as an original invention of its own. Even if the notion were abstractly tenable, it
would be refuted by the unusual "artificiality" of the cultivated maize plant, its
inability to propagate and maintain itself in nature, our ignorance of a direct
wild ancestor. But if most of the 500 tribes learned rather than invented maize-
growing, economy of explanation inevitably carries us not only to 300 or 400
who learned it, but probably to 499. Invention in one tribe or region, then a
spread to the rest, seems much the most economical and reasonable interpreta-
tion. This conclusion is fortified by a botanical consideration : Genetic mutations

and hybridization, one or both of which are believed to have been needed to
transform unknown wild ancestors into maize, are definitely rare in plant his-
        —
tory more likely to occur now and then only than over and over again.
        The case for diffusion, rather than independent invention, of native Ameri-
can pottery, whose distribution is slightly wider than than of maize, though
§    172                                RESISTANCE TO DIFFUSION                                      223
roughly correspondent,             is   similar,   though not quite     as firm. Theoretically        it

would be quite conceivable                  that there   had been two or three or       fcjur    inde-
pendent inventions of the pottery art in America, each with its own history of
growth and spread, until several diffusions coalesced and came to look on the
map like a single bicontincntal one. At any rate, there is no known physico-
chemical reason, corresponding to the genetic-botanical one for maize, to weigh
against such a view of multiple origin. Yet even if there had been four or five
                                        New World, the ratio of tribal diffusions
or six separate origins of pottery in the
to inventions  would still have been about a hundred to one.
       Even at the beginnings of all human record, from the early Palaeolithic
well back in the Pleistocene, the discovered distributions strongly suggest dif-
fusions of wide sweep. In western Europe, North and East Africa, Arabia and
India, the earliest cultures we can define with thorough assurance are "core cul-
tures"      (§ 273)        using massive, trimmed-down         flints   of bifacial "hand-ax" or
"Chellean-pick" type. Contemporaneously, central and eastern Europe, and pre-
sumably northern Asia               also,    harbored "flake cultures," with tools of edged
chips struck off from flint nodules. The indication is chat the two technologies
were devised separately, and that each had its own history of spread, though
both spread intercontinentally. By the time of the last or Wiirm Glaciation, the
two diffusions had met and overlapped in western Europe.
    Similarly, toward the end of the Palaeolithic, the chipping of minute deli-
cate blades of flint was evolved in North Africa during the Capsian period,
spread to Spain, and in the following Mesolithic became characteristic of north-
western Europe from France to Scandinavia (§ 275-276).
       As regards patterned systems of traits, the world-wide dispersal of several
of these     — the week, the alphabet, the zodiac—             is   outlined below in    § 196-197,

206-221, 229.

                                172. RESISTANCE          TO DIFFUSION

       We can assume from the foregoing that any feature of culture once estab-
lished will automatically tend to spread to the cultures of other societies, just as
it   will tend to persist in its own. The principle is empirical, but so great is the
mass of experience, both contemporary and historical, on which it is based that
it   has the force of an axiom. However, the principle affirms not that there must
be diffusion, only that there will be some impulse for it to take place. Roughly,
we can assume that culture traits will spread unless there are specific factors to
prevent spread, much as we assume that things once in a culture will continue
in    it   until displaced or modified             by some positive impingement. This           is   be-
cause, from the angle of the culture trait, spread is after all only a form of per-
sistence     :   it is   continuation in a new geography.
    However, from the point of view of societies and their total cultures, the
contrary is true, and is important enough to repeat: Diffusion is like invention in
that it results in an innovation. When an invention is accepted, place                     is   made
224                                  CULTURE CHANGE                                §    l?^

for something that has just originated in the same society.      When a diffused trait
is   accepted, a place is similarly made in a culture for something that previously
originated in another society and culture. In both cases there normally are ob-
stacles or resistance to acceptance.      These may occasionally be actually greater
for an invention or a home innovation, if this seems to threaten established eco-
nomic interests or an ideology with active sanctions behind           it,   or even only
bodily habits that have firm hold. But on the whole the edge           is   probably the
other way, since the farther it travels, the greater the risk that the diffusing ele-
ment will encounter wholly new settings which may contain something defi-
nitely antagonistic to it. Nevertheless, any difference between the resistances en-
countered respectively by invention innovations and diffusion innovations                is

more of degree than of kind, and, on the average, likely to be not very great
in degree.
       Of prime importance to the fate of either kind of innovation are the pat-
terns it encounters in the culture at whose door it is knocking. There are going
to be obvious difficulties about inducing Christians and Mohammedans to wor-
ship, say, river gods, or     persuading Mohammedans and Jews to eat pork sau-
sage   —about equally so whether the prophet or the inventor of the idea be a
native renegade or a missionary from another faith. This class of situations has
been touched upon under invention            (§ 151),   and further instances are men-
tioned in § 185, 199, 221.
       Sometimes the resistances are selective, as when the Japanese gradually took
over most of Chinese civilization but resolutely refused to accept rhymed tonal
poetry, civil-service examinations, foot-binding, and a number of other particular
Chinese features. The reason for the first resistance is simple and in a way extra-
cultural   :   The character of the Japanese language is such as to make a rhymed
and tone-observing poetry almost impossible, whereas in Chinese, prose and
poetry would be difficult to distinguish except by rhyme and tone. Civil-service
examinations        as the basis   for officeholding, power,   and wealth began    to    be
developed in China when the aristocracy was crushed in the great national
unification      more than twenty-one hundred years ago. In Japan, however, aris-
tocracy of descent always maintained itself, in fact has pretty consistently been
the dominant power in the country, and never submitted to bowing to the yoke
of a merit system of tests. In China, the        emperor was the Regent of Heaven;
but a dynasty that became wicked was thought no longer to represent Heaven
and could justifiably be overthrown. The Japanese eagerly took over the idea of
the Chinese emperor's absolute authority,       which was much greater than that
of their       own early rulers. But with the native rulers claiming to be gods de-
scended from the sun goddess, it would not do to admit that their line could
become corrupt or that they might legitimately be deposed. So the dynasty has
remained nominally unbroken, though most emperors have had little real power,
and many have been edged into abdication.
 §   '7^                          RESISTANCE TO DIFFUSION                             225
        Foot -binding is of interest because it seems to have clashed with an uncon-
scious Japanese pattern to which anything like mutilation was repugnant. Thus
eunuchism, which persisted at the Chinese court until this century, never got a
 foothold in Japan; and the Japanese avoidance of all body jewelry is perhaps re-
lated psychologically. In this       way the Japanese nonacceptances of Chinese civi-
lization seem quite spotty, and yet are characteristically Japanese. After 1931         it

gradually became evident that the Japanese had been equally selective in taking
over Occidental civilization. But        we of the West had felt so pleased at being
imitated since 1868, and thought so well of the Japanese for imitating us, that
we were overlooking how much of Western culture they were also firmly
rejecting.
        Items of culture that are isolated, not much woven into a pattern, and there-
fore relatively neutral in their social functioning, and yet of an indubitable prac-
tical      value, are least likely to encounter resistances to their diflfusion: matches,
for instance, or potatoes. In fact, the flint-and-steel strike-a-light has maintained
itself, if at all,   chiefly   among very remote or very poor groups who could not
secure matches regularly. And why not.? Matches conflict with nothing institu-
tional. Here       and there a priest might insist that ritual fire continue to be made
in the old way, or even by driUing;         but such exceptions would not in the least
impair the spread of matches for ordinary secular use, where the main motiva-
tion inevitably      is   the pragmatic one of getting a light as quickly, surely,    and
easily as possible.

        Tobacco, as a relatively harmless indulgence, habit-forming but not leading
to incapacity,      and reasonably economical at that, has had a rapid, world-wide
diffusion (§ 193). It is also essentially neutral toward the ideology or value pat-
tern of most of the cultures it entered. In native America         it   did often have re-
ligious associations; but these promptly got lost when its travels began.
        Now and then an autocrat or a religion attempts to freeze a culture as of a
given moment. In the main, the endeavor is of course foredoomed. But it may
cause some strange, spotty retardations of diffusions.        Mohammedanism is the
most striking example. It forbade images, wine, usury, and gambling; and the
Koran, or the custom law it accepted or implied, was to be the basic civil law
of Islam for all time. Among the consequences one is that the Arabs, who had
had no previous representative sculpture or painting, never developed any,
though the Mohammedanized Iranians, who had had these arts, managed in
time to revive them. Playing cards diffused from China; they struck quick roots
in Europe, but seem to have passed Islam by.         Insurance has been difficult to in-
troduce in Mohammedan countries.            The pious conservatives could claim that
it   partook of both usury and gambling. Even coffee-drinking was in jeopardy
for a while because it is not mentioned in the Koran; though Mohammedans at
large soon became coffee-lovers.        Tobacco has also at times been forbidden by
the very strict. Printing was under graver and longer suspicion (§ 199). It is not
sanctioned in the Koran; it would expectably be applied to the text of the Koran,
226                                CULTURE CHANGE                             § l?^


which Mohammed had dictated for writing down by hand; and it was an
invention of Chinese and Christian unbeUevers. The first attempt to print in
                       —
Mohammedan lands a history of Egypt in 1729, nearly three hundred years
after Gutenberg   —
                 led to riots and prohibiton. It was not until 1825 that a Mo-
hammedan Arabic press was established in Cairo, though Christians had printed
in Arabic type in Italy as early as 1512. Printing of the Koran in Islam was
specifically forbidden in 1727.

      These several Mohammedan blockings of diffusions are perhaps most in-
teresting for the common resistance they encountered in spite of being inherently
disconnected. There    is   neither logical nor intrinsic nexus between sculpture,
insurance, coffee, cards, and book-printing. What made these so dissimilar in-
troductions meet resistance     was a psychological attitude: a timorous legalism
or puritanism (§ 248) that tried to protect the accidents of a system or code
adopted by the culture. Obviously useful novelties that were indifferent toward
the spirit or the letter of Islam, like the compass, cannon, matches,    and auto-
mobiles, met no such resistance. Like Christianity, Mohammedanism has gen-
erally been   imbued with a characteristic feeling of superiority and has tended
to manifest aggressiveness.    But a counterpart of this quality has been an in-
feriority sense and self-protectiveness whenever the culture was unsuccessful
as it mostly has been, in competition with Christianity, since about a.d. hoc,
except for the interlude of the Ottoman Turks.
     The resulting defensive attitude of Islam is somewhat akin to that which
led China, Tibet, Korea, and Japan to try for two or three hundred years to shut
out all Occidental contacts. The Far Eastern societies had been unaggressive, and
now tried to isolate themselves and their cultures altogether. Islam could not
make the identical endeavor, both because of being unusually far-flung and ex-
posed in geography, and because of its fundamental militancy. But it could and
did try here and there to effect a protective exclusion of culture features that
were tending to enter. This might be construed as a sort of seclusion in spots.


                            173.   MARGINAL CULTURES
      The important concept that cultures are retarded because of their peripheral
or marginal position in geography rests largely upon the idea that diffusion is
a more or less continuous process. It also assumes that it is in the higher centers
of civilization that the most numerous inventions and the most generally
adoptable advances will be made, on the whole. As these new increments tend
to spread, they will   however spread most slowly to those societies which are
most remote or most diflicult to reach. Further, the innovations and additions
that do reach the edges and peripheries may fail of acceptance by the cultures
there, because they involve requirements the receiving culture cannot fulfill.
Thus a marginal culture might be quite eager to use metal tools, and advanced
enough in manual skills to learn metallurgical processes, and yet be forced to
§   173                           MARGINAL CULTURES                                 227

pass by the opportunity of acquiring them because            it   lacked, say, the gross
tools, or the habits of industrial perseverance, necessary for mining ores.

       In this way a growing gap may be created, theoretically and often actually,
between the culturally productive center and the cultural margin. This gap
tends to increase as the center piles up additional increments and the margin
receives or accepts only a fraction of them. In theory, accordingly, peripheral
cultures would tend to drop farther          and farther behind. Finally some center,
besides enriching    its   culture,   may also extend it geographically until part of
its   society is transported to the marginal lands, comes in contact with the      mar-
ginal cultures there,and proceeds to extinguish these, absorb them, or brush
them aside. This is what has been progressively happening to most primitive
cultures since 1500 at the hands of the increasingly expansive Occidental civili-
zation.
       But there is no necessary sequence in these matters. The high centers may
recede or shift, or new ones may come up       —
                                             finally even at the edges     —
                                                                       until what
was peripheral has become focal, and perhaps vice versa. In 3000 B.C., for in-
stance, all of Europe was certainly marginally retarded as compared with nearer
Asia and Egypt. In 500 b.c, Greece was within the center, but Italy still lagging,
and western and northern Europe even more so. By a.d. 100, Rome looked like
                                                                   —
the focus, and certainly was part of it. At some later period just when is de-
batable, but certainly by a.d. 1650     —the nucleus of highest productivity in Euro-
pean culture had shifted across the Alps. During the past three centuries Eng-
land has surely been among the small group of northwestern-European nations
that constitute the central hearth of Occidental civiUzation. But previous to 1550,
England was, equally obviously, retarded and marginal to western continental
Europe, and the more so the farther back we go in history: in 1000 b.c, or 3000
B.C., England was no more than a feather edge of high culture, a margin of a

margin.
       Similarly with the radiation of culture out of the great Far Eastern center
that began to glow and spark in North China three to four thousand years ago.
This culture expanded, diffused over South China and Annam, also eastward
into Korea, and from there to Japan. Of two peoples in Japan about the open-
ing of the Christian era, the Yamato or ancestral Japanese held the parts of the
islands nearest Korea, from about Kyoto southwest; the Ainu held Tokyo and
die northeast beyond. The archaeological remains suggest no great difference of
cultural level between the two races. But for century after century elements of
the long-established civilization of China dribbled into southwestern Japan, cul-
minating, around a.d. 400-700, in a rush of import of writing, learning, Bud-
dhism, political organization, and hundreds of other things. Yamato Japanese
culture now became fundamentally Sinitic. At the same time it was so placed as
to cut off the Ainu from all immediate contacts with the higher Chinese civiliza-
tion. The Ainu thus remained barbarian, the Japanese did not. They were grad-

ually conquered, absorbed, or pushed by the Japanese to the extreme northeast
228                                CULTURE CHANGE                                §   173

of the archipelago, where some thousands still survive as an interesting racial
relict, in   a cultural and ethnic status recaUing that of reservation Indians in the
United States (§ 65). It was their geographical position of being marginal to the
marginal Japanese that no doubt mainly accounts for the Ainu retardation until
the present. But just so, and to about an equal degree, was Japan retarded fifteen
hundred years ago as against China. And for the same reason. China on the
mainland, in more or less contact with the rest of Asia and Europe, was profiting
by this contact; but Japan lay beyond the farthest edge of the continent, in a
little island world of its own, virtually beyond contacts in an age of limited

and difficult navigation. Japan off the east of Asia and Britain off the west of
Europe thus were in corresponding situations, and remained retarded for cor-
respondingly long periods.
      As for the Japanese, they sought for Chinese civilization at various times,
and absorbed and assimilated it with skill, yet always managed to give the bor-
rowed product a distinctive national individuality, until now and then it would
have been difficult to assert that the teacher still remained more advanced than
the pupil. Nevertheless, the flow of diffusion continued one-way. Whether it was
coining money or drinking tea or printing books or a different Buddhist sect
or a new style of painting landscapes, it was always China that originated, Japan
that followed (§ 303). The lag might be one century or two centuries or six, but
it was always Japan that was behind. The Japanese did exercise option about

their acceptance, and simply rejected a good-sized series of Chinese traits, as we
have just seen (§172). Where they had something of their own, however, as
in the native Shinto cult, or where they gave something of Chinese origin a new
twist or value, as in fine swordmaking, these originaUties of theirs never passed
out of Japan back into China. This does not mean that Japanese products and
devisings were invariably inferior. They could hardly all have been so, and as-
suredly were not. Essentially       it   was Chinese self-sufficience, quiet arrogance
about the superiority of their own culture, that prevented important return dif-
fusion. Here, then, it was an attitude which was effective as a block; whereas
the long retardation of Japan, like that of Britain at the opposite end of the great
Eurasiatic land mass, was due primarily to its extreme marginal position. The
historical relation of Chinese to Japanese culture may well be described as one
of dominance, similar to that of parent on child, or between          most persons in
habitual relation to each other, or even, according to the psychologists, between
most primate individuals.
      Until 1500, the prevailing contacts of the whole Far Eastern or China-
dominated center with the rest of the world were overland. Then came the
ship-borne Portuguese, followed by Spaniards, Dutch, English, and French.
After some unpleasant and disturbing contacts, both China and Japan in fact  —
                                    —
Korea, Annam, and Tibet also tried to shut these contacts out by policies of
seclusion.     During the nineteenth century these policies proved manifestly in-
adequate, were given up, and Western influences were once         more admitted.
§    174                          MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS                               229
Here a difTcrcncc developed: The Japanese now sought cultural imports from the
West, the Chinese accepted them much more slowly, often reluctantly. Over
the seaways, Japan now was no longer more remote from the new center of the
Occident. In fact, as an island nation Japan was more accessible to successful
diffusions, and more quickly permeated by them, than China with its hundreds
of millions living mostly in the interior of a great land mass. So now, when
advance for a while had largely become equated to Westernization, Japan at
last took the lead, and before long not only defeated China in war but attempted

to guide and instruct it. The roles of the two peoples reversed when the condi-
tions changed, although the same processes continued at work.
     This whole Chinese-Japanese relationship can also be seen, just as legiti-
mately, as an example of acculturation. But acculturation is a more complex
thing, from which diffusion must always be analyzed out as one of the elemental
processes at work, as will be seen below, in § 176-179.
     Marginal backwardness is manifest in total culture rather than in particular
traits:     it is   essentially a cumulative matter. It is occasionally traceable in specific
complexes, as when the Asiatic composite or three-ply bow of horn-wood-sinew
appears in northwestern America as the simplified "sinew-backed" bow of horn
and sinew or wood and sinew; and the associated thumb ring of Asia for re-              —
                              —
leasing the bowstring is also lacking in America. Similarly, resist dyeing (§ 235),
supposed to have originated in India and still flourishing in three forms in Indo-
nesia      —pattern, knot, and fiber dyeing—        is   represented as far out in the Pacific
as    Melanesian Santa Cruz Island by merely the last of these three processes.
In general, however, retardation is obviously going to show in the total culture
accumulated, rather than in special traits.


                           174.   MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS
       Biologists long ago observed that the large backward or relict biotas—^both
faunas and floras          —were those of the Southern Hemisphere. Africa south of
the Sahara harbors a Pleistocene-like association of animals that                 is   extinct in
Europe. South America was never reached by many important groups of mam-
mals; but as if to make up for this, it evolved a specialized fauna, such as the
platyrrhine monkeys, and the noncompetitive sloths, armadillos,                        and other
edentates of the Patagonian extremity. Australia of course                 is   much the most
retarded of continents biologically, its native mammals being virtually all of the
primitive marsupial type.            As compared with these three southern continents,
Europe, North Africa, Asia, and North America form a virtually continuous
land mass,® "Holarctica," within which species could migrate without                        much
hindrance; and any new successful forms were Hkely to spread over the whole

      ® Continuous       except for shallow Bering Strait, and this was repeatedly a land bridge
in the past;        whereas the existing Panama land bridge was more often a barrier strait in
geological time.
230                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                §   174

great area. By contrast, the three southern continents are like three Wind alleys
running off from the much greater Holarctica, which stretches east and west
four-fifths of the way around the globe. Newly evolved forms of life got into
these three southern projections late, or not at   all; old forms found shelter

there,    were preserved, or even underwent further local development. The net
result has been that the three      marginal southern continents     —marginal to cen-
tral   Holarctica   —have been evolutionistically retarded.
       The cultural parallel is interesting. No very high civilization has ever de-
veloped independently south of the equator. The most advanced was that of
ancient Peru.       The native Australians are often cited as culturally the most
primitive large block of mankind. Ultramarginal to the margin that the Aus-
tralians constituted were the still more backward Tasmanians. The tip of South
America was occupied by primitive Yahgan, Alakaluf, Ona, Tehuelche. In the
far south of Africa were the Bushmen; scattered south of the equator, the
Pygmy tribes; and Bushmen and Pygmies constitute the only two ethnic groups
in Africa that still live wholly by hunting-and-gathering. The cultural retarda-
tion in the three southern continental extremities certainly seems similar to the
faunal one.
       At its northeastern end,      the great Eurasiatic continent pinches into a
nearly waste, unfavorable, Arctic tip, beyond which lies Bering Strait, and then
nearly equally arduous Alaska, before the temperate   and desirable parts of
North America are reached. Here then is a bottleneck between the Old World
and New World halves of Holarctica, between Palearctica and Nearctica. In the
millions of years available for their dispersal since the Eocene,      many species
of mammals passed through this bottleneck at times            when Bering Strait was
dry land and the climate perhaps less raw than now.           Among such were ele-
                                                             many others.
phants, horses, bisons, camels, tapirs, wolves, bears, beavers, and
Some spread eastward, some westward; a few probably even flowed back. But
other groups never did effect the crossing. Lions, tigers, hippopotami, rhi-
noceroses, true cattle and water buffalos, the whole group of true antelopes and
gazelles, did not get into America, which can therefore be construed as faunally
submarginal to Europe- Africa-Asia: semiperipheral to          it,   but not wholly de-
pendent.
       It is   interesting as showing the influence of basic geography that for thou-
sands of years America was submarginal in culture also. When this condition
began to change after 1492, it was through the expansion of European societies
across the Atlantic, not through enlargement or easing of the Bering Strait
bottleneck. But pre-1492 America was culturally only semimarginal, not defi-
nitely peripheral like Australia. There was a demonstrable flow of culture from
Asia into the nearer parts      —about half—of North America.This diffusion           in-

cluded traits such as the sinew-backed bow just mentioned (§ 173), slat armor,
snowshoes, the toboggan, bark boats, bark dishes and pots, basketry hats, the
tepee or conical tent of skin or bark, scapulimancy, bear ceremonialism, the
§    175                         INTERNAL MARGINALITY                            23I

"magic flight" story     (§ 227),   and some others. But in the main, the more ad-
vanced and complex cuhurcs of native America as a whole, both North and
South, seem to have been independently evolved in the hemisphere rather than
received by diffusion. This was perhaps the result of the opportunities offered
by the large favorable areas well away from the Bering bottleneck, areas where
agriculture was developed, population multiplied, and the arts of life increased.
Most students of native American history believe that this development, which
culminated in the stretch between Mexico and Peru, was essentially autono-
mous. It attained to cities, kingdoms, most metallurgical arts, some astronomy
and calendry, and extraordinarily complex rituals. It did not achieve ironwork-
ing, writing, or a "world" type of religion (§ 169). It was thus retarded in type
or level, by perhaps two or three thousand years, behind the highest centers
in the Old World. But the retardation was through a separate and delayed start.
Slowness and incompleteness of interhemispheric diffusions constituted only a
remoter factor underlying the lateness of the beginnings of American Indian
higher developments.
       The Greeks had a name for the central area of higher civilization: oi\umene.
Literally, this meant "the inhabited world"; but     it   had also the connotation of
"civilized world," or civilization as a whole; much as an oecumenical council of
the Church still means a council of the whole of Christianity. This oi/^umene
of the Greeks, which stretched from Gibraltar to India and dimly known China,
was the region in which people lived in cities in organized states, plowed their
fields     and raised cattle, worked iron, and knew letters. What was beyond this
civilization the Greeks were hazy about; they considered it either wasteland or
land occupied only by unstable savages: for they much underestimated the size
of the southern parts of Africa and the north
                                           and east of Asia, and of course
Australia andAmerica were wholly outside their ken. This concept of the
oikumene of the immediate pre-Christian and post-Christian centuries has a
modern utility as a convenient designation of the total area reached by traceable
diffusion influences from the main higher centers of Eurasia at which most
new culture had up to then been produced.


                          175.   INTERNAL MARGINALITY
      It is important to remember that all this discussion of diffusion from centers

to   margins refers to prevalent directions of drift, and not to any rigorous or
one-way determinism. To conceive the diffusion of culture as radiating out in
concentric circles, like sound waves from a bell, is schematic; actual history is
almost never so simple. In fact, even physical nature is likely to have winds and
obstructions and conflicting noises interfering with the regularity of its waves.
In culture, one of these complexities is manifest in societies that remain retarded
although they are situated within the sphere of higher centers. Such cultures
have been called "internally marginal." This phrase is literally appropriate when
232                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                     § 1 75


the habitat is a desert or a mountainous or undesirable tract inside a generally
favorable region. In other cases the phrase is just a telescoped way of saying that
the culture in question is backward, like cultures whose geography is marginal;
that it is an incomplete form of some richer culture elsewhere and perhaps not
far away. Often both conditions apply: The culture is retarded and is also
crowded back into undesirable terrain that may shelter it from active diffusions
almost as effectively as would distant remoteness.
      Asia is particularly rich in tribal societies with "internally marginal" cul-
tures. Examples are: the very primitive Veddas of Ceylon; the Todas and other
nonliterate tribes of the Nilgiri hills in southern India; ® most of the Munda tribes
farther north in India; Palaung, Kachin, Moi, Semang, Sakai, and many others
in the states of Farther India and Malaya; Lolo, Yao, Man, and so on in South
China. None of these nationalities is situated on an actual outer edge of the
continent. All of them constitute enclaves within a larger area and population
of civilized people. Most often these latter, whether Hindus, Chinese, Burmese,
Annamese, or Malays, have taken up the fertile plains and valleys. The primi-
tives may now and then have pushed in to where they are, but more often they

are an obvious remnant,         now contracted to the hills, ridges, plateaus, higher
mountain valleys, jungle, or "bush." This whole culture type is equally interest-
ing from the angle of acculturation, which will be touched upon in the next
section.^"
      In the East Indian archipelagoes, above              all   among the larger Philippine
Islands, migration, travel, commerce, and enlightenment have moved easily by
sea lanes, while land penetration        is   difficult,   on account of both terrain and
vegetation. The remote and backward places regularly are the interiors of the
islands; the accessible     and advanced tracts are their physical edges, the shore-
lands     —as in post-Perry Japan. So we find, for instance, in Luzon the Negritos
of simplest culture in the mountains most difficult to reach; next to them the
pagan brown Filipinos in at least two distinguishable levels of culture and re-
moteness, exemplified respectively by, say, the Ilongot and the Tinggian; and
then the lowlanders like the Tagalog and the Pampanga, long ago influenced
by Hindu and then by Mohammedan and finally by Christian civilization.
      It is   evident that this Indonesian condition inverts the space relation of
"center" and "periphery" with which we started. Culturally, centers are spots of
high productivity; margins, spots of prevailing receptivity and retardation. Cul-
tural centers may be geographically central also, or on geographical margins.

      8   They are sometimes misnamed "pre-Dravidian" in order to shunt the contamination
of primitive affiliation away from the civilized Dravidian nations. Actually the Toda, Kota,
and so on are fully Dravidian in speech, and their cultures seem to be somewhat specialized
and retarded tribal or caste facets of general Dravidian or southern Hindu culture.
    ^^ Internal marginaUty is recognized also in the Smithsonian Insdtution's Handboo\ of

South American Indians, and in the ethnographic dassificadon of that condnent developed
below in § 319, 331.
§   «76                                   ACCULTURATION                                      233
Geography always enters into consideration in the matter, because it is difTusion
that is at work and diffusion is geographical spread; but it is culture that is
spread, or which fails to be spread and leaves certain societies retarded. Such
retarded cultures are often spoken of as peripheral whether their situation be on
the edges or in the interiors of land masses.



                                   176.    ACCULTURATION
       Acculturation comprises those changes produced in a culture by the                    in-

fluence of another culture         which result in an increased similarity of the two.
The influencing may be reciprocal or overwhelmingly one-way. The resultant
assimilation may proceed so far as the extinction of one culture by absorption
in the other; or other factors may intervene to counterbalance the assimilation
and keep the cultures separate. The process of acculturation tends to be gradual
rather than abrupt.
                 It is perhaps always gradual and long-range enough for

           phenomena to fall within the scope of history, even if the phe-
acculturation
nomena examined be contemporary ones. In fact, in so far as history is more
than the story of particular events and particular individuals and deals with
     and cultural changes, a large part of all history the world over, possibly
social

more than half of it, deals ultimately with the results of intercultural influencing
—that      is,   acculturation. This is clear as soon as we consider the findings of that
part of history in which the role of particular events and persons is of necessity
reduced to a minimum; namely, archaeology. Practically                 all   the diffusion   we
have been considering either contributes to acculturation or can be viewed as an
aspect of acculturation; and conversely, all acculturation is full of diffusion. The
two are thoroughly interwoven in the phenomena: the distinction is a concep-
tual one of approach and emphasis of interest.           When we follow the fortunes of
a particular culture trait or complex or institution through its wanderings from
culture to culture, we call        it   a study of diffusion.   When we consider two cul-
tures bombarding each other with hundreds or thousands of diffusing traits, and
appraise the results of such interaction, we more commonly call it acculturation.
Diffusion is a matter of what happens to elements or parts of culture; accultura-
tion, of what happens to cultures.

       In 1935, Redfield, Herskovits, and Linton, as a committee of the American
Anthropological Association, formulated the following definition: "Accultura-
tion      comprehends those phenomena which result when groups of individuals
having different cultures come into continuous first hand contact, with subse-
quent changes in the original culture patterns of either or both groups." They
went on to distinguish acculturation from culture change, of which it is only one
aspect; from assimilation, which at times is one of the results of acculturation;
and from diffusion, which constitutes only one aspect of acculturation, but yet
is always present when there is acculturation and sometimes when there is not.
234                               CULTURE CHANGE                                        § 1 76


      In a concrete science like anthropology there        is   little   gained by pushing
conceptual distinctions very far, and some risk of sterility, because phenomena
intergrade endlessly, especially in so highly plastic a thing as culture.           A broad
definition, centering on the core of the meaning involved rather than aiming at
hairline logical definition of its edges, is therefore ordinarily the most useful.         A
definition of this kind for acculturation might be    :   the effect on cultures of con-
tact with other cultures. In this would also be included the effect on the societies

that carried the cultures. Viewed in this way, it is evident that acculturation takes
in a lot of meaning. It has no doubt been operative since there have been separate
human cultures. Ninety-nine per cent of all acculturation must lie in the past;
and it involves the nature, the processes, and the patterns of culture as well as
its changes.

      If any modification of one culture by   another culture is acculturation, why
the sudden interest, almost excitement, beginning about 1920-25 and culminating
perhaps in 1935-40, about a concept as wide, elusive, and protean as this? It must
have had some special implications; some portion or corner of it must have been
charged with particular connotations.
      The principal factors that made for the whirl of vogue which acculturation
studies were given for a while      were the beliefs that such studies were imme-
diately   contemporary and that they were practically useful             —plus, probably, a
sense that they dealt with our own civilization as familiar to us and that there-
fore they involved less wrench to our natural ethnocentrism, by our not having
to depart from it to examine other culture and times. With these considerations,
there were mixed some subsidiary ones. For instance, as World War I closed, an
"Americanization" movement swept          patriotic, political,      social,   philanthropic,
and educational circles in the United States. Poles, Italians, and other immigrants
were to be amalgamated. The "foreigners" who were outside were to be kept
out; those who were in were to be remolded, as quickly and effectively as pos-
sible, into reproductions of Anglo-Saxon Americans. Anthropologists and so-

ciologists were to help appraise the methods and the degrees of their assimila-

tion. In England there was a somewhat analogous movement, relating to the

adjustments to European civilization that "natives" under colonial administra-
tion were facing or making.
     Further, it had become an ethnological technique to study other cultures,
especially backward ones, by investigating them in the field, on their own
ground: perhaps the Arunta in Australia, the Toda in India, the Yoruba in
Nigeria, the Dakota or the Hopi on their reservations in the United States. In
every case, these primitive societies had begun to have their culture visibly in-
vaded and affected by Western civilization; some only to a minor extent, others
so far that the former native culture could only be recovered from memories
of the older people, while the present-day population lived in a transitional
hybrid culture   —or sometimes a parasitic one—that was neither quite native nor
quite Western. Often     it   was easier to describe this patent, obtrusive mixture
§   176                            ACCULTURATION                                235
than If) reconstruct tlic native primitive culture before it went all to pieces. One
could observe the workings of the hybrid culture instead of having to extricate
or to infer the workings of the past. Further, the unconscious hold of ethno-
centrism on all of us is strong; so that some students preferred dealing with a
bastard partial derivative of their own culture to orienting themselves in one of
radically different assumptions, patterns, and attitudes; the mental journey took
them less far from home. Again, uncontaminated primitive societies still going
their own way might possess fairly retarded cultures, but normally these would
be adjusted fairly well to their   own problems and making more or less of a
success as going concerns. In contrast, when the much more massive and power-
ful Occidental civilization begins to   impinge on backward cultures, it tends to
disarrange or disorient these. Primitive societies in process of disappearance are
therefore usually full of maladjustments, miseries, and unsolved problems. These
sufferings stimulate students with philanthropic or reformist inclinations or
those interested in social pathology, but tend to distract those    whose interest
lies rather in cultural patterns and their normal values.
     At first, acculturation studies also held out an exciting promise of showing
how the wheels of culture change go round. One saw what people had been,
what they were, what they were turning into, and why. It was like catching the
dynamics of culture change in the act, almost like setting up a laboratory. This
is more or less true. Yet essentially the same thing holds for all culture changes

due to contact, in the past as well as now, between two alien civilizations as well
as when our own is concerned. The precise motivations of the people involved
in these former and foreign situations will mostly not be as familiarly vivid; but
in compensation the ultimate effect on their culture patterns will     normally be
much more fully visible after the act of acculturation has been completed than
while it is still in progress; and the outcome should be more fully understand-
able in the perspective yielded by a more remote period or region. There is no
difference of principle between the acculturation involved in the Hellenization
of the Romans in Italy during the two or three centuries following 270 b.c. and
that of the Americanization of Italians in the United States in the century fol-
lowing A.D. 1850. The chief unlikeness is that the ancient Italians were the domi-
nant and majority group, the modern Italians a minority and socially dominated
group. Which problem one prefers to investigate is largely a matter of taste and
temperament. Those to whom foreign and historical phenomena easily carry a
meaning, or do so only with difficulty, will respectively be interested in one or
the other approach. The approaches are equally legitimate.      Which alternative
one chooses for himself is likely to be determined by the degree to which one is
ethnocentric or allocentric, at home with a synchronic or a diachronic view, in-
clined to discharge ideas into action or to let them sink in deeper   —rather than
being a matter of better or worse scientific procedure.
     At any rate, these reflections on method are of a certain importance because
they show that the particular type of "acculturation studies" developed by an-
236                                CULTURE CHANGE                                     §   l?^

thropologists in the interval between the         two World Wars does not so much
represent the discovery of a radically new type of problem as the emphasizing of
one special aspect of the long-recognized phenomena of culture change, and the
application of investigatory techniques to somewhat nearer and possibly more
"practical" situations.
      What is distinctive in these special acculturation studies, as Linton has
pointed out, consists of several features. First, they view acculturation almost
wholly and one-sidedly from the angle of the impact of a dominant, prestige-
laden society and culture upon a backward or dominated minority. Next, the
changes investigated are almost invariably not spontaneous and automatic, but
purposively directed or controlled, at least in part, by the superior society,
through its Colonial Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Army, police force, au-
thorized missionaries, and the majority public opinion behind these. Special
attention has also been given to phenomena of nativistic revivalism. By this is
meant defense efforts of the dominated culture to glorify its past and to re-
establish at least parts of it. Finally, the acculturation has been studied as            it is


intended to work; namely, to result in ultimate disappearance of the minority—
in its cultural   and social fusion. Even where conspicuous racial differentiation
and a sense of racial superiority tend to prevent social assimilation, as in the case
of the American Negro, there is little doubt that the pressure of the majority
population is in the direction of cultural assimilation. The studies made there-
fore incline both to take ultimate uniformity for granted             and to accept it with
a degree of equanimity.
      All these characteristics of the conventional type of professed acculturation
studies apply to only a selective part of the total phenomena of change resulting
from culture contact, or acculturation in the broadest sense. The following sec-
tions will accordingly try to present some instances of culture-contact dynamics

of a broader and more fundamental type.



      177. ACCULTURATION WITH AND WITHOUT DOMINANCE AND
                                    ASSIMILATION

      Since acculturation basically is the acceptance or borrowing of material from
one culture by another, it always involves some approximation between the
two cultures. But there is no reason why such approximation should continue
into assimilation. Normally, we may expect assimilation only when the outlook
of one society is inclusive and when this society is definitely the stronger and its
culture the more advanced. In the majority of cases the populations somewhat
balance each other in     size,   have separate    territories, are   mutually influenced,
but expect to retain separate ways and customs, and do retain them. In other
words, the acculturation is more or less reciprocal, but incomplete. Each people
§    177                       DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                                   237
is   also likely to be developing new peculiarities even while        it   is   taking over cul-
ture       from the other. This is perhaps the most common form of acculturation:
across a frontier that remains a frontier, although not a closed one.
    A familiar example is the boundary between Mexico and the United States,
which is also the frontier separating the two principal facets of Occidental civili-
zation in the Western Hemisphere: Latin American and Anglo-American. The
border states from Texas to California show a series of influences from Mexico
that are not        found elsewhere: in names, architecture, foods, land grants, com-
munity-property marriage law, frequency of knowledge of the Spanish lan-
guage, and understanding of Latin American ideology and attitudes. Comple-
mentarily for the Mexican states from Tamaulipas to Sonora, as compared with
for instance Michoacan or Oaxaca or Vera           Cruz: people and habits seem and
are more like those of the United States. At the same time there is no question
but that crossing the Rio Grande either way means entering a thoroughly dis-
tinctive form of modern Western culture.
   This type of situation is exceedingly common. It recurs wherever Moham-
medan and Christian peoples adjoin. Religion and language maintain a cultural
barrier that may be stationary for centuries, but which is continually permeated
by diffusion. Spanish civilization for instance has a larger heritage of absorp-
tions from Islamic civilization than any other in western Europe. Witness as a
sample just the following words with the article al-, which were among the many
diffused from Arabic into Spanish, and from there passed through French into
English: algebra, almanac, alkali, alcohol,        alfalfa, alcove,    cotton {algodon in
Spanish), adobe. Primitive tribes        who are neighbors are always partly accul-
tured, as      is   evident from the fact that their cultures regularly resemble each
other even though their speech affiliations may be quite diverse. But no two such
tribal or national cultures are ever identical. Each people is aware that the other

has some peculiarities which have not been accepted by itself.
       Of course assimilation also takes place at times. The Norman and Saxon
fusion after 1066 is a familiar instance. Within three centuries these two strains
were assimilated in culture, speech, and mainly in blood. English civiUzation
was greatly enriched by the infusion of the large Norman-French element into
the Anglo-Saxon, so that by say 1400 it had come to approximate more nearly
French culture in its level; but of course it remained definitely distinct from
French. The Normans produced a decisive effect because their mainland cul-
ture was more advanced and more effective than the belated island culture of
the Saxons; but their being fewer in numbers made the assimilation easy and
natural. Also, they were in a sense professional "acculturators." Only a century
and a half before, in fact, the Viking Norsemen had similarly conquered Nor-
mandy for themselves out of France; and they had since then been acculturing
themselves into fairly close representations of Frenchmen.
       The Manchu, the Mongols, and the still earlier Tungus conquerors of China
238                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                § '77


lost theirown cultures there. This was evidently because they were a small
minority with a much more limited culture than the Chinese. The situation was
almost as if the Apache or the Sioux had overrun the eastern United States
seventy-five or a hundred years ago.        We
                                        might in that event conceivably be
paying taxes to a great Indian chief, while American civilization with its
machinery, highways, schools, newspapers, movies, and slang would perhaps
be going on not so very different from what it actually is. At least one might
so infer from the repeated Chinese cases; and from the story of the Vandals, the
Goths, the Lombards, and other tribes of the Germanic Volkerwanderung. This
hypothetical example indicates that as regards what happens to civilization, the
main results will be much the same, irrespective of who conquers or becomes
"dominant," when a large population possessing a rich culture collides with a
small, backward one. The difference between our imaginary Sioux Indians giv-
ing orders from the Capitol and collecting customs duties for themselves in
New York, and the actual Sioux living submarginally beyond the Mississippi
because they have made a poor go of farming and can't all join             Wild West
shows   —this difference   is   one that affects very profoundly the success and for-
tunes of some ten thousands of Sioux. But that            is   the principal effect the
imagined difference would have had. Native Sioux buffalo-hunting culture
would almost certainly be as essentially disintegrated by now as it actually is,
even if the Sioux had by some miracle conquered us; and American culture
would perhaps have been modified only in minor respects.
     Some United States Indians have worked out an interesting semiassimila-
tion of their own. These are certain central tribes, such as the Winnebago, the
Fox, and the Shawnee. They have accepted American money, dress, houses,
                                   —
furniture, and transportation in other words, the tangibles and the economics
of our civilization. But they have kept their old social institutions and rituals.
This snatching of a half-preservation from the pervasive swamping which
acculturation has meant for most Indians appears to be due to an intransigeant
sense of superiority that these few tribes managed to retain even when defeated
and crowded onto reservations they never accepted spiritual dominance by the
                                       :




white man. The Shawnee have had an unusual history of migrating from west
to east and then north and west again for three hundred years, and of repeatedly
moving into contact with white men and a variety of Indian tribes, and out
again. Exceptionally exposed in these long roamings to a multitude of possible
diffusions, they have ended up by developing an anti-acculturation attitude, in
order to preserve their identity. Thus they avoided or postponed the total as-
similation with which their small numbers threatened them.
      The Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico have also kept their
society and religion intact, plus a good deal of their material culture       and sub-
sistence. This is because for two and a half centuries they were under Spanish
rule, with enforced Christianity. They countered with an outward acceptance of
§    177                    DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                                    239

this,beneath which they kept their old rituals and idea systems alive by a sort
of semisecret passive resistance. They were aided in their conservatism by the
sparseness of Caucasian immigration.
        Somewhat similar is what happened in Latin American countries in which
the Indian racial ingredient remains heavy, especially parts of Mexico, Guate-
mala, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. Here the Aztec, Otomi, Maya, Quechua, or
Aymara Indians were economically oppressed by their conquest, and were made
Christians more effectively than on the remote Pueblo frontier of             New Mexico.
Hence their old religion was completely shattered and is now largely lost, even
where they live in solid populations of hundreds of thousands. Mostly they are
devout Catholics, but with considerable pagan absorptions. Their dress is not
the old native one; but       it   often is distinctive of locality or   class, like   peasant
costume. The rest of their life is a similar mosaic of indigenous and Spanish
elements in complex and unpredictable combinations. There are millions of such
"Indians" in these countries, with a culture that             is   not pre-Columbian, not
Spanish or colonial, not modern Occidental, but some of each, plus local develop-
ments evolved from the mixture during four hundred years. There has been an
enormous amount of acculturing going on here                 in these centuries.       But the
product is better characterizable as a hybridization than as an acculturation, if
that word is allowed to retain         its   usual implication of assimilation into some-
thing superior or larger. These millions of Indians are not "assimilated," either
nationally or culturally.
        A third type of adjustment has been made by the Navaho, a branch of the
Athabascan Apache, along with whom they entered the Pueblo territory in the
southwestern United States an unrecorded number of centuries ago. For some
reason, the Navaho took over more culture from the Pueblos than did the other
Apache: corn-planting, cloth-weaving, probably matrilineal descent, certainly a
great mass of ritual elements. Subsequently they borrowed sheepherding and
silversmithing from the Spaniards. With these enrichments of their culture, they
became definitely prosperous, by their own standards, in a habitat that is pretty
meager in resources. But this very poverty of the land resulted in few Spaniards
or Americans      coming into it. Meanwhile the Navaho multiplied themselves
severalfold in the eighty years   between 1865 and 1945; so that instead of re-
tracting as did so many other tribes, they overflowed their territory. The result
is    that they are largely    self-sustaining,     independent, proud, and willing to
maintain their old ways. They are Navahos with Navaho habits, dress, and
speech, not imitation white men; and the usual absorption by assimilation is not
in the least in sight for them at present. The chief causes of this situation seem
to be their old and skillful adaptation to a rather poor environment; their growth

in    numbers, which made them a regional majority instead of a swamped
minority; and with this the preservation of assurance and even a certain sense
of superiority.
240                                CULTURE CHANGE                                    § 177


    This factor of assurance can be of the greatest importance if a minority
wishes to maintain itself. The Gypsies were satisfied with themselves, wanted
to   remain separate, and did keep themselves          intact in   Europe   for centuries.
They changed in some measure along with the culture that enveloped them, as
in shifting from horses to automobiles in the United States        —but without thereby
ever coming any nearer to social absorption, which they evidently did not desire.
Perhaps the greatest dislocation of the semiautonomy of their caste society in
the United States was due to       WPA
                                     and other work-relief inducements of the
1930's. Since    Gypsies ordinarily possessed only portable and tangible property,
those who, previous to WPA, wished to escape could ordinarily have done so
only    at   a low social level; for this   it   was hardly worth while trading their
unshackledness. It was perhaps the half-realization of this fact which strength-
ened their old attitude of aloofness and professed self-satisfaction.
    On the other hand, the fact that Jews remain a minority group is perhaps
more largely due to Gentile majority pressure. As their enforced segregation and
exclusion diminished cumulatively in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
the Jews began definitely to assimilate culturally, and even socially. They have
been, on the whole, economically prosperous, so that those who wished to and
did flow out of their old caste confinement had opportunity to do so on favor-
able social levels.
       By way of contrast, it may be of interest to consider some cases where
groups of Western origin have become minority populations.


               178.   JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA
    In 1 163 a colony of Jews from Persia settled at K'aifeng in Honan. Five
hundred years later they were still there, as attested by a stone inscription, and
had just rebuilt their synagogue under imperial sanction. Two centuries more,
however, and they were preserving only a consciousness of being Jews and some
scrolls of their Law.    The last rabbi had died about 1830 and the synagogue was
pulled down by 1850. The colony no longer knew Hebrew, could not therefore
read their scrolls, were uncircumcised, had lost their pedigrees, and were indis-
tinguishable in names, dress, and often in features from Chinese.              They had
become poor, and this may have contributed to the relative rapidity of their final
assimilation.
       Even older is a Jewish colony in Cochin in southern India, which was
flourishing in 1020, as is shown by a grant of lands and privileges to one of its
leaders, preserved     on copper plates of that date. There are also Jewish tomb-
stones dated 1269. Following the Hindu pattern, these Jews today are divided
into three castes, which do not marry or eat together, though their religion and
general culture are identical. The so-called "White" Jews number less than 150
and are all in one congregation, to which the "Black" are not admitted. These
§   178              JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA                     24I

Whites may include some descendants of the original Jewish settlers in India,
but seem mainly to be of Spanish Jewish stock that arrived in the sixteenth cen-
tury and kept itself separate. They are of about the same complexion as southern
Europeans, and in blood they are very high in type A (§ 72), a distribution char-
acteristic of the Iberian Peninsula.   The "Brown" caste numbers only two or
three      dozen native servants or ex-servants of the White caste converted to
Judaism. The Black caste is some ten times as numerous as the White and has
seven synagogues. They resemble the Cochin Hindus in color and blood type,
and in origin they must be either outright converts from the native population
or the descendants of former cumulative intermai riages of Jewish immigrants
with natives. The two main castes arc old: in 1686 they were described much
as now, and synagogues still in use by the Whites and the Blacks were built in
1568 and 1489, respectively. The Cochin Jews are at once well fitted into south-
ern-Indian civilization and separate from it where they want to be, which         is

                  and group identity. They live in a ghetto street, but from
chiefly in religion
choice. They all learn to read Hebrew, the Blacks as sedulously as the
Whites, for prayers and services, but talk Malayalam along with the rest of
Cochin. Rice is their staple food, as it is in   all   southern India; but they will
never mix curries of meat with those of milk, in conformity with the orthodox
Jewish injunction. They chew betel, paint their nails, play rummy, but have pre-
served their Hebrew ritual and festivals scrupulously. There is much accultura-
tion,     but also a wholly successful maintenance of the integrity of a minority
group and of a subculture around an intact nucleus of religion.
      Equally interesting are the native Christians of Cochin,      who legendarily
stem from the disciple St. Thomas, and at any rate were found long-established
when the Portuguese reached India in 1498. There are five sects of tJiem. Two
groups are Roman Catholics, one using Latin and the other Syriac as the ritual
language. These both acknowledge the Pope, of course, but represent somewhat
different degrees of secondary influence of Portuguese missionaries on the local
Christians. The native Chaldaean Syrians are under the Patriarch of Babylon;
the Jacobite Syrians, under the Patriarch of Antioch. From these latter, the fifth
sect, the Reformed or St. Thomas Syrians, seems to have branched off, with its

own local bishop as head, under the influence of immigrant Protestant mis-
sionaries; this sect rejects confession, relics, masses for the dead, and invocation

of saints.    To these live sects there correspond seven castes, which absolutely
prohibit interdining     and intermarriage, in conformity with standard Hindu
custom. The Roman Catholics of Latin rite comprise three castes, whose basis
of separatism is not clear. Otherwise, each sect is also a caste, except that the
Jacobite     and Reformed Svrians are jointly split—not on the basis of religious
adherence, but of ancestral residence: the northerners, Jacobite and Reformed
alike, claim to have arrived in India earlier, thus being superior, and accordingly

refusing to marry with the southerners.
242                               CULTURE CHANGE                                   §   178

      It is clear that the customary tolerance of Asiatics toward religions, strength-

ened by the dominant Hindu leaning toward caste particularity, afford minority
groups of foreign origin an excellent chance to maintain themselves without
being extinguished by assimilation, and yet to acculture, outside of their             re-
ligion, as far as is convenient to them. At the same time, it is also evident that

the Cochin Jews, and still more the Cochin Christians, have been aided in the
preservation of their particularities by occasional relations with overseas co-
religionists, resulting in their reinvigoration as minorities.     The Jews in China,
remote, inland, and secluded, were beyond such reinforcement, and both their
social and their cultural identity washed away after some centuries.



              179.   VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION
      It is   true that much modern acculturation of minorities is directed by the
majority culture, and that their assimilation       is   consciously furthered as some-
thing desirable. Uniformity has a way of commending itself to majorities. How-
ever, there is some importance in remembering that assimilation and standardi-
zation are not inevitable outflows from anything in the nature of man or his
culture.      A whole lot of human history has unrolled without any notable en-
deavors at uniformizing. The Persian Empire, the Hellenistic states, and Rome
were all notorious for not attempting any total assimilation of their subjects.
One obeyed the authorities, kept the peace, and paid taxes. Beyond that, one was
free to follow the ways of his fathers or to abandon them. And there was a
deal of acculturation nevertheless. Asia Minor and Syria largely turned Greek
in culture and speech; the greatest Greek city in the world was Alexandria in
Egypt; Gauls and Iberians became utterly Romanized             —of their free   will, be-

cause it was to their own advantage or prestige, not because a ruler or a majority
put pressure on them.
    Ethnically at least, the attitude of the Middle Ages was much the same.
Conformity to the Christian doctrine and church was exacted, but little else.
In fact, controlled acculturation came late. Not until well into the modern period
of European history, along with the rise of consciously nationalistic programs,
did the inclination become strong to improve people of other culture and speech
by inducing or forcing them to accept one's own. China and India have always
been notoriously tolerant or indifferent in these matters. The list of "internally
marginal" backward peoples that have been mentioned (§ 175)              —who are of
                                            —
course only partly accultured populations is evidence.
      A few cases to exemplify this generalization —that much human accultura-
tion has been voluntary     —will now be   cited.   One instance will be recent, one
older, the third in the primitive field.
      Since the Meiji reform of 1868, Japan has obviously been making its culture
over to conform progressively to Western civilization, at least in most respects.
Thus, following the charter oath, M'ith its clause that "intellect and learning
 J   179                     VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION                                243
shall be           sought for throughout the world," in 1871 feudalism was abolished.
Then there followed these introductions:
        1872: compulsory universal education
        1872:       (irst   railroad and telegraph

        1874: Gregorian calendar
        1875: girls' normal school
        1   881:    Bank of Japan
        1889: constitution with a parliament
        1890+: new law codes
        1897: gold standard
        1899: abolition of extraterritoriality
        1902: Anglo-Japanese alliance

        All this "Westernization" or adoption of Occidental culture was voluntary.
Perry had used a mixture of persuasion and threats to open the door and estab-
lish relations;             but none of the actual Japanese acculturation was due to com-
pulsion or even to pressure from outside                 —no more than there had been in the
similarly large-scale Japanese taking-over of Chinese civilization                       between a.d.
400 and 800 discussed in § 172-173 and 303. Neither, of course, was there the
least       diminution of Japanese          social,   racial,   or national integrity.    The whole
matter of minorities and absorption was lacking, as was direction or control from
outside the group. And yet                what happened is one of the most sweeping and
important acculturations in history, even though much too brief to be complete.
    The Lithuanians furnish the contrary example of a people voluntarily sub-
merging both their culture and most of their identity. By about 1200 Europe
had been Christianized, and therewith brought into Occidental civilization,
sxcept for the barbarous, independent Prussi, Litva, Latvi, Kor, and other tribes
along the lower Vistula, the Niemen, and the Dwina. These peoples, often
mistaken for Slavs, were not Slavs, but formed in speech an independent, co-
ordinate division of Indo-Europeans, the Baltic or Lettic branch. To their east,
the Russians had previously been Christianized                       from Constantinople      to   the
rites of the Greek Orthodox Church.                  To the south, the Hungarians and the Poles
had been converted to the authority of Rome. So had the Germans on the south-
west and the Scandinavians to the northwest of the Baltic peoples. From Sweden,
Christianity had been carried to the peaceful pagan Finns off to the north of our
Baits; the latter thus formed the one remaining island of heathenism in Europe
—a typical "internally marginal" retardation.
      Then, in 1226, the Teutonic Knights, a mihtant monastic order, began a
crusade for the conversion or extermination of the Borussians or Prussians. Grad-
ually the whole coastal territory along the east side of the Baltic Sea as far as
the Gulf of Finland was subjugated and appropriated by the                       Germans. Its in-
habitants were either exterminated or Christianized by force.                      One group of
tribes alone, the Litva or Lithuanians, a little farther inland than the rest along
244                               CULTURE CHANGE                             §   179

the  Niemen, fought back for their freedom and managed to retain it long
enough to learn about organized war and statehood from the encroaching Ger-
mans. Beginning with Mindvog in 1247, they developed a series of national
leaders. They also commenced for the first time to found fortified towns such
as Vilna. Soon they passed from holding their own to expanding, especially
toward the south, where the recent Mongol storm had left the several Russian
nationalities and states shattered. Gedymin overran White and Volhynian
Russia; his son, Ukrainian Russia beyond Kiev; under the Grand Duke Jagiello,
Lithuanian dominion reached down the Dnieper almost to the Black Sea. In
1386, the heiress to the Polish crown was persuaded to marry this Jagiello, on
condition that he become Christian; and his people followed him. A personal
union of rule thus bound together Poland, much longer civilized, and Lithuania,
perhaps twice as large. The combination being voluntary and reinforced by joint
successes against the    German Knights, the Lithuanian higher classes eagerly
Polonized themselves. They took over not only the CathoHcism but the speech,
manners, dress, customs, and education of the Poles; and by the diet of Lublin
in 1569 they    handed over the old Lithuanian conquests to Poland. That, inci-
dentally, was the basis of the Polish-Russian disputes over eastern Poland after
World War I and during World War IL The population of the disputed area
still is prevailingly White Russian, as it was when annexed by Lithuania six

hundred years before; but it had been under unchallenged and sole Polish rule
for about two centuries. In the home district of Lithuania, the peasants and
serfs continued to speak Lithuanian and to preserve Lithuanian folk customs;

but the culture of the higher classes was Polish. A heavy proportion of eminent
Poles in all fields of accomplishment were Lithuanian in ancestry, but thought
of themselves as Poles. This was much as a Spaniard or a Tunisian of the early
centuries after Christ would feel himself to be really a Roman in citizenship and
civilization; his actual provincial origin was of no particular moment. All three
of the Baltic states founded in 1919 had genuine difficulties to overcome in their
careers, because they were really erected on a basis of the social submergence of
their nationalities.   The nationalities, as linguistic or ethnic groups, were un-
questionably there. But their educated, prosperous, professional, and politically
trained classes were prevailingly either Germanized, Russianized, or Polonized.
Yet in the case of the Lithuanians, their acculturation and semiassimilation had
really been thoroughly self-sought and self-imposed by a respect for an older
civilization.
      Another voluntary reorientation is that made by the Algonkin and Atha-
bascan hunting and fishing tribes of the great transcontinental coniferous forest
of northern Canada, as a result of European demand for furs. Their habitat was
rich in fine pelts, though miserably poor in almost all other immediate resources.
Deer, moose, or reindeer continued to be hunted for food by these tribes; but
mink, marten, beaver, and ermine assumed a wholly new value in terms of what
white men were ready to give for them: steel traps, firearms, tools and kettles,
§    l8o                  NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                        245
woolen blankets, trinkets, and tea, flour, and pork. A dependence of families,
bands, and tribes on trading posts grew up. Caucasian contacts gave the Indians
more comforts, but also entrenched them more firmly as hunters. Their canoes,
snowshoes, and the like were retained because they had been successfully worked
out to fit living off the country. Their present culture thus has a native founda-
tion, but it also has a large Caucasian constituent and at least partial    Caucasian
motivation. And the acculturation was not due to conquest, to missionaries, or
                        swarming in, but to the fact that the Indians, who re-
to dispossessing settlers
main in the majority, changed their ways of their own accord (§ 327).


                    180. NATIVISM, REVIVALS,         AND MESSIAHS
       After two societies have come into sufficiently close contact for one to feel
the other as definitely more populous, stronger, or better equipped, so that its
own culture is in process of being supplanted by the other, a conscious preserva-
tion effort or defense is often produced. Such reactions have been called nati-
vistic     endeavors or revivals. They envelop with a sort of halo the culture that
is   passing away, and attempt to reaffirm or re-establish it, or parts of it.
       An immigrant group in the United States or Brazil almost always forms an
association of its nationals, not only to give its members aid, but to help preserve
the folkways, customs, speech,      and home life characteristic of the old culture.
This may be done even though the immigrants are economically better off than
they were in the homeland and would not think of returning to the conditions
from which they emigrated. People in growing up do get attached to the ways
of their culture, much as they become attached to their kinsfolk or their old
home. By the time they begin to age, their memories of the culture have got
tinged with pleasurable nostalgic sentiments and assume a symbolic value. Folk
dances, for instance, or literary exercises thus may come to mean much           more
than they did in the old country.
   Much the same effect may be produced when the territory of a more back-
ward minority is being occupied by an alien dominant population; when a
people is conquered and forced to change its ways; or even if it only feels its
own culture peacefully giving way under the automatic weight of a neighbor-
ing larger and more successful one. Thus the ancient bardic gatherings called
Eisteddfods were revived in 1798 for the conscious preservation and cultivation
of Welsh speech, poetry, tradition,and music; these were almost all that re-
mained of the national culture of Wales, since Welshmen had long been full
participants in British citizenship, empire, and civilization.
      With primitive tribes, the shock of cultural contact is often sudden and
severe. Their hunting lands or pastures may be taken away or broken under
the plow, their immemorial customs of blood revenge, head-hunting, sacrifice,
marriage by purchase, or polygyny be suppressed, perhaps their holy places
profaned or deliberately overthrown. Resistance is crushed by firearms or by
246                              CULTURE CHANGE                                §   1   80

superior military organization. Despondency settles over the tribes. Under the
blacking-out of all old established ideals and prestiges, without provision for new
values and opportunities to take their place, the resulting universal hopelessness
will weigh doubly heavy because it seems to reaffirm inescapable frustration in
personal life also. At this juncture a prophet is likely to arise and picture a wish
fulfillment a release from the human impasse by supernatural mechanism. The
              :



ancestral dead are to return and sweep the encroaching whites off the land.
Bulletproof shirts will neutralize firearms. The game animals will pour out
from the bowels of the earth whither they withdrew to evade the white man.
The old customs, the old rituals, the old happy gatherings, will all be re-estab-
lished. All that is needed, says the prophet, is faith in the impending miraculous
event, and some slight token observance of faith, such as dancing, or destroying
one's belongings of white manufacture. Therewith a revivalistic       movement of
return to the good old days is launched. The prophet's motivation       may range
from sincere delusion to desire for power, fame, or even money, or be com-
pounded of these. His converts follow him because of the stress of their social
unhappiness. Skeptical individuals or groups are ignored, or finally get caught
in the mass infection too.
     Some of these cults end in an armed clash and defeat. Such were, among
American Indians, the Delaware Prophet's announcements of 1762 and the
Shawnee Tenskwatawa's of 1805, which were followed by Pontiac's conspiracy
and by Tecumseh, the Battle of Tippecanoe, and the Creek War, respectively.
Other movements merely fade away when the date passes and the prediction is
unfulfilled. More often they maintain themselves as a new, hybrid church com-
bining elements selected out of the former tribal religion and out of Christian-
ity— its hybridity conforming to the transitional character of the dissolving

native culture as a whole. Of this character was the revivalistic cult established
about 1884 by the Columbia River Sahaptin Indian called Smohalla, which
ended in a permanent religion with church buildings, half after the Caucasian
model.
        In 1869 a   Walker Lake Paiute of Nevada named Wodziwob began to
preach locally the end of the world, destruction of the white man, and return
of the Indian dead. This "First Ghost  Dance" belief spread intertribally with
increasing momentum. By 1871      had the Indians of northern California in a
                                   it

ferment (§ 239); but from 1872 to 1874 it broke up into three movements. The
first   of these was the Earth Lodge cult, professing to protect the faithful from
catastrophe by having them enter specially built subterranean houses. Next was
the Bole-Maru, which arose after it began to appear that the world would not
end just then, and which therefore relegated the impending catastrophe and
return of the dead into the background; but its prophets or dreamers seized
upon certain spectacular native dances, simplified these, and combined them
with the use of patterned flags and modifications of white women's dresses. The
third current was the Big Head cult, which drifted away to attach special im-
§   l8o                     NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                      247
portancc to a certain type of feather headdress, which was passed on Hkc a fetish
to new converts. Of these three proHferations of the Ghost Dance, only the Bole-
Maru lasted: it still was being practiced after seventy years at the outbreak
of World War II.       It   thus represents a return from the convulsive character of
a messianic revival or native millennium to the more stable adjustment of pro-
gressive acculturation.
      Even more famous was the Second Ghost Dance of around               1890.   This
originated, in a sense, among the same Nevada Paiute that started the first one,
the originating dreamer or prophet now being Wovoka or Jack Wilson, a son
of the foremost convert of Wodziwob twenty years before. His doctrine was the
same: cataclysm, reversion of the land         to the Indians, return of their    dead
relatives.    Because the First Ghost Dance had found its most ardent proselytes
to the    west among the California Indians,       who were now disillusioned, this
second movement stirred a new clientele of Indians to the east, mostly beyond
the Rockies, among Dakota, Arapaho, Kiowa, and other Plains tribes. Its hys-
teria led to the battle or     massacre of Wounded Knee, after which it subsided
fairly rapidly, leaving as its chief relicts a   few symbolic games and a couple of
partly new dance costumes and steps       —besides of course a more profound despair
or resignation.
      It is   interesting that the rapid and wide spread of these Ghost Dances was
     due to a set of acculturation phenomena that had greatly increased the
itself

communication possibilities of the Indians. These were: English as a means of
intertribal     communication; railroads; and enforced acquaintance of diverse
groups with each other on reservations.
      Analogous stirrings, upheavals, and outbreaks are on repeated record from
South America and South Africa, in Nigeria and New Guinea, wherever Cau-
casians have sufficiently crowded natives as to their land, subsistence, folkways,
or religion. Usually the revolt     —or the attempted escape into the miraculous
comes after the invaded culture has had its really mortal wound, when the
natives as a mass begin to despair of its survival. Until then, they are troubled
by the progressive disintegration of their fortunes and institutions, but not yet
driven to relying on the supernatural for hope fulfillment. A few years later,
                                                                 —
disillusionment is profound enough to keep them in apathy at any rate until a
new generation has grown up. There seem always to be some pessimists and
skeptics, and some passive resignationists. But when the emotional pressure on
the mass becomes strong enough, even these individuals get caught up in the
hope beliefs of the majority, or temporarily retire into side-Hne conformity: it is
often difficult to tell which, subsequently.
      The Jews have been particularly prone to such nativistic revival attempts.
In 722 B.C. and again in 586, conquest and deportation by Nineveh and Babylon
had ended, realistically and historically, the Hebrew dream of a great pros-
perous national kingdom. They possessed by then, however, a unique religion,
more and more centering on belief in an exclusive deity with special interest in
248                                   CULTURE CHANGE                                   § 1 80


themselves. This belief led them in two directions. In part, they broadened their
national monolatry and monotheism into a universal conceptual monotheism,
and therewith laid the foundation for Christianity and Mohammedanism. On
the other side, the narrower and cruder among the Hebrews took increasing
comfort in the idea of the Messiah, the anointed one, descendant of David, who
would restore the Hebrew kingdom to glory and perhaps supremacy among
the powers of the earth. For more than two hundred years of Roman domi-
nance, this Messianic idea kept goading the Jews into hopeless rebellions, the
greatest being that led by Bar-Kochba,  who actually took Jerusalem and a
thousand villages before being destroyed by Hadrian's generals in a.d. 135.
Thereafter rebellions were fewer; but claims to Messiahship kept being put for-
ward through mediaeval and modern centuries, their frequency being fairly pro-
portionate to the degree of misery or hopelessness the Jews were enduring at
any given time in western or eastern Europe or under Islam.
        The expectation of a Messiah definitely entered into the making of Chris-
tianity. Jesus'  own immediate Jewish disciples considered him to be such: the
epithet Christos, the anointed,         is   the   Greek translation of Mashiach, the one
anointed with oil         mashach   —as a sign of sovereignty.       It was denationalized

Jews like Paul, and converted Gentiles, who in the generation after the Cruci-
fixion swung the emphasis of the faith away from that of a Palestinian Jewish
minority sect onto a basis that could serve for a universal religion. Blood sacri-
fice,                                                           made noncom-
            circumcision, the exact Levitical law, were eliminated or
pulsory; belief, baptism,   and communion sufficed to make non-Jews equal
members of the church; and therewith the teaching of Jesus became possible
of acceptance the world over. And with that, of course, the historically under-
lying nativistic revivalism was wholly transcended.



                                 181.   ETHNIC REVIVALS
    Non-Messianic but literally revivalistic is a late development of Jewish his-
tory Zionism, the movement to re-establish an independent state in Palesdne,
        :




to serve at least as a center or a token of Judaism if not as a home for all the Jews
of the world. Incidentally, the Zionistic movement is only a particular example
of a world-wide drift toward autonomous nationalism              :   an independent Finland
and an independent Poland emerging and re-emerging from World War I, Ice-
land breaking away from Denmark, the cry of "Indonesia for the Indonesians,"
and dozens of similar cases. The only fundamentally peculiar element in Zion-
ism is that its proponent Jews are not a full nationality and have not been one
for two thousand years. It is religion and religious customs, not speech or gen-
eral culture, that have at the same time held the Jews together and segregated
them from the rest of the world.
        Some of the Jewish Zionists went one step farther, however, and decided
to restore Hebrew as a national language (§ 107, 120), though it had been only
§   1   82                      ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY                                  249
a       language of   ritual   and   literature   — a "dead" language as compared with a
"mother tongue"        — twice as long as Latin.        It   is   believed that already in Jesus'
time Aramaic had replaced Hebrew as the everyday idiom of Palestine.                        Now
engineering and economics are being taught in Hebrew at a Hebrew university
in Jerusalem, and some tens of thousands of Palestinian Jewish children speak
nothing but Hebrew.
         That we are really dealing here with only an example of a generic drift of
the times is shown by the attempted revivification of Gaelic in Eire, and by the
creation of a Norwegian national language in recent generations. Gaelic or Irish,
of Keltic derivation, had sunk in the later nineteenth century to being the speech
of a fraction of a minority population. In general, it survived only in western
Ireland, mostly       among the rural, remote, little-educated, and uninfluential. It
has now been enacted into one of the two official languages of Eire, is spoken in
the Dail, and taught in all schools.
     Norway, while politically a part of Denmark, got along with Norwegian
folk dialects  on the part of its farmers and fishermen, though people with
schooling and social pretensions had learned Danish, or rather a Norwegian
sort of near-Danish. After the separation in 181 4, this modified Danish assimi-

lated more toward the homespun or folk Norwegian, and became known as
Riksmaal, or "language of the realm," in distinction from standard Danish.
This was not enough to satisfy the more ardent Norwegians, however, and soon
after 1840 a linguist, Aasen, constructed a synthetic pure Norwegian out of local
dialects. This, the Landsmaal or "language of the country," was accepted by

some, opposed by others, suffered some changes, but was finally adopted as a
second official and standard Norwegian language.
     These cases are of some theoretical interest because it has been widely taken
for granted that while a language in its written form might be embalmed and
used indefinitely, as a living speech it was dead and unrevivable once it had no
more mother-tongue speakers. It is evidently unsafe to predict too sweepingly
about what any culture or aspect of culture can or cannot do. However, it would
also be rash to predict that Biblical Hebrew, Irish Gaelic, and Landsmaal Nor-
wegian have struck deep enough roots to flourish permanently and inde-
pendently of propaganda, subsidy, and official support. They do look like ex-
                                                       —
periments that so far are partly successful which is a pretty good resuscitation
for the seemingly moribund.



                        182. ASSIMILATION AND                UNIFORMITY
    The recent tendency and desire to see group minorities and cultural local-
isms assimilated into complete uniformity is much accentuated by the recent
burst of technological development. Not only does a better machine quickly
displace a      dozen previous ones, but ever improving transportation and com-
munications leave to all particularisms very little isolation in which to shelter
250                                  CULTURE CHANGE                                        § 182


themselves. Such particularisms may get temporarily caught up as an interesting
novelty and have their nation-wide or world-wide day of vogue: the dirndl
costume, for instance. Otherwise, they certainly tend to get obliterated by the
increasingly uniformized general culture.         It   is   precisely Austrian   and South
German dirndl-wearers who gave up peasant dress. In a country like the United
States, everybody dresses alike, rides in the same          makes of cars, reads the same
dispatches, columns, and cartoons in similarly headlined newspapers, dances to
the same music, in any given year or month. Much of this uniformization has
begun to spread internationally. It is certainly convenient to find the same foods,
drinks, houses, clothes, amusements, and reading matter anywhere in the world
—if one knocks about the world. But, equally surely, it is also monotonous. And
when there is no more place left to find something different, or from whose
localism to derive a new stimulation, the world may conceivably awaken to a
situation Uke that of the ancient Hawaiians when they found that their religion
had staled on them (§168).
      It   is   an old recognition that nationalistic effectiveness resides in union.
Whether it be a matter of survival, expansion, or economic prosperity, a united
EngUsh-speaking America was bound to count for more than thirteen colonial
states; a German Reich, more than the sum of its twenty-six kingdoms, princi-

palities,                                                      —
         and free cities. And next to political union in national efficiency is             —
social and cultural uniformity.A hundred million people living, acting, speak-
ing, thinking, and feeling ahke can normally move with a trip-hammer effect,
whatever the undertaking, such as could not possibly be attained by a union of
fifteen    groups of ten million each, differing in customs, outlook, occupations,
manners, and ideals       —except perhaps occasionally in a transcendent         crisis.   In a
shrinking world, which is therefore inescapably more competitive, there is an
obvious premium, first for national size; next for tightness of political unity;
third for cultural uniformity    —   at least while other things remain equal. India and

China have the size, but neither the unity nor the uniformity; Japan and Ger-
many, by 1935, had each begun to enforce their unity and uniformity, and there-
with to threaten the world. The unusual cultural homogeneity of our 140 mil-
lions undoubtedly was a great help to the United States in enabling us to
sustain the storm of World War II and to pass rapidly from defense to attack.
Yet it is well to remember that this homogeneity differed from that of Hitlerian
Germany chiefly in being spontaneous and unenforced, although its degree, after
the United States was well in the war, was not so very different. The cause and
the motivation of our homogeneity were different from those of the Germans
and the Japanese. But it remains to be judged by what the future brings whether
the net effect on ourselves of having had to uniformize ourselves, especially if
we have to repeat the process, may not include the development of some atti-
tudes similar to German and Japanese ones. There seems to be little doubt that
a degree of differentiation by locality, profession, or custom, with the impinge-
ment of their varieties on the whole, affords a provocative stimulation and a
§   «82                         ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY                                   25I

wider scope of experiment toward fruitful change of culture forms, as well as
greater inclination toward tolerance of differences.
        In this connection the Russian attitude on acculturation          is   of considerable
interest for       its   bearing both on uniformity and on    its   control.   As a left-wing
party developing in an absolute monarchy, the original Bolsheviki were natu-
rally     in   sympathy with freedom        for national aspirations.   As     socialists,   their
planning for a new organization of international culture, and their program of
control of change, both tended toward their favoring uniformity.                   When they
came into power in Russia, they set up, gradually, a long series of soviet repub-
lics, one for each larger minority nationality        —
                                                   Ukraine, White Russia, Latvia,
Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Uzbek, Tadjik, Kirghiz, and so on plus the            —
inclusion in the Russian Soviet Socialist Federated Republic of subautonomous
units such as Altai and Yakutsk. At first, subject or included peoples, such as
the Georgians, the Uzbek, the Yakut, were to be liberated and unsubmerged,
                                                —
much like the Russian proletariat itself also, much as Woodrow Wilson con-
ceived of Letts and Lithuanians as free and autonomous nationalities. Alphabets
were devised for the peoples if they had none; literature was translated into
their vernacular; and everything was done to encourage each people to work
out its own culture in Hne with its own past and its aspirations." It was Czar-
dom, the absolute and exploiting state, which had been crushing minorities and
subject nationalities, just as it deprived the masses of liberty and opportunity. It
was assumed by the Bolsheviks that each such group would spontaneously re-
spond to the grant of its cultural liberty, and gratefully reciprocate by em-
bracing the political faith of its liberators and supporting them. Some notable
experiments were made in this direction of tribal cultural development, most
interesting perhaps when they were applied to wholly specialized and backward
peoples like the Chukchi, or some of the almost pure pastoral nomads.
      After some dozen years the official Soviet attitude on these matters changed.
The causes may have been a growing sense of security as to survival of the Soviet
regime; the tendency to rechannel the emphasis of the Communist program
from world-wide revolution to internal strengthening; or still other factors the             —
situation is complex, and it is unnecessary to account for all the precise causes in
the present connection. At any rate, there was a shift in official policy away from
international and multinational to strictly nationalistic aims. This shift was enor-
mously strengthened by the successful resistance to the German attack after
1941. The overwhelmingly leading nationality in the Soviet Union being Rus-
sian, and especially Great Russian, this new attitude in effect was one of Russian
patriotism. With this majority patriotism the minority nationalisms might in-
terfere;       but they could hardly strengthen it materially. The later Soviet policy
has therefore tended to revert once more to de-facto Russianization, to promot-

     ^^ Except in the domain of religion,  any form of which the early Bolsheviks saw as an
inevitable      enemy. Therefore they did what they could to prevent even the shamanistic
practices of their primitive populations.
                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                        182
252                                                                                §


ing uniformity and homogeneity. The cultural autonomy of Tadjik or Lithuan-
ians or Yakut or Ukrainians is evidently slated henceforth to consist mainly of
folk dances and sports and suchlike matters, plus the use of their own tongue
in local   and provincial spheres. That    is,   the minority nationalities will pre-
sumably be submergent once more.
      Quite likely this process is inevitable. Political fractionation would be end-
less over the  world if every group with a culture and language that could be
distinguished as separate were to split off into complete political autonomy at
will. There is no attempt here to indicate a solution, or to say what rightly ought

to be. The Russian situation is pictured in order to outline, a      little   more fully
than one is likely to conceive it from the angle of one's own majority nationaUty
alone, some of the involvements of acculturation, assimilation, and homogeniz-
ing to uniformity.
                                   INDEX
Aascn (linguist), 249                         180; reform, 171; Russian, 216; segre-

Acculturation, 195, 229, 232; Algonkin,       gative reduction, 179-80; Soviet, 251;

  244-45; American Indians, 247; assim-       Turkish, 219; world language, 215
  ilation, 236-40; Athabascan, 244-45;      Altai (nationality), 251

  culture, 233-36, 236-40; definition,      Altaic (family of languages), 22

  233-34; dominance, 236-40; foreign        America: culture, 71-72, loi; pre-/^92,
  origin (Asia), groups of, 242;              230; submarginal culture, 230-31
  Japanese, 243; Jews, Cochin, 241;         American Anthropological Association,
  Lithuanians, 243-44; Middle Ages,           233
  242; minorities, 242; nature, 234;        American civilization, 66; constitution,
  patterns, 234; processes, 234; Russia,      176; psychological strands, 132;
  251-52; spontaneous, 242-45; volun-         society and culture, 77-80

  tary, 242-45                              American Indians: acculturation, 247;
Achievement, and capacity for, 148            communication possibilities, 247;
Adams, John Couch, 149                        culture, 109, 124; dog, 187-88; farm-

Aeschylus, 146                                ing, 198; First   Ghost Dance, 246;
Aesthetic styles, 138                         ghost dances, 246-47; internal mar-
Africa: animals, 229; cultural retarda-       ginality, 232; maize, 222; pets, 202;

  tion, 230;    language distribution in,     prophets, 246-47; Second Ghost
  22-23; nomads, 85; political organ-         Dance, 247; semiassimilation, 238;
  ization, 206. See also Egypt; Negroes       stef>-daughter marriage, 208, 209
Age mates, 83                               American Revolution, 216
Agriculture: American (native), 121;        Americanization movement, 234, 235
  maize, 121; plow, 121, 169-70;            Amharic (language), 22, 42
  rice,   121                               Anabaptist sectarians, 217
Ainu (people), language, map, 21            Analogizing (philological term), 56
Alakaluf (people), 230                      Anadaman, language map, 21
Albanian (language), 20, 29, 52             Anglo-American civilization, 237
Alchemy, 181                                Anglo-Saxon (language), 37
Alexander the Great, 93                     Animals: behavior, 57; breeding, 201-03;
Algebra, 138, 139                             domestication, 201-02; hybridized, 67;
Algonkin (language group), 24, map,           motor habits, 156-58; sacrifice, 108;
  25; acculturation, 244-45                   self-preservation, 95; social, 9; social

Alphabet: and calendar reform, 171;            valuation, 203; speech, 30-33. See also
  deviation, 127; invention, 121, 124,        Mammals
Animistic ritual, 107                           linguistic families of, 20, 21. See also

Annam, culture, 227                             China; India; Japan
Annamese (language), 22, map, 21              Asia Minor, 242
Apinaye (tribe), 204-05                       Assimilation, 233, 236-40, 249-52; cul-
Apollinian personality, 130                     tural, 236; minorities, 242; social, 236

Arabic (language), 22, 215, map, 23;          Assyria and the Assyrians, 22
  classical, 44^                              Astrology, 180-81, 188
Arabs (people): culture, 84; nomads, 85;      Astronomy, 180-81
  painting, 225; poetry, 178; sculpture,      Athabascan (language group), 24, 42,
  225                                           map, 25; acculturation, 244-45
Aramaic (language), 249                       Athabascan Apache (Indian tribe), 239
Arapaho (language), 42                        Attitude, 129, 130
Arapaho (tribe), 247                          Ausonius (Latin poet), 257
Araucanian Indians, language, 24,             Australia:   monkeys, 229; peasantry
  map, 26                                       lacking, 92; useful arts, 183^
Arawak (language group), 24,                  Australian ballot, 175-76
  maps, 25, 26                                Australians (native): cultural retarda-
Arawak Indians, ant ordeal, 205                 tion, 230; culture, 109, 132, 230;

Archaeology, 4-5, 233                           society, 155; speech, 24

Archery, 186                                  Austronesian language family, 24, map,
Aristocracy, 76                                 21. See also Malaya-Polynesian

Aristophanes, 134                             Automobile, 166-68, 186; history of, 164,
Aristotle, 133, 144; natural selection, 174     170; invention, 176
Arizona. See Southwest                        Avestan religion, 2i5n
Armenia (nationality), 251                    Ax: function, 112; lictor's, 113; meaning,
Armenian (language), 20                         112; symbol, 113; use of, 112
Armor, 55                                     Aymara (language group), 24, 29, 239,
Arrow and bow, invention of, 164.               map, 26
  See also Bow                                Azerbaijan (nationality), 251
Art, 1 1 1 ; discoveries and innovations,     Aztec Indians, 239; technological
  165; lost, 182; play impulse, 199;            devices, 165

  porcelain, 177; Russia, 216; style, 137,

  138, 200; useful, disappearance of,         Babylonians, 22. See also Mesopotamia
  183-84; woodcut, 186-87. See also           Bahima culture, 85
  Pottery; Sculpture                          Balkan languages, 52
Arthropods: legs, 122-23; patterns, 123;      Ballooning, 164
  structure, 123                              Ballot, invention of, 175

Articulata. See Arthropods                    Baltic languages, 20

Arunta culture, 234                           Bantu linguisticfamily, 22, 27, 46,
Aryan family. See Indo-European                 map, 23
Asia: Christianity, 241; culture,. 227;       Banyankole (people), 85
Basic pattern, 139-44                      Calendar: Chinese, 180; Egyptian, 180;
Basic [Tcrsonality structure, 133            Gregorian, 218, 243; Jewish, 180;
Baskctvvcaving, 157-58                       Mohammedan, 180; recorded counts
Basque (language), 29, map, 21               and observations, 168; solar, 180
Basques (people), 48                       California and intermountain regions,
Beduin culture, 84-85                        dogs, 202
Belgium, nationalities, 35                 Calvinism, 210
Bell, Alexander Graham, 172,        173    Canada, nationalities, 35, 36. See also
Benedict, Ruth. 130, 131                     American Indians; North America
Bering Strait, 229^, 230, 231              Cancer, 162
Bible, English, 38                         Canella (tribe), 204
Bicycles, 163-64, 168                      Cannibalism, 108
Big Head (cult), 246-47                    Cannon, 220
Biography, 175                             Canoes, 183^
Biology, 9, 69; scope of, 2-3              Cantonal cultures, 70-71
Biotas, marginal, 229-31                   Capitalism, slave, 254
Black Jews, 240-41                         Carib (language group), 24, map, 26
Blood: sacrifice, 108, no, 248; type A,    Carnivores, digits, 122

  241                                      Carthaginians, 22
Boas, Franz, 130                           Caste: Beduin, 84; culture, 84-88;
Body politic, 34, 35                         definition, 84; Jews, 240; speech, 31.

Bole-Maru (cult), 246, 247                   See also India
Bolivia: Indians" 239; peasantry, 92       Catholicism, 210
Bolsheviki, 251                            Caucasian (languages), 29
Bottger, Johartn Friedrich, 177            Chaldaean Syrians, 241
Bow: archery, 186; Australian, 183;        Change: culture, 194-252; culture
  composite, 229; cultural history of,       environment, 195, 196; diffusion,
  170; sinew-backed, 230; three-ply, 229     219-23; fashion, 198-201; growth, 195;
Bow and arrow, invention of, 164             in the natural world, 194; play, 195;

Brazil: dogs, 202; Ge family, 204-05         population, 195-98; religion, organ-
Breton (Keltic dialect), 28                  ized, 213-16; revolution, 216-19;

British Isles, lower classes, 99             subsistence, 195-98
Bronze and Bronze Age, diffusion, 222      Chapin, F. Stuart, 12
Brown caste of Jews, 241                   Chellean-pick type, 223
Buddhism, 153; characteristics, 214-15;    Chemistry, 181
  China, 214; India, 153; ritual, no       Cherokee, writing, 177
Bulgarian (language), 52                   Chibcha language, 24, maps, 25, 26
Burial customs, 108, 210; China, no.       Chickens, diffusion, 222
  See also Mummification                   Children: articulate parents, 98; imita-
Bushmen, 230; language, 22, map, 23;         tion, 155; speech, 41;   unhappy or
  painting, ni                               broken marriages, 98
China and the Chinese, lo, 28; alchemy,      Circumcision, 248

  181; bloodshed, ritual, no; Buddhism,      City dwellers, 90

  214; card playing, 225; ceramics, 177;     Civilization, 90; accumulative, 106;

  circular causalities, 197; civil-service     configuration, 124; equator, 230;

  examinations, 224; civilization, 75;         impersonalization, 90; Lowie, quoted,

  clothing, 140; Confusianism, 214;            96; recessions, 105; richness of, 82;

  cross-cousins, 206; culture, 70, 135,        senility, 128. See also Culture

  228; customs, 221 ethos, 102; funerary
                     ;                       Clam eating, 159
  deposit of valuables, no; Jews, 240,       Class cultures, 77

  242; mathematics, 139; nomadism, 85;       Class segregation, 80

  occidental contracts, 226; orientation,    Climates, culture, 196

  128; playing cards, 225; policy of         Clipper ship, 182
  exclusion and seclusion, 228-29;           Clocks, 168
  religion, 153, 215-16; revolution, 218;    Clothing, 139-44; buttons, placing of,
  ritual bloodshed, no; seclusion policy,       157. See also Dress; Fashion

  228-29; self-suificience, 228; size of     Cochin Christians, 241-42
  society, influence of, 80-81; tolerance,   Cochin Jews, 241-42
  242; tribal societies, 232; uniformity     Coffee-drinking, 225
  and unity, 250; urban, 91                  Communication, 71; impulse toward, 32
Chinese (language), 20, 37; affixes and      Communism, goal of, 94
  internal change, 50; monosyllabic          Comte, Auguste, 76, 104
  stems, 50; pronunciations, 45; prose,      Conditioned (learned) activities, 61
  224; sex gender, 46; speech, 46;           Conditioning, 98
  writing, 45, 46, 215. See also Sinitic     Conduct, standards of, 57
Chinook (language), sex gender, 47           Configurational psychology, loi
Christianity, 67, 153, 178, 222; Asia,       Confucianism, 153, 215
  2, 241-42; castes, 241; characteristics,   Consonants, 40; pictorial, 179
  214-15; Hawaii, 211, 212; history,         Constitution (American), 176, 216

  213-14; India, 241; Jews, 248;             Constitution (English), 176
  Lithuanians, 243; marriage, 207-08;        Contact influence, 47, 51, 195. See also
  mediaeval, 210; militancy, 226; mono-        Diffusion
  theistic pattern, 122; progress, 104;      Continents, retarded, 229-30
  Protestantism, 217; Pueblo Indians,        Continuant, 18
  238; Russia, 243; sacrifice, i lo-i i      Convergences and parallels, 195
  superiority, feeling of, 226               Convictions on social matters, 55
Christos (epithet), 248                      Coptic language, 29
Chukchi (people), 251                        Core cultures, 223
Chukchi-Koryak-Kamchadal                     Corpses, contamination by, 108
  (language), map, 21                        Correns (biologist), 151
Church of England, 208                       Cosmetics, 188
Circular causality, 197                      Cousins: cross, 206; parallel, 206
Couvadc taboo restrictions, 115                 national, 190; nature of, 60       1   18; need

Cowboy world of Western fiction and             1   14-18;   nomadic, 84-88; nonmatcrial,
  films, 86                                     103-04; novelty, 171    ;   organic diversity,

Cremation, 108, 210                             67-69; oriental, 218; orientation, 129;

Crete, 113                                      parasitic, 84-88; part-cultures, 82-84;

Cross-cousins, 206                              participation, 98-100; patterns, 224;

Crystal-gazing, 188                             persistence of, 95, 154-55; periods, 72;

Culture, 7-10; abstractions, 7, 33; accul-      phenomena, 11; population, 238;
  turation, 233-40; adolescent, 83; age         preservation effort 245-48; primitive,

  levels, 82-83; areas, 72; assimilation,       115, 202; processes, 152-93; productive

  66, 67, 68, 69, 236; attitudes, 129;          center, 227; progressiveness, idea of,

  Australians (native), 230; backward,          104-12; properties, 62; psychosomatic

  6,   232; caste, 84-88; centers, 232;         activity, 131;    purpose, 1 14-18; radi-

  change, 194-252, 253; civilization, loss      ation of, 227; receptivity, 64, 65, 66,

  of, 197, 198;   common denominators,          69; religion 225-26; resistances, 66;

  120; compositeness of, 64-67; con-            sex phases, 82; social life, ion; society,

  sistency, 65; contact, primitive tribes       75-80; sophisticate, 89, 90, 92, 93;
  shock of, 245-46; content, 100-01;            speech, 86-87; subcultures, 82-84;

  continuity, 65, 69-73; <^oie, 223; death,     subsistence provision amounts, 195-98;

  190-93; defined 8, 10, 60-64; diffusion,      substitutions, 190; superindividual, 61,

  75, 221, 229; diffusion and parallelism       62, 63; superorganic, 61, 62, 63; tradi-

  in, 46-50;   displacements, 186-88;           tion, 219; traits, 195, 221, 223; trans-

  diversity of, 11; economic responsi-          mission, 153; tribal developments, 251;
  bility, 85; eidos,   100-03; environment,     unitary, 193; unstable, 65; use, 112;

  195, 196; environment, changes in,            values, 102-03; varieties, 70. See also

  195, 196; ethos, 100-03; fatigue,             Invention
  211-13; flake, 223; fluctuation and         Cuneiform, 179
  variation, 153; form, loi, 112; func-       Customs, 73; definition, 199; foreign,
  tion, 1 12-14; generic features and proc-     221
  esses, 12; growth, 206-07; historical

  sources, 49; Holland, 172; hybridity,       Daguerre, Louis, 162
  67-69, 234-35; influence of, 98;            Dahomey culture, 132
  instability, 91; integration, 76, 94-96;    Dakota (tribe), 130, 234, 247; language,
  internal marginality, 231-33; inter-          39
  societal functioning of, 221; intra-        Dance: folk, 245; ghost dances, 246-47
  society transmission, 220; invention,       Dark Ages, 93, 105; Christianity, 214;
  160; irrational, 115; language, 31-33,        clothing, 140; culture, 105

  37, 38, 53-59; localisms, 249-52; loss,     Darwin, Charles, 68, 149; essential
  182 fl., 188-90; marginal, 226-29;            achievement, 6; evolution, idea of,
  material 103-04; meaning, 112;                173-74; progress, 104
  motivation, 55; motor habits, 156-58;       Dead, disposal of the, 210
Death, contamination by, io8                Economic motivation, 183
Deity, 122                                  Ecuador, Indians, 239
Delaware Prophet (1762), 246                Education, 96, loi, 155, 219, 220
Democracy, 55, 89                           Egocentricity, 106
Democritus, 144                             Egypt and the Egyptians, 242; calendar,
Demosthenes, 134                              180; civilization, 92; culture, 105,
Determinism, invention, 172                   191-92, 226; hieroglyphs, illus., 179;
DeVries, Hugo, 149                            king-godship, 175; peasant-serfs, 99;
Diaguita (language group), map, 26            society, influence of size of, 80-81;

Diffusion, 195, 219, 226; culture, 231;       sound signs, 179; spelling, reform
  definition, 233; double, 222;               of, 218

  geography, 233; influences, 231;          Eidos, 101-02
  inter-hemispheric, 231; invention, 223;   Eisteddfod (bardic gathering), 145
  resistance to, 223-29                     Empire, concept of, in
Digits, 122                                 Emu, digits, 122
Dionysiac, temperament, 130                 England and English civilization, 237;
Dispersal, 195                                Bible, 38; colonial administration,

Dissemination, 195                            234; culture, 227; cultural height-
Distributions, 30-79                          ening, 135-36; driving, 157; Gregorian
Divination, 202                               calendar, accepted, 218; music, 135;
Divine kinship, concept of, 175               painting, 135; retardation, 228; road
Dobuan culture, 130, 131, 132                 engine vehicle, 167; steam railways,
Dog: California, 202; culture impulses,       167. See also Invention

  32; history of, 187                       English (language), 20, 27-28, 37;
Dominance, 236-40                             borrowed words, 42; cases, 127;
Dravidian family of languages, 22, 27,        change in, 41; conjugation, 127;
  29, 232, map, 21; sex gender, 46            culture, piece of, 63; distinct terms, 69;

Dream, 107                                    grammar, 129; India, 36; inflectional, 50;
Dress, 139-44; designing, i34«, 201;          objective elements, 48; origin, 127;

  dirndl, 250; fashion, 199, 200; Indian,     pronunciation, 41; sex gender, 46;

  239; Navaho man, 239. See also              sound equivalences, 17, 18, 19; speech,
  Clothing                                    217; style pattern, 128; syntax, 128;
Driving, 156-57                               word-borrowing, 127; writing, 217
Durkheim, Emile, 12, 89n, 155               Environment, 195, 196; language, 30
Dyeing, 229                                 Equator, 230
                                            Eskimo: aged parents, 73; boats lost
Ears: lobes, distention, 108; piercing,       from culture, 183-84, 185; culture,
  i09«                                        109, 185; Eta (or Polar), 183; iron

Earth Lodge (cult), 246                       knives, 184; kayaks, 184; magic, 116;

Easter Island, Polynesians of, 184-86         Polar, 183-84; society, 206; Southamp-

Economic determinism, 74                      ton Island, 185; Thule phase, 185
Eskimo (language), 24, maps, 21, 25;        I'inno-Ugric (language). See

  dual numlxrr, 47                            Ural-Altaic

Eta Eskimo, 183                             Finns (people), 22, 243
Etherealization, i8i                        Fire, ritual, 225

Ethnic revivals, 248-49                     Fire drill (implement), 163
Ethnocentrism, 74, 106, 234, 235;           First CJhost Dance, 246

  unconscious, 1                            Flake cultures, 223
Ethnography, 50                             I'olk: culture, 89-93, '^7 ^'y

Ethnology, 5, 13                              dances, 70, 245
Ethos, 101-02                               Folk-sophisticate polarity, 89n
Euclid, 134                                 Folkways, 73-75; origin of, 54
Eugenics, 5                                 Food, necessity for, 160-61. See also
Eunichism, 225                                Subsistence
Eurasiatic continent, 230                   Foot-binding, 1090
Euripedes, 146                              Foreign customs, 221
Europe and Europeans: alchemy, i8i;         Fortune, Rev. F., 130
  card playing, 225; ceramics, 177;         Fowls, common, 202
  circular causalities, 197; culture, 71,   Fox (tribe), 238
  220, 227; linguistic stocks, 20, 21;      France: culture, 99, 237; culture open-
  Neolithic, 92; playing cards, 225           ness, 64; defeatism in 1940, 212.

Evolution: as progress, 104; organic,         See also Invention
  68, 189; processes, 5-7. See also         Frazer, Sir James, 95, 1 12

  Darwin, Charles                           French (language), 20, 37, 51; first
Evolutionistic fancies, 5-7                   written, 44; objective elements, 48;

Explosion engine, 166                         nominative case-ending, 48; sex
                                              gender, 46-47

Fabricius, 172                              French Revolution, 99-100, 104, 216
                                            Fricative (rubbing sound), 18
Face, painting, 188
                                            Friction devices, 163
Family names, use of, 128
                                            Frustration, 246
Farming, and population, relationship
                                            Fulah (people), 85
  of, 198
                                            Fulton, Robert, 170
Fasces (bundle of rods), 113
                                            Function, 1 12-14; definition, 112;
Fashion, 53-55, 83, 90; changeableness
                                              popular meaning, 1 12
  of, 198-201; definition, 199; fluctua-
                                            Fusional language, 27
  tions of, 91; play impulse, 199; style,

  139-44
                                            Gaelic (language), 34; attempted
Father, descent from, 6
                                              revivification of, 249
Fatigue, culture, 211-13                    Galilei, Galileo, 172
Feminine component, 82                      Galton, Sir Francis, 202
Feudalism, 243                              Gambling, 225
Gardening, fashions in, 200-01              Greece and Greek culture: algebra, 138;
Gauls, 242                                    arithmetic, 138; astronomy, 168;
Ge (language group), 24, map, 26              classic civilization, 67; clocks, 168;

Gedymin (Lithuanian leader), 244              clothing, 140; comedy, 146; conic
Geistestvissenschajten, 103                   sections, 138; cultural activities,

Genetics, science of, 174                     heightening, 134-35; culture, 82, 227;
Geniuses, 105, 169, 175; clustering and       geometry, 138; mathematics, 138-39;
  nature of, 144-48                           mythology, 213; oikumene, 231;
Gentiles, 248; culture, 86; minority          personalities of the very highest

  pressure, 240                               ability, 144-47; science, 138-39;

Geographical margins, 232                     thinking, way of, 174; tragedy, 146
Geography, diffusion, 233                     Greek (language), 20, 51, 215; con-
Geometry, 138, 139                            jugations and declensions, 53;
Georgia (nationality), 251                    grammar, 178; idioms and structure
German (language), 20; cases, 127;            features, 52; sound equivalences,

  origin, 127; sound equivalences, 17,        17.19
  18, 19; style pattern, 128; syntax, 128   Greek Orthodox Church, 208, 243
Germany and the German people, 243,         Gregorian calendar, 218, 243
   244; culture heightening, 136;           Grimm's Law, 19
  Reformation, 217; uniformity and          Growth: changes, 195; cultural, 206-07
  unity, 250. See also Invention            Group minorities: assimilation, 249-52;
G estalt, 10                                  Russia, 251-52

Ghetto segregation, 87                      Guatemala: Indians, 239; peasantry, 92
Ghost Dance, 246-47                         Guaycuru (language group), map, 26
Ghosts, belief in, 103                      Guest, John, 177

Ginsberg, Morris, 12                        Gunpowder, 55
                                            Gypsies: attitude, 87, 88; cultural
Glass, 187
                                              peculiarities, 87; religion, 87; speech,
God, belief in, 108
                                              87; United States, 240
Goddaughters, marriage with, 208
Goodyear, Charles, 162-63
                                            Habit, adjustment, 154; channelings,
Gorer Geoffrey, 130
                                            158-59; formation, 159; mannerisms,
Goths (tribe), 238
                                              159; motor, 156-58
Grammar, 41-42, 51-53, 58, 59;              Hadhar (dwellers in brick), 85
  definition, 127. See also individual
                                            Hahn, Edouard, 202
  countries; individual cultures;
                                            Hamitic family of languages, 22, 37,
  Language; Latin; French, etc.               map, 23; sex gender, 46, 47
Gray, Elisha, 172                           Harriott, Thomas, 172
Great Basin Shoshoneans, 206                Hawaii: cultural fatigue, 211-13; taboo,
Great-man theory or fallacy, 173              211-13; religion, 117
Great Russian (people), 251                 Head: deformation, 108; hunting, 108
Hebrew (language), 28, 44; biblical,          Hunting to herding to farming theory,
  87; Zionism, 87, 248-49                       86
Hebrews (people), 22; religion, 122           Huron savages, family line, 73
Hellenistic (culture period), 93              Hybridization, 67-69, 239
Hcnothcism, 122                               Hypochondriac disposition, ii7n
Herd, instinct, 55
Heredity, 2; ability and intelligence,        Iberians, 242

   145; generic faculties, 98; genius, 145,   Ideogram, 179
  147; laws of, 149; tradition, displaced,    Ideology, defined, loi

  2; transmission process, 8. See also        Ifuago (people), 89, 100, 132;
  Mendelian human traits                        culture, 120

Herodotus, 13                                 Igorot (people), no
Herskovits, Melville J., 233                  Ikhnaton (pharoah), 218
Hicks, Granville, 79                          Ilongot (tribe), 232
Hieroglyphs; Egypt, 179 (illus.)              Imitation, 96, 155
Hindus and Hinduism, civilization, 102        Immigrants and immigration, national
Hippocrates, 134                                group association, 245
History, 4; acculturation, 233; continuity    Inca (culture), technological devices,
  of, 71-72; intercultural influencing,          165. See also Quechua

  233; phenomena, 136                         Incest, 6; prohibition, 208

Hiung-Nu, 85                                  Incorporating languages, 27
Hobhouse, Leonard Trelawny, 12                India: castes, 84; Christians, 241;
Hobos (association group), 87                   circular causalities, 197; cross-cousins,

Hokan (language), 24^; nominative               206; culture, 215; dyeing, 229;
  case-ending, 48                               elephant, 202; fowl, 202; Jewish
Hokan-Siouan (language group), 24^              colony, 240; nationalities, 36; pets,
Holarctica, 229-30                              202; Protestantism, 241; tolerance,
Holland: culture, 172; heightening, 135;        242; tribal societies, 232; uniformity
  herring, 196                                  and unity, 250; urban, 91
Holy Roman Empire, 35                         Indie (language), 20
Hbpi (dialect), 42                            Individuals: culture alternatives, 97;
Hopi (tribe), 234                               culture participation, 98-100; molding
Horn lantern, 187                               the, 94, 96-98; participation, 99;

Horse, 186, 201, 203; diflFusion, 222           peculiarities, 97; superiority, 148

Hottentot: culture, 75; dual number, 47;      Indo-European family of languages, 19,
  language, 22, map, 23; sex gender, 47         20, 27, 37, map, 21; changes in, 42;

Huastec (dialect), 42                           dual number, 47; formal mechan-
Human: action, 62; association, io«;            isms 50, 51; nominative case-ending,
  behavior, culture, 8; sacrifice, 108          47-48; objective elements, 48; sex
Hungarian Magyars, 22                           gender, 46-47; superficial secondary
Hungarians (people), 243                        assimilation of form, 51
Indo-German. See Indo-European              Jacobite Syrians, 241
Indus Valley, 179                           Jagiello, Grand Duke, 244
Industrial progress, 139                    Jainism, iion
Industrial Revolution, 195
                                            Japan and the Japanese: acculturation,
Inflecting language, 27
                                              243; aristocracy of descent, 224;
Innovation, 223, 224. See also Invention      Buddhism, 214; burial, retainer, no;
Insects, cultureless true societies, 9
                                              cannon, 220; carpenter, 156; Chinese
Institutions, invention of, 175-76
                                              civilization, 224-25, 227,, 228, 243;
Integration, 94                               civilization, 67; clothing, 140; culture,
Interhemispheric diffusions, 231
                                              70, 227, 228; dynasty, 224; emperor
Interlanguage transfers, 45                   divinity, 213; ethos, 102; foot-binding,
Internal marginality, 231-33
                                              225; grammar, 178; Gregorian calen-
Interpersonal relations, 221                  dar, 243; language, 127, 128, 228;
Invention and inventions, 226; accident,      mathematics, 139; Meiji moderniza-
   161-63; antecedents, 165-68; complex,      tion, 218, 242; mutilation, 225;
   168-70; culture, 160; cumulative,          occidental civilization, 225, 226; occi-
   168-70; definition, 170, 171;              dental culture, adoption of, 242-43;
  determinism, 172; diffusion, 219, 220,      religion, 215-16; retainer burial, no;
  221-22, 223; displacements, 186-88;         retardation, 228; seclusion policy,
  inevitability, 172-73; innovations,
                                              228-29; siz^ of society, influence of,
  223, 224; institutions, 175-76; plan-       80-81; steam engine, 220; stock
  ning, 160; play, 163-65; political,         tongue, 22; swords of, 182; teapot-
   175-76; popular view, 168-69; reduc-       shaped vessels, 159; uniformity and
  tion-segregation, 178-82; simultane-        unity, 250
  ous, 149-50, 172-75; social acceptance,
                                            Japanese (language), 22, 27, 37, map,
   170-71; socioeconomic, 176; stimulus
                                              21; poetry, 224; pronunciations, 46;
  diffusion, 176-78
                                              sex gender, 46
Iran and Iranians, 225
                                            Jenghis Khan, 85
Iranic (language), 30
                                            Jesperson, Otto, 39
Irish Gaelic (language), 249
                                            Jesus, no; disciples, 248; teaching of,
Iron and Iron Age: diffusion, 222;
                                              248
  knives (Eskimo), 184
                                            Jews: Asia, as minorities in, 240-42;
Iroquoian (language group), 24, map,
                                              black, 240-41; brown caste of, 241;
  25; dual number, 47
Islam. See Mohammedanism                      castes, 240; China, 240; Christianity,

Isolation, effects of, 183-86                 248; cobelief and coworship, 214;

Italian (language): grand opera               Cochin, 241-42; Gentile majority

  vocabulary, 38; sex gender, 46              pressure, 240; India, 240-41; Messianic

Italy: nationalities, 35; Renaissance         idea, 248; Mohammedanism, 248;

  culture, 102. See also Rome and the         Monotheism, 248; nativistic revival
  Roman Empire                                attempts, 247-48; sacrifices, iio-ii;
  speech, 86; white, 240-41; Zionism,         change, rate of, 41-43; change in,
  248-49                                      53-57; classification by types, 27-28;
Julian calendar reform, 218                   convergent, 50-52; culture, 31-33, 37,

                                              38, 53-59; diffusion and parallelism
Kaahumanu (widow), 211                        in, 46-50;   discontinuous develop-
Kachin (tribe), 232                           ment, 14; fusional, 27; historical
Kaingang (tribe), 205                         nature, 30-31; incorporating, 27;
Kamehameha I, 211                             Indo-European family of, 19;
Kamehameha II, 21                             inflecting, 27; isolating, 27; migra-

Karok (tribe), magic, 217                     tion, 14; Norwegian, 249; origin of,

Kayak (boat), 184                             33; phenomena and processes, 56;
Kekuaokalani, 212                             phonetic laws, 17-20; polysynthetic,
Keltic (language), 20, 29, 44                 27; rate of change, 41-43; relation-
Kemal Atatiirk, 218-19                        ship, 14-17; similarity, 15; sound
Ket (language), map, 21                       equivalences, 17-20; speaking, 43-46,
Khasi (language). See Mon-Khmer               63; speech families, 20-27; spoken,
King-godship, 175                             44; style, 126-29; superficial secondaiy
Kinship, 89, 90, 91, 207; close kin, 208;     assimilation of form, 51; teaching, 43;
  marriage, 208; necessity, 161; recog-       translations, 38; types, classification uy
  nition 31                                   types, 27-28; understanding, 63;
Kiowa (tribe), 247                            universal, 215; vocabulary, 37, 38-39;
Kipling, Rudyard, on Occidental and           words, 37; world, 215; writing, 43-40
 Asiatic civilizations, quoted, 124         Lassik Indian, 106-07
Kirghiz (nationality), 251                  Latin (language), 20, 28, 29, 37, ^u,
Klamath (language), 39                        52, 215, 241; cases, 127; conjugation,
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 126; patterns, 126
                                              53, 127; declensions, 53; nominative
Kolarian (language), 29, map, 21              case-ending, 48; sound equivalences,
Kor (tribe), 243                              17, 18, 19; vulgar, 44
Koran, 225-26
                                            Latin America: civilization, 237;
Korea: culture, 227; occidental contacts,
                                              Indians, 239. See also American
  226
                                              Indians; South America
Korean (language), map, 21; stock
                                            Lattimore, Owen, 85
  tongue, 22
                                            Latvia (nationality), 251
Kuznets (sociologist), 169
                                            Laufer, Berthold, 202
Kwakiutl Indians, 130, 131
                                            Law, speech, 3

Labrys (double-bitted ax), 113              Learned (conditioned) activities, 61

Landsmaal Norwegian (language), 249         Leeuwenhoek, Anton van, 172
Language, 14-59; acquired, 30; agglutin-    Legs, arthropods, 122-23

  ative, 27; and race, permanence of,       Leibnitz, Gottfried, 149

  28-30; biological nature, 30-31;          Lenin's body, 182
Letter (visible silent sign), 43. See also     Manchus, culture, 237-38
     Alphabet; Writing                         Manic-depressives, 131
Leverrier, Urbain, 149                         Manichaeism (religion), 11, 215
Leviticus,          no                         Mannerisms, nonessential, 159
Liable social structures, 203-07               Manners, 54
Lictor's ax, 113                               Marginal biotas, 229-31
Light, polarization of, 162                    Marginal cultures, 225-28
Linguistic family or stock, defined, 15        Marriage, 204; Christian countries, 207;
Linton, Ralph, 60, 61, 1 12, 233, 236            close kin, 208; cross-cousin, 206; god-
Lips: distention of, 108; sounds, 18             daughters, with, 208; monogamous, 6;
Lithuanian (language), 20                        speech, 31; step-daughter, 207-08
Lithuanians (people), 243-44, 252;             Marx, Karl, 74, 77
     acculturation, 243-44                     Marxian ideology, 100, 218
Litva (tribe), 243                             Masai ( people), 85
11   (Welsh), 40                               Masculine component, 82
Locomotives, 167                               Mass, emotional pressure, 247
Lolo (language). See Sinitic                   Matches, use of, 225
Lolo (tribe), 89,232                           Material culture, nonmaterial traits of,
Lombards (tribe), 238                            103-04
Loss, kinds of, 188-90                         Mathematics: China, 139; Greek, 138;
Lowie, Robert H., 60, 61; on civilization,       Japan, 139
     quoted, 94                                Mating, intelligence and discrimination
Lublin, diet of (1569), 244                      in, 5

Lucretius, 13                                  Mauss, Marcel, 12
Luiseno (tribe), ant ordeal, 205               Maya (language), 24, 29, 37, 39,
                                                 map, 25
Machines, acceptance of, 171                   Maya Indians, 89, 239
Magic, 106-07, io8> i09> 112,                  Mazdaism (religion), in, 215
     1 16-17,   1   88; astrology, 181         Mclver, Robert M., 12
Maidu (language), nominative case-             Mead, Margaret, 130
     ending, 48                                Meat-eating, 202
Malayo-Polynesian (language), 27, map,         Medicine: accident, 161-62; specializa-
     21; dual number, 47; sex gender, 46;        tion, 181-82

     speech, 24                                Megalomania, 131
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 95, 116                 Melanesians (people), magic, 116, 117
Malus, Etienne Louis, 162                      Mendelian human traits, 174
Mammals: Australia, 229; Bering Strait,        Mentally unwell, in modern advanced
     230; digits, 122; South America, 229        cultures, 108

Man, 232; behavior, 57; boredom, 67;           Mesolithic period, 196, 223
     conservative, 154; digits, 122; normal,   Mesopotamia: civilization, 92; size of
     97                                          society, influence of, 80-81
Messianic idea, 248                          Mother, descent from, 6
Methodists, 104                              Mother-in-law taboo, 103, 113
Metric system, 218                           Motivation, unconscious, 53-54
Mexico: agriculture, 198; border, 237;       Motor habits, culture, 156-58
  ceramic history of, 158; Indians, 239;     Mummification, 108
  Panuco River, 165; peasantry, 82;          Munda (tribal societies), 232
  population, 197-98; size of society,       Music: language, 32; Russia, 216
  influence of, 80-8 1 See also Aztec
                      .                      Muskogean (language group), 24, map.
  Indians
Miao (language). See Sinitic                 Mussel, 159
Microscope, 139; compound, 172
Middle Ages: acculturation, 242;             Nageli (Swiss botanist), 174
  clothing, 140                              Nahuad (language), 29, 39, 41
Migration, language, 14                      Nails, painting of the, 188
Millets, 222                                 National events, 130
Milton, John, different words, 38            Nationalism, in; autonomous, 248;
Mindvog (Lithuanian leader), 244               effectiveness, 250; invention, 170;

Missionizing, 220                              Russian, 216, 251
Mithraism (religion), iii, 215               Nationality, 89; culture, 33-36; language,
Moaning, 31                                    33-36
Mohammedanism, 22, 62, 222; charac-          Nations, 44-45
  teristics, 214-15; Jews, 248; militancy,   Nativism, 245-48
  226; monotheistic pattern, 122;            Natural science, 103
  retardations of diffusions, 225-26;        Natural selection, 149, 173-74
  sacrifice, in; superiority, feeling of,    Naturwissenschajten, 103
  226                                        Navaho (language), 39
Moi (tribe), 232                             Navaho (tribe), 239; step-daughter
Moiety, defined, 104, 105                      marriage, 208
Mongolian (language), 22                     Near East, 92, 197
Mongols and mongolians, culture,             Nearctica, 230
  227-28                                     Necessity, 160-61; kin, 161; orientation,
Monkey, South America, 229                     161; religion, 161
Mon-Khmer languages, map, 21                 Negritos, 232; culture, 87-88, 109; home,
Monks, 178                                     i6r
Monogamy, 103/2                              Negroes: butter, loi; cattle, loi, 103;
Monotheism, 55, 122-24                         civilization, 34; culture, 84; heredity,
Morality, 92                                   2; kings, 202; language, 29-30, 34;
Morals, 54; relativity of, 73-75               Louisiana, 2, 8; musical faculties, 2;
Mores (folkways), 74, 154; unconscious         society, 78; song, 2

  causation of, 54                           Neolithic period, 195, 197
Morse, Samuel F. B., 172, 173                Nevada Paiute (tribe), 246-47
New Guinea, 23-24                                 Pacific coast, population density, 198

New Mexico. See Southwest                         Palaeolithic period, 223

Newton, Isaac, 149; anecdote identifi-            Palaung (tribe), 232
  cation, 169                                     Palearctica, 230

Ngis, 40                                          Pali (language), 215

Nigeria, 234                                      Pampanga (tribe), 232
Nomadic culture, 84-88                            Panama land bridge, 229«
Nominative case-ending, 47-48                     Pano (language group), map, 26
Non-Bantu languages, 23                           Pantheism, 122
Nonchurch people, 79                              Papuans, dialects, 24
Non-Hamitic languages, 23                         Parallel developments: and conver-

Nonmaterial culture, traits of, 103-04              gences, 195; marginal biotas, 229-31

Normal man, 97                                    Paranoia, 131
Norman and Saxon fusion, 237                      Parasitic cultures, 84-88

Normans, 237                                      Parasitism, social, 88

North America: diffusion, 231;                    Parsi (religion), 215/2

  linguistic families, 24, map, 25; sub-          Part-cultures, 82-84

  marginal culture, 230-31                        Participation, 155; culture, 98-100

Norwegian (language), 249                         Pasteur, Louis, immunization, 162

Noun incorporation, 27^                           Pastoralism, 85, 86

Nupe culture, 132                                 Patagonia, 229
                                                  Patents, 166

O (German), 40                                    Patriarchal authority, 128

Oats, 163                                         Patterns: basic, 139-44; culture, 244;

Obi sash and bow, 140                               definition, 119; internal relationship,

Occidental civilization, 70, 226, 227, 228,         systems of, 11 9-51; scarifications, 108;

  229; Japan, 242-43
                                                    style, 137-39;   subhuman organisms,
Oceania, 23-24;       arts,   useful disappear-     123; systemic, 120-24, 217; total-

  ance   of,          bow, 183; pottery, 183        culture, 124-26, 127; total-culture,
               183;
                                                    psychological implications, 129-34;
Ogburn, William F., 12, 149
                                                     universal, 119-20
Oikumene (the inhabited world) 231
                                                  Paul, St., 214, 248; on sacrifice, quoted,
Ona (people), 230
                                                    iiin
Organic anthropology, 3-4
                                                  Peasants, 92; costumes, 70
Organic diversity, 67-69
                                                  Penicillin, 161
Organic elements, 2-3
                                                  Persia, subjects, assimilation of, 242
Organic evolution, 68                             Persian (language), 30
Organic sciences, 4                               Persistence of culture, 154-55
Oriental cultures, 218                            Personality, type of, 133
Orientation, 129, 130; necessity, 161             Peru, 230; ceramic history, 158; Indians,
Otomi Indians, 239                                  239; jjeasantry, 92; political organiza-
  tion, 206; [X)pulation, 197-98; size of   Population: alien dominant, 245;
  society, influence of, 80-81                changes, 195-198; culture, 23S; farm-
Petroglyphs, 185                              ing, 198; rural, 88-94 urban, 88-94

Pets: keeping of, 202; overcherishingof,    Porcelain, 177

  ,87                                       Position of numerals, 168

Philippines, sea lanes, 232                 Pottery,   177; Australia,   183; diffusion,

Philology, comparative, 16                    222-23; invention of, 178

Philosophy, 106, iii                        Practical utility, 183

                                            Pre-Dravidian, 2320
Phoenicians, 22
                                            Primeval purity, 73
Photography, 162
                                            Primitive cultures, 115; disappearance,
Physical anthropology, 3-4
                                              process of, 235; fashion, 202; social
Physiological function, 114; adult
                                              structure, 206; societies, 235. See also
  attitudes toward, 109
                                              Folk culture
Physiology, i
                                            Printing, 90, 222, 225-26
Pictographic writing, 179
                                            Professional subcultures, 70
Pigs, 201; digits, 122
                                            Progress, idea of, 6-7, 73, 104-12, 154-55;
Pindar, 134                                   industrial, 139
Plainville (Missouri agricultural           Proletariat, urban, 99
  community), 78-79                         Pronouns: independent, 48; objective,
Plato, 134, 144, 145                          48
Play and the play impulse: changes, 195;    Prophets, 246-47
  impulses, 198-99; invention, 163-65       Protestantism, 217; India, 241

Pleistocene period, 223                     Provincial distinctiveness, 70

Plow: invention of, 169-70; sulky, 169-70   Prussi (tribe), 243

Poetry, quantitative meter, 178             Psychiatry, 132; psychoanalysis, 75
                                            Psychology, i, 9, 12-13, 74-75; clinical,
Poland, 244
                                               131; configurational, 101; individual,
Poles (people), 243
                                              98; whole-cultural patterns, 129-34
Political: autonomy, 34; fractionation,
                                            Pueblo Indians, 238-39
  252; nation, 34, 35; organization,
                                            Puelche (language group), map, 26
  primitives, 206
                                            Puritanism, 210, 226
Polynesia and the Polynesians: bird cult,
                                            Pygmies, 250
  185, 186; culture, 132, 185; magic,

  117; petroglyphs, 185; statues, 186;      Quaternary period. See Pleistocene
  war, 183; wooden tablets, 185               period

Polynesian (language): nominative case-     Quechua (Inca), language group, 24,
  ending, 48; phonetic attrition, 50          29, 41, 239, map, 26

Polysynthetic languages, 27                 Race and races: diflference, 221; inferior-
Pomo (language), sex gender, 47               ity, 221; language permanence, 28-30

Pomo (tribe), 71                            Radclifle-Brown, H. R., 95
Railways, 167                                 Roads, 167. See also Railways;
Ramkokamekra (tribe), 204                       Steamships
Rationalism, 94                               Roman Catholic Church, 62, 241. See
Rationalization, 91                             also Catholicism

Redfield, Robert, 233                         Romance (language), 20
Reduction-segregation process, 181-82         Romansh (language), 35
Referendum, invention of, 175-76              Rome and the Roman Empire, 35, 93;
Reformation, in Germany, 217                    Augustan age, 135; Chinese civiliza-
Reformed Syrians, 241                           tion, compared with, 128; Christian-

Reformers, 154                                  ity, 213-14; circus games, 202;

Reforms: alphabet, 171; calendar,               clothing, 140; culture, 227; fall of, 72;

  217-18; customs, 217; law, 217;               orientation, 128; science, 135; subjects,

  measurements, 217; spelling, 217              assimilation of, 242; warfare, 55
Regional peculiarities, 70                    Ross, Sir John, 183, 184
Reinvention, 221. See also Invention          "Rough" ch, 40
Relativity, element of, 75                    Rubber: tire, 167-68; vulcanized, 162
Religion and the feeling for religion, 79,    Rucuyenne (tribe), ant ordeal, 205
  82, 83, III; Asiatic tolerance, 242;        Rumanian (language), 52
  Bolsheviks, 251^; civilizations, 213-16;    Rural components in population, 88-94
  civilized, 109; cults, 155; cultural        Rural-urban distinction, 89
  barrier, 227; culture freezing, 225-26;     Russia: acculturation, 251-52;
  Hawaii, 211-13; language, 237;                Christianity, 243; Gregorian calendar,

  national and primitive, 213; necessity,       218; peasants, 92; revolution (1918),
  161; observances, 54; organized               216, 218; social revolution, 100
  change through, 213-16; primitive,          Russian (language), 30
  109; resistance reforms, 171; Soviet,       Russian (people), 251
  94; speech, 31. See also Buddhism,          Russian Soviet Socialist Federated
  Christianity; Jews; Mohammedanism,            Republic, 251
  etc.                                        Ruwala of Arabia, 203
Resistance: factor of, 171; selective, 224;   Rye (grain), 163
  to diffusion, 223-29

Respect, showing of, 73                       Sacrifice: animal, 108, 202; human, 108

Revivals, 245-48; ethnic, 248-49              Sahaptin Indians, 246
Revolution, 98-99, 195; change by,            Saint Thomas Syrians, 241
  216-19; from below, 218                     Sakai (language), map, 21
Right, connotation of, 102                    Sakai (tribe), 232
Riksmaal (language), 249                      Salish (language), sex gender, 47

Rio Grande River, 237                         Saliva (tribe), ant ordeal, 205
Ritual inversion, 108                         Samoa and Samoans, animism, 117
Ritual prostitution, 108                      Samoyed (language), 22. See also
Rivers, W.H.R., 183                             Ural-Altaic
Sanskrit (language), 28, 215; grammar,      Sioux (tribe) buffalo-hunting culture,
  178                                         238
Sapir, Edward, 28, 51                       Skull: cult, 108; preservation, 108

Saxon culture, 237                          Slavic (language), 20, 52

Scandinavians (people), 243                 Slavs (people), 243
Scheiner, Christoph, 172                    Sleeves, 140

Schizophrenia, 131                          Small Town (eastern New York), 79-80
Science, in; discoveries and innova-        Smith, P.P., 162
  tions, 165; European, 139; fashion,       Smith (blacksmith), an in-marrying
  199; Greek, 138-39; play impulse, 199;      profession, 84

  prosecution of, 138-39; simultaneous      Smohalla (revivalistic cult), 246
  invention, 172-75                         Social: assimilation, 236; climbing, 78;

Script. See Writing                           creations, 56; definition of, 3, 7, 10;

Sculpture, Arab, 225                          environment language, 30; fatigue,
Second Ghost Dance (1890), 247                212-13; influence, 59; inheritance, 61;
Secularization, 91                            insects, 9; integration, 95; mobility,

Semang (language), map, 21                    78; organization, speech, 31; parasit-
Semand (tribe), 232                           ism, 88; problems, 100; sciences, i, 4,
Semitic family of languages, 22, 27, 37,      7, 11-13,   103; structure, 10, 75-76,
  maps, 21, 23; nominative case-ending,       203-07; suggestion, 55; tradition, 61;
  48; objective elements, 48; sex gender,     unhappiness, 246; uniformity, 250;

  46,47                                       usages, 57
Sequoya (half-breed Indian), 177            Society, 7-10; culture, 75-80, 105, 154;

Serbian (language), 52                        definition of, 7; diversified qualita-
Seri Indians, culture, 87-88                  tively, 81; function, specialization of,

Sex and the sex impulse: culture, 82;         99; in popular usage, 10; invention,
  motor habits, 157                           171; labor, division of, 99; moiety,
Sex gender, 46-47, 48                         204; size, influence of, 80-82; with-
Shakespeare, William, words used, 38, 39      out culture, 9. See also Culture
Shan-Siamese (language). See Sinitic        Sociocultural: anthropology, 4-5; indi-
Shawnee (tribe), 238                          vidual, 91; organic sciences, 3;
Shawnee Tenskwatawa (1805), 246               phenomena, 3, 9, 54; sciences, 4
Sherente (tribe), 205                       Sociology, 2-3, 12
Shinto (religion), 70, 214                  Socrates, 144, 145
Shoshone (tribe), 206                       "Somatology," 3
Singhalese (dialect), 42                    Sonant stop, 18
Sinitic language (Chinese; Shan-            Song: form, 113; function of, 113
  Siamese; Tibeto-Burman; Miao; Lolo;       Sophisticate culture, 89, 90, 92, 93
Moso), 20, 27, map, 21; writing, 46         Sophocles, 134, 146
Siouan (language group), 24, 42, map,       Sound shift, 19
  25; nominative case-ending, 48            Sounds, speech, quality of, 39-41
South America: cultural retardation,         Sunspots, 172
  230; diffusion, 231; linguistic families   Superindividual, 61, 62, 63
  of, 24, map, 25; mammals, 229;             Superorganic, 61-62, 63; definition, 61-62
  monkeys, 229; sub-marginal culture,        Superstition, 106

  230-31. See also Bolivia; Peru, etc.       Surd stop, 18
Southampton Island, 184-85                   Swammerdam (Dutch scientist), 172
Southwest: culture, 72; pottery, 158-59      Sweden and the Swedes, peasants,
Soviet: doctrine, 93-94; religion, 161         vocabulary of, 39
Spain, civilization, 237                     Switzerland: lake dwellers of, 92;
Spanish (language) 20, 41; objective           nationalities, 35, 36; referendum,

  elements, 48; origin, 127; sex gender,       175-76

  46                                         Syria, 242

Specialization, process of, 181-82           Syriac (language), 241
Speculative reasoning, 6                     Systemic patterns, 120-24, ^27
Speech: animals, 30-31; faculty, 9;
  families, 20-27; innate, 30; language,     Taboos, 54, 74; couvade, restrictions,
  43-46; sounds, quality of, 39-41             115; Hawaii, 211-13; mother-in-law,
Spencer, Herbert, 104, 173                     "3
Spengler, Oswald, 95                         Tacitus, 125
Spindle whorls, 16'^n                        Tadjik (nationality), 251, 252
Spinoza, Baruch, 172                         Tagalog (tribe), 232
State, U. S. Department of, 34/1             T'ai. See Shan-Siamese

Steam engines, 220                           Taoism, 153
Steam railway, 167                           Taro meal, 171
Steamships, invention of, 170                Tasmanians, 230
Steel, diffusion, 222                        Taste habits, 159
Step-daughter marriage, 207-08, 210          Technology, in, 182, 184, 186
Stephenson's steam locomotive, 167           Teeth: filing, 108; knocking out, 108
Steward, Julian, 6                           Tehuelche (language group), 230, map,
Stock-raising, 201
                                               26
Stops, 18
                                             Telegraph, 172
Style: definition, 137, 199; patterns,
                                             Telephone, 172
  137-39; variability, 139-44. ^^^ ^^°
                                             Telescope, 139, 168, 172
  Fashion
                                             Teutonic Knights, 243, 244
Subcultures, 82-84
                                             th sound, 40
Subhuman level, 9
Subsistence, 195; changes, 195-98
                                             Thomas, Dorothy, 149
Sub-subcultures, 70                          Thomas, W. J. 12
Sugar cane, diffusion, 222                   Thucydides, 134
Sulfanilamid, 161                            Tibet and Tibetans, occidental
Sumner, William Graham, 12, 74                 contacts, 226
Tibcto-Burman branch of languages,        Ukraine (nationality), 251, 252
  20, map, 21                             Unconsciousness, quality of, 53-54
Tigrc (language), 22                      Uniformity, 249-52
Tinggian (tribe), 232                     Union of South Africa, nationalities, 35
Tobacco, 225; diffusion, 225              Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Toda (tribe), 232, 234                      nationalities, 35. See also Russia;

Tohunga (craftsmen), 183                    Soviet
Tonnies, Ferdinand, Sgn                   Unitarian profession of faith, 104
Total-culture patterns, 124-26, 127;      United States: class uniformity, 77;
  psychological diagnoses, 131; psycho-     cultural homogeneity, 250; gypsies,

  logical implications, 129-34              240; living standard, 77; peasantry,
Totemism, 204                               92; population, 250; social classes,
Toynbee, Arnold, 181                        77-80; social stratification in the,
Tradition, 61, 219; principle of, 2-3        77-80; uniformization, 250; union,
Traffic, 157, 158                           idea of, 250. See also America;
Traits: culture, 221, 223; speech           American Indians; Inventions; North
  faculties, 32                             America
Translations, 38                            Universal pattern, 119-20
Transmission, process of, 8               Upper class, 76
Trevithick's car of 180^, \6-j            Ural-Altaic language (Finno-Ugric;
Tribal culture. See Folk culture            Mongol; Samoyed; Tungus-Manchu;
Trinitarians, 104                           Turkish), 22, 27, 46, map, 21
Trousers, 140                             Urban components in population, 88-94
Tschermak (biologist), 149                Urbanization, 91
Tschirnhaus (German inventor), 177        Uto-Aztecan (language group), 24, map,
Tucano (language group), map, 26            25; dual number, 47

Tungus, culture, 237-38
Tungus-Manchu (language), 22. See         Vai (language), writing, 178

  also Ural-Altaic                        Values, 102

Tupi (language group), 24, 29, map. 26    Vandals (tribe), 238

Tupi (tribe), ant ordeal, 205             Veddas of Ceylon (tribe), 232
Turkey and the Turkish people, 20;        V^edic Brahmanism,     no
  linguistic group, 22; revolution,       Victories, great, stimulating effect of,

  218-19                                    136
Turkish (language), 22; alphabet, 219.    Viking Norsemen, 237
  See also Ural-Altaic                    Vinci, Leonardo da, 166; flying machine,

Tylor, Edward Burnett, 9«, 60, 61           171
                                          Vocabulary, 38-39
U (French), 50                            Voluntary adaptation, 155
U ("short"), 40                           Voodoo, 188
WPA, 240                                       Wounded Knee, massacre of, 247
Wallace, Alfred Russell, 149, 173              Wovoka or Jack Wilson (prophet), 247
Warfare, history of 55-56                      Wreaths, wearing of, 1 13-14
Warner, W. Lloyd, 77, 78                       Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur,
Watt, James, 169
                                                 166
Wealth growth in stocks of, 1   1
                                               Writing, 90; Cherokee, 177; China,
Weaving, 157-58
                                                 215; language, 43-46; methods of, 179;
Week, origin of, 180
                                                 Polynesian wooden tablets, 185-86;
Welsh (language), 29
                                                  Vai language, 178. See also Alphabet
Welsh culture, 245
                                               Wiirm glaciation, 223
West, James, 78
Western civilization: progress, concept
  of, 104-05; size of society, influence of,
                                               Yahgan, 230

  80-81                                        Yakut, 252

Wheat, 143, 222                                Yakutsk (nationality), 251
Wheels, 165, 166                               Yamato (ancestral Japanese), 227
White Jews, 240-41                             Yankee City (New England town),
Widows, 108                                      78,80
Wilson, Jack, or Wovoka (prophet), 247         Yao (tribe), 232
Wilson, Woodrow, 251                           Yeniseian (language), map, 21
Winnebago (tribe), 238                         Yiddish, 87
Wirth, Louis, 12
                                               Yoruba (tribe), 232; culture, 132
Wissler, Clark, 119
                                               Yukaghir (language), map, 21
Witchcraft, 107
                                               Yuki (native Californian language),
Wodziwob (prophet), 246-47
                                                 16-17
Women: menstruation, 108; parturition,
                                               Yurok (tribe), 100, 132; culture, 120;
  108; skirts, 200
                                                 knives, 153; magic, 117
Women's clothing, 139-44, «^^«-^v 144;
  buttons, 157; skirt length, 142; skirt
  width, 142; variability, 141-42; waist       Zionism, 248-49; Hebrew (language),

  height, 142; waist width, 142                  248-49; Jews, 248-49; Palestine, 97

Word (term), 43; borrowing, 22, 27             Zoroastrianism, 2i5«

World religions. See Buddhism;                 Zulu (language), 39
  Christianity; Mohammedanism                  Zuni (tribe), culture, 130, 131
V
                      ^'
                                \

            1^
    o           --   ct
                     <t^^'
                          M^^-
                           —
                          3<'
                                IJ^

        1-^.i
    ^1
    2iV
ANTHROPOLOGY:
CULTURE PATTERNS AND PROCESSES
bv A. L. KROEBER


THIS VOLUME offers a selection of those chapters of
All! «d L. Kroeber's classic work     ANTHROPOLOGY that deal
specie cally with matters of Culture Patterns and Prjcesses.


THE CONTENTS: What Anthropology Ts Aboui
                       Languafre
                       The Natu e of Culture
                                  t



                       Patterns
                       Culture Processes
                       Culture Change

If no s.^lection can ever take the place of t!:e complete work

from V hich it is drawn, this holds doubly trne of a work
as closely integrated as Kroeber's Anthropology, which covers
a vast area of knowledge, illumines each of its parts
from a single fundamental point of view, and subjects
an entire field of scholarship to the searching inquiry
of one mind of uncommon scope.


The present selection will serve tht convenience
of those readers who wish to study only
the narrower topic. Culture Patterns and Processes.
The section numbers and numerous cross references
that run throughout the parent volume
have here been retained unchanged, for those
who wish to refer back to the whole vrork.
The text is that of the revised edition, published in 1948.


Alfred L. Kroeber (1876-1960), long recognized as the dea'i
of   American anthropology, was one of the founding members,
and onetime president, of the American Anthropological
Association, a   member 'and often the president) of man'
other learned societies, including the National Academy
of Sciences, the   American Philosophical Society,
and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
and a fellow of the Center for Advanced Study
of the Behavioral Sciences. His long    and   brilliant

career, during  which he taught at Harvard, Columbia, 1 ranJeis,
Yale, California, and elsewhere, brought to him
many honors and distinctions.


A HARBINGER BOOK / Harcourt, Brace & World
