tinction    we have already considered in connection with race (§ 86, 90)        :   that
achievement and capacity for achievement are different things, and that they
do not correlate in any outright one-to-one or other simple manner. We assume
that achievement presupposes inherent capacity, though even here it is a prob-
lem to be investigated how close the correspondence comes to being a i co-per-
cent one. We certainly cannot assume that capacity is always actualized in
achievement.
        One difference between the race problem and the genius problem is that
differences in ability between races are still somewhat uncertain, and, being dif-
ferences of averages, are likely to prove small; whereas individual differences
within one race and culture are well substantiated as considerable by psycho-
logical and practical tests. Moreover, it is relatively easy to compare individuals
of practically identical physique, culture, economic stratum,      and social oppor-
tunities and yet find marked differences between them; whereas races are never
the same in culture, social environment, and opportunities.
        Recognition of the fact that potential capacity may not be inferred in regard
to race outright from accepted achievement, especially      not negatively, began to
be well and widely established by 1900. But recognition of the parallel non-
correspondence as regards individual genius did not come until well along in
the twentieth century. And the significance of the clustering of both genius and
cultural florescence has at times even yet failed to penetrate      where an unhis-
torical attitude of mind prevails.

        One possible misconception will be guarded against by its mention. The
naiive view of course is that greatmen do great things. The greater achievements
of civilization are therefore "explained" by the great men's happening to come
along.    Why they come along when and where they do hardly seems to call for
further explanation in a pre-culture-conscious period. But once we are aware of
culture and begin to take note of its workings, the simultaneous clustering of
genius and of style-pattern fulfillments is one of the outstanding manifestations
of history, and seems to lead inevitably to the conclusion of the interrelation of
genius and pattern. The admission of this interdependence may put some curb
on our notion of genius. We can certainly no longer look upon genius as some-
thing wholly unaccountable, heaven-sent, exempt from the laws of nature, opera-
tive solely according to its own uncontrollable will. Genius is reduced to a
phenomenon, and therewith relatable to other phenomena. But genius is thereby
not abrogated or denied. The genius remains the superior man, even the su-
premely able one. But he is such at birth by the bounty of the variability of
organic heredity; and he is such at death by the grace of the condition of his
culture, which has allowed and helped       him to realize his congenital potentiali-
ties.   In short, understanding of    how culture operates does not in the least
"abolish" individual superiority. It merely helps to explain greatness while using
it   also to explain better the patterns of culture.
5   '4°             THE MEANINC; OH SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS                          I49


             140. THE MEANING OF          SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS
        Allied both to pattern florescences and to genius clustering is the fact that
many inventions have been made independently by two or more men, and
often even simultaneously. If this happened just now and then, and were true
of only a small minority of all inventions,      it    could be called coincidence and
attributed to accident. But as soon as simultaneity and independence of origin
characterize any considerable proportion of inventions or discoveries, it is evident
on the basis of the law of averages that some specific factor must be operating
in that direction.   Now the number of cases is not small Ogburn and Thomas as
                                                                  :



long ago as 1922 had listed 148 instances. It is therefore of interest to under-
stand what is at the bottom of the phenomenon, and why it went unrecognized
so long— until about the time of World War I.
    The reason for the nonrecognition seems to have been the reluctance of
our minds to see anything superpersonal in matters that involve persons. Ac-
ceptance of impersonal forces lying outside the individual, but driving him to
this achievement or that failure, appears somehow to infringe on our personali-

ties,to delimit our freedom. Particularly do we tend to resent such invasions
when they concern great intellects.
    After 1700, everybody who knew anything of the history of science was
aware that Newton and Leibnitz had both devised the calculus, and each at
firstwithout knowing of the other's discovery. It was their respective followers
and compatriots who fought over priority and insinuated bad faith.
    In 1845, Adams and Leverrier separately predicted the discovery of the
planet Neptune. Adams's computation was worked out a little the earlier, but
Leverrier's was published first, and the planet was promptly seen where he had
said it ought to be.
        In 1858, Darwin and Wallace presented parallel papers at the same meeting
of the Royal Society, setting forth the idea of natural selection as a factor ac-
counting for the evolutionary formation and change of species. Darwin had had
the germ of the idea twenty years before, but hesitated to commit himself pub-
licly.    When the same idea occurred to Wallace, who was exploring in the East
Indies,     he promptly wrote   it   out and sent     it   to   London. This both forced
Darwin's hand and strengthened his confidence, with the result of the com-
panion papers as an immediate compromise fair to both men, and the publi-
cation of Darwin's Origin of Species the next year.
        The year 1900 saw the discovery of the basic laws of heredity — was really
                                                                             it

a rediscovery, but     more of that later (§152)    —by three several biologists: De
Vries, Correns, and     Tschermak.
        These four instances, all of them relating to fundamental discoveries in
science, will at least suffice to take the phenomenon of simultaneity out of the
range of mere coincidence. The list on the next page, which could be increased
150                                           PATTERNS                                       S 140


indefinitely, will reinforce the principle. If practically all of the cases cited are
from modern Occidental civilization, that is because invention records which
are authentic, full, and exactly datable nearly all hail from that civilization. Also
it    will be seen     from the list that technological invention, scientific discovery,
and even geographical discovery all behave much alike in this matter of simul-
taneity   —in line with their shading into one another otherwise, as              set forth in

§145-
                  SOME SIMULTANEOUS DISCOVERIES AND INVENTIONS
Telescope: Jansen, Lippershey, Metius, 1608 (§ 137, 152)
Sunspots: Fabricius, Galileo, Harriott, Schciner, 1611
Logarithms: Napier, 1614; Biirgi, 1620
Calculus: Newton. 1671, publ. 1687; Leibnitz, 1676, publ. 1684
Problem of three bodies: Clairaut, D'Alembert, Euler, 1747
Nitrogen: Rutherford, 1772; Scheele, 1773
Oxygen: Priestley, Scheele, 1774
Water is H2O: Cavendish, Watt, 1781; Lavoisier, 1783
Steamboat: Jouffroy, 1783; Rumsey, 1787; Fitch, 1788; Symington, 1788 (§ 155, 186)
Theory of Planetary Disturbances: Lagrange, Laplace, 1808
Pepsin: Latour, Schwann, 1835
Telegraph: Henry, Morse, Steinheil, Wheatstone and Cooke, about 1837 (§ 187)
Star parallax first measured: Bessel, Henderson, Struve, 1838
Photography: Daguerre and Niepce, Talbot, 1839 (§ 187)
Planet Neptune: Adams, Leverrier, 1845
Surgical anaesthesia by ether: Long, 1842, results disregarded; Jackson, Liston, Morton,
  Robinson, 1846; N2O, Wells, 1845
Sunspot variations correlated with disturbances on earth: Gauthier, Sabine, Wolfe, 1852
Natural selection: Darwin, Wallace, 1858
Periodic Law of Elements: Mendeleev, Meyer, 1869
Telephone: Bell, Gray, 1876 (§ 187)
Phonograph: Cros, Eldison, 1877 (§ 187)
Liquefaction of oxygen: Cailletet, Pictet, 1877
Rediscovery of Mendel's Laws: De Vries, Correns, Tschermak, 1900 (respectively on
  March 14, April 24, June 2; see § 152)
North Pole: Cook,'" Peary, 1909
South Pole: Amundsen, December, 1911; Scott, January, 1912
Flight orientation of bats due to hearing reflections of uttered sounds: Griffin and Galam-
     bos, U.S.A., 1941-42; Dijkgraat, Holland, 1943      —during total severance of communi-
     cations in war years


       A list like this tends to instill a conviction that inventions may be in-
evitable,    within certain Umits; that given a certain constellation and develop-
ment of a culture, certain inventions must be made. Such a conclusion involves
       ^° That   Cook's discovery was untrue varies the principle of simultaneity without in-
validating it. Fifty years earlier   it   would probably not have occurred to anyone even to
pretend the discovery; twenty, perhaps even ten, years earlier, the claim would have been
received with such incredulity as to discourage a false claimant; 1909 was the psychological
moment for a fake attempt      —the whole world was agog      for the discovery that Peary   was
actually consummating.
§   MO            THE MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS                       I5I

the recognition of supcrindividual forces   —historical agencies or social currents
transcending personalities. This is a matter which will be taken up again, and
more fully, in connection with the nature of invention, in § 145-155, especially
152. Our more immediate concern here is with the clustering of able inventors
around an important invention or series of related inventions, like the clustering
of able or great men in a particular art or any phase of a nationally delimited
culture growth.   The two sets of clusterings are strikingly similar; and it is
evident that they are both related to the development of culture patterns. The
patterns   must have a certain potentiality, and they must have reached a stage
of "fruitfulness," before we can expect great men, great productions, or great
inventions. But once geniuses, achievements, or inventions begin to arrive, they
may be expected in bursts of concentration.
                               CHAPTER NINE

                            Culture Processes


141. CULTURE PROCESSES            I42. PERSISTENCE     I43,   MOTOR HABITS       I44.    OTHER HABIT
CHANNELINGS        I45.   INVENTION       I46. NECESSITY       I47.   ACCIDENT        I48.   INVENTION
AND PLAY       149.   ANTECEDENTS        I50.   CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS                 I5I.

SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE          I52.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN               I53.     INVENTION OF
INSTITUTIONS      I54. INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION                 I55. INVENTION BY REDUC-

TION-SEGREGATION          156. CULTURAL LOSS       I57. DISAPPEARANCE OF        USEFUL ARTS       I58,

EFFECTS OF ISOLATION:         SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS                  1 59.    DISPLACEMENTS
160. KINDS OF LOSS        161. PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES



                                  141.   CULTURE PROCESSES
          PROCESSES of culturc we mean those factors which operate either toward
BY      the stabilization and preservation of cultures and their parts, or toward
       growth and change. Changes, in turn, may consist either of increments,
such as new developments, inventions, and learned traits acquired from outside;
or of losses and displacements. Beyond these, there are minor alterations or fluc-
tuations that are neither particularly additive nor deductive, as when the wheel
base of automobiles is shortened, or the floor is lowered, or the engine is placed
behind.
    The main value of these formal distinctions of kinds of process is logical:
they help us organize a large mass of facts into some sort of preliminary order.
For that reason the topical sequence of consideration             :   persistence, invention, loss,
in this chapter, and change in the next, will be followed here. But as cultures and

their parts actually live, thrive, decay,          and alter, and as they influence one an-
other, these several processes, which in the abstract seem so neat and distinctive,
                                             and interwoven. All of them
are found to manifest themselves in association
           work at once, so that the same phenomenon may be seen as an
are often at
example of two or three of them. This constant interrelation of processes is
characteristic of culture. Their segregation has something artificial about it, and
is justified   chiefly by convenience.

     For instance, one might expect innovations to cause displacements: for the
steel knife to crowd out the stone knife.            But the latter may survive in ritual; or
S    141                          CULTURE PROCESSES                                I53

the stone tool may have become associated with certain       motor habits that it is
awkward or unprofitable to change, as when the Yurok Indians eagerly took
over our American knives for most purposes, but during a couple of genera-
tions retained their flint ones for dressing and splitting salmon. If there is such
a retention alongside the addition, the culture of course     now possesses two
traits instead of one. Yet   we may not assume that this always happens, else cul-
tures would regularly grow additively or cumulatively. They do sometimes: our
Western civilization undoubtedly has more content now than it had a thousand
years ago. But it is probable that there are occasions when losses can and do
exceed additions: for instance, in Italy during the first seven or eight centuries
of the Christian era.
      What happens in particular cultures may of course happen to their sum,
to   human culture in the aggregate. The total quantity of this probably does tend
to increase, but certainly at     uneven   rates in different periods   and   areas, as
already discussed in § 127. Variation and fluctuation of culture content are evi-
dently more typical events than its steady increase. If any generic inherent force
making for progressive cultural accumulation existed, it would be difficult to
explain the fact that there still remain backward and lowly "primitive" cultures
of meager content.
       We may conclude that while innovations sometimes result in displacements,
they sometimes do not; but that losses also can occur without gains. While there
is   a relation between the two currents, they are separate enough to justify their
separate consideration.
     Even changes and persistences blend into each other. The normal way in
which culture continues is for one generation of a society to transmit its culture
to the next generation, the process occurring in time, since societies and cultures
are normally attached to an area. But when one culture transmits some of its
                      —
content to another when for instance porcelain or papermaking diffuses from
                                                                    —
China to Europe, or glass or surveying from Europe to China the receiving
culture has changed by acquiring something new, though the process of trans-
mission is now through space instead of time. But from the angle of the total
culture material in the world, there has been merely a continuance of a trait,
accompanied by its geographical spread, conceivably without any change in the
trait itself,   or only minimal change. Ultimately a diffusing technique or insti-
tution or system may even die out or be displaced in its homeland, but survive
where it was imported; as Christianity withered away in Palestine, and Bud-
dhism in India, but they continue to flourish respectively in Europe and China.
In Europe, however, Christianity crowded out all other organized religions;
whereas in China, Taoism and Confucianism have maintained themselves along-
side Buddhism.
     These instances will indicate what is meant by the statement that con-
ceptually distinct processes tend to come intertwined, and to interact, in the
actual operations and history of culture.
154                               CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 14^




                                 142. PERSISTENCE

       It has been asserted that the first problem of any culture is that of its sur-

vival or persistence, much as     any society is always confronted by the problem
of surviving. This allegation seems truer logically than important factually.
If a culture perishes,    there is an obvious end to its problems of adaptation and
modification. But this does not by any means involve every culture's constant
striving to avert disaster— least of all   an awareness of being perpetually faced
by a life-or-death problem. Nor are societies in chronically acute jeopardy. Their
case is rather like that of individual organisms. These also have indispensable
needs, but mainly they are organized to function as physiological successes,
and on the whole they do so. The same with human societies and their cultures:
normally they make a go of it, at least for a time. What is more, most peoples
expect to make a go of it. They do not expect that they themselves and their in-
stitutions will    have crashed to ruin by next year. Such overclouded, anxiety-
ridden states of mind would have something of the abnormal about them. Per-
haps the whole notion of their being usual is a reflection in the minds of some
anthropologists of the uncertainties, strains, depressions, and threats of the period
from World War I to World War II (cf. § 122).
       What is true is that ordinarily societies cling with attachment to their cul-
tures. Genuine revolutionaries are rare, the    world over. They characterize par-
ticular periods and limited areas. Reformers are more numerous; but even these
generally want particular improvements on top of a basic maintenance of the
scheme of things. And a large part of mankind just is fundamentally conserva-
tive  —
     which means that they like their culture and their personal stake in it.
This personal stake and its rewards might well be bigger for the average man,
and he is Ukely to be trying to make it a bit bigger; but mostly he does so
without any notion of changing the rules, except perhaps at a spot or two. This
is   not a statement of what should be, but an attempt to summarize the attitude
of most people, primitive, barbarous, and highly advanced, throughout history
and all over the earth.
       There are several reasons for this attachment of men to their cultures. One
of course is habit adjustment.    We have been molded by our culture until we
fit it,   more or less, have got used to functioning within its framework, and have
channeled such functioning into habits. Then there is always education of the
young, both spontaneous and deliberate. This inevitably exalts the ideals and
values of the instructing generation. In most countries and times, these ideals of
the elders are pretty generally accepted, without much criticism or serious revolt.
The folkways tend to persist; the mores are held to firmly, with release of emo-
tion if they are challenged. It must be remembered that the idea        and ideal of
progress, which we of modern Western civilization tend to accept as axiomatic
§       4^                              PERSISTENCE
    1
                                                                                  1   55

(§ 127), has not been in the least axiomatic to       mankind at large. To most so-
cieties the      notion has hardly occurred, at any rate not as a guiding principle.
They rather take essential continuance for granted: the golden age is in the
past, not ahead. There certainly       is reassurance and comfort in the idea of con-

tinuance, unless one has been         imbued with the contrary attitude that restless
improvement is a desirable thing, or a sort of obligation.
     The famous French sociologist Durkheim went so far as to maintain that
                                         —                           —
what the "most primitive" people meaning the Australians really worship
through their rites, sacrifices, and taboos is the bonds of their society and the
institutions of their culture. The totems and the ancestors and their impersona-
tions, the sacred spots and the hallowed paraphernalia of bull-roarers, the care-

fully screened mysteries      —
                            all these are not randomly worshiped ghosts, animals,

rocks, and fetishes, but symbols of the total tribal society of the past, the present,
and the future, and its successful adaptation in the universe through entering
into mystic ritual relations with the universe.       This interpretation perhaps fits
the Australians more tellingly than it would fit most primitives and nonliterates,
and is somewhat extreme even as regards them; but the view undoubtedly ex-
presses considerable truth, and it would be more widely accepted today if
Durkheim had not stretched it into a basic philosophy of all culture and society
that savored almost as         much of mysticism as did the beliefs of the savages.
There is no doubt that most religious cults stress strongly the continuity with
all the past, an accord or oneness of the individual or his group with the whole

world, and the basic changelessness of these relations.
         It is also   necessary to remember how children   —          —
                                                           and adults enter into as-
similation and participation with their society       and culture, as already touched
on in § 123. One of two main mechanisms for this is voluntary adaptation
imitation,   wanting to conform, learning from example. Some of this is con-
scious, or begins consciously; more of it is unconscious, or foreconscious. Perhaps
it would be fair to say that normally there exists a strong emotional bent, which

is latently conscious, toward participation, and therefore toward assimilation and

learning, but that the actual imitating by the young is mostly done without
much specific awareness.
   The second mechanism making for participation of the young in their cul-
ture, and their fitting into society, is education, learning by being taught or
trained. This is clearly in the main a conscious process, even though its impli-
cations may often be overlooked. In general, what elders teach the young is
ways of becoming what they themselves are and have attained; or what they
might have become and attained under the same cultural rules if their luck or
their ability had been better. It is evident that both mechanisms are calculated
to work toward perpetuation and persistence.
156                                CULTURE PROCESSES                                 § 143




                               143.        MOTOR HABITS
       Among the factors that make for persistence of culture, in whatever form
it    happens to have anywhere, are motor habits. Such habits become estabhshed
in all higher animals. Resting on congenital anatomical structure, they may be
modified, and are channeled, in accord with the circumstances of environment.
In the field of culture, motor habits become particularly conspicuous in the
technologies and the arts. As long as these arts are studied chiefly through their
products, such as museum specimens, the motor habits that went into the mak-
ing of the objects do not obtrude. But if it is possible to give attention to produc-
tion as well as to product, motor habits are quickly seen to be a definite factor.
For instance, whittUng, sawing, planing, and many other tool operations can be
done either by pushing or by pulling. The Japanese carpenter pulls the plane
toward himself, centripetally. The Western workman pushes it away from his
body, centrifugally. Probably one method is as good as the other in most cases.
But once a certain skill has become established in connection with pushing, it is
impossible for a given individual to be equally skillful when he substitutes the
pulling motion. He may attain such skill by deliberately trying to learn a new
habit, but meanwhile his work is that of a novice. As there is usually no reward
for a change, and likely to be        an obvious penalty, because of temporarily de-
creased quality of performance, the change is not made, and the individual re-
mains a lifelong addict to the particular set of habits that first became estab-
hshed in him. Just as he acquired these habits from older workmen, he is likely
to transmit them to his apprentices or pupils. Thus not only does one habit pre-
vail    among a certain population, and the contrary or a diflferent one among
another population, but such habits may persist for hundreds or thousands of
years. These habits are definite parts of cultures. The difference between pushing
and pulling a plane is as much a culture phenomenon as the difference between
smoothing with a piece of sandstone and with a carpenter's plane.
    There are a great many situations in which one way of performing an opera-
tion is about as good intrinsically as the other; but it is frequently more efficient,
or at least timesaving and effort-saving, to decide on one method and stick to
it.   Driving on the right or the left side of the road is a case in point. Where
traffic is   negligible or slow,   it is   quite possible to get on without any motor
habit or rule. In proportion as traffic is heavy and swift, it becomes indispensable
to make a decision once for all and then to establish the chosen habit as            an in-
dividual automatic reaction, as well as a law of the society. It is notorious that
since the nations of the world have felt it necessary each to enforce a choice in
the matter, they have divided, some in favor of right-hand and some of left-hand
driving.     Any reasons for one being intrinsically preferable to the other are
mainly rationalizations. What actually seems           to   have happened   is   that loose
tendencies toward passing oncoming vehicles on one side or the other became
§    M3                                M01X)R HABITS                                  157

crystallized as wagon traffic became heavier with the growth of population and
the improvement of roads, and were then transferred to the automobile when
the matter of uniformity of reaction had become imperative.
   It is interesting that once such a rule becomes set among a population it

may be easier to alter manufactured objects than to change the rule. The Eng-
lish began     with the horse -driver sitting on the right side of the seat and turning
to the left    on meeting another vehicle. He could thus see whether the wheels
of the two vehicles were clear. When horses and wagons and roads were intro-
duced in British Colonial America, the driver presumably continued to sit on
the right of the seat: he had an established motor habit on this point. Traffic,
however, was       at first so   sparse that apparently any rules of passing   fell   into
disuse;  and when finally, with the increase of horse-drawn vehicles, a rule or
custom became desirable, the right-hand pass of oncoming vehicles was some-
how chosen. This put the driver away from his clearing wheel; but apparently
this was felt only as a minor objection. Only after the automobile with its much

greater speed came on the scene, was there seen to be an element of serious
danger. Then the conflict was solved by altering the pattern of car construction
so that the driver was now put on the left side of his seat. The rule of swerving
to the right, in which instantaneous response to a motor habit is frequently vital,
remained unaltered.
    Even animals get their motor habits conditioned by human culture. In our
civilization onemounts to the saddle by the left stirrup. Many horses become
disturbed or alarmed by an attempt to mount them from the right. An animal
taught to obey the jerk line in multiple-team plowing will not know how to
respond to the rein, and vice versa.
      Differences in motor habits are not necessarily between whole cultures or
societies.   They may exist between groups within the same society, or between
the sexes. Among ourselves a man's coat or vest buttons from the left over the
right. The buttons are on the right edge.       The side that carries the buttonholes
laps over this from the left. The rule in women's garments is the opposite. The
left side carries the buttons and the right is laid over and outside it. The result
is   that   men execute most of the business of buttoning with their left hand,
women with the right. Habits get established, and transfer to the other hand
would bring awkwardness and irritation.
     In weaving cloth on a vertical loom it is possible to begin inserting the weft
either at the top or at the bottom. In a basket the direction of progress of weave
can be clockwise or counterclockwise. Here it is possible to set up explanations
to the eflect that most people are right-handed, and that it is natural to keep
the defter fingers free for the insertion and pulling of the weft while the left
hand holds or spreads the warps. A basket can however be woven at the near
edge, with the worker facing its outside; or it can be woven across its hollow,
facing the inside, in which case the progress of the same weft between the
weaver's hands would be opposite. Ordinarily perhaps a basket is manufactured
158                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                  §   MS
resting on what will be its bottom; but some tribes hang the foundation of the
basket up on a cord and work downward toward what will be the rim. In the
contrasting cases the     same   finger manipulations will yield progress in the
opposite direction. These several variations in technical manipulation actually
occur as standard among certain populations. They plainly are cultural differ-
ences, although they all preserve the         normal supremacy of the right hand. In
such instances, factors of organic equipment, such as normal right-handedness,
must be recognized if the total situation is to be understood. Yet the direction of
progress depends not on this alone, but specifically on how the basket is held.
A particular congenital motor habit rarely suffices to explain the whole method
of operation: this always remains partly or mostly cultural in origin.             Motor
habits have the limits of their range set by the human organic equipment, but
their specific determination is overwhelmingly by culture.



                        144.   OTHER HABIT CHANNELINGS
    There are some persistences in culture that recall habit formations in indi-
viduals and into which the factor of habit channeling undoubtedly has entered
through the constant overlapping of generations in every society. For instance,
in ancient Peru the southern coastal districts early got into the habit of making
their pottery vessels   with round bottoms, whereas the northern areas favored
flat   bottoms. This difference was consistendy maintained as long as native pot-
tery continued to be     made. Both Peruvian areas, as far back as we have              ar-

chaeological record of them, developed tubular spouts: single, double, or united
like a stirrup-shaped handle.     This   is    a trait   which   persisted throughout the

ceramic history of Peru.
       On the contrary, in ancient southern Mexico and Central America, habit ran
in the direction of providing bowls, pots,         and even jars with three legs. This
tripod arrangement has certain practical advantages              when cooking vessels are
to be set over the fire; but among the Mexicans it became a stylistic manner or

trend, because the supports were put on vessels whose shapes or ornamentation
shows that they were never set on the fire; and in some cases the legs have de-
generated into functionless lugs or ornamental devices. Moreover, in this same
Mexican region the idea of tripod support was extended to objects of totally
different uses, such as the metate for grinding corn, and the stool or seat. The
tripod habit    was already established two thousand or more years ago in the
earliest wares yet discovered,  and it maintains itself today in the household in-
ventory of Indians and peons.
       Farther north, in the United States Southwest, whose archaeological history
can also be carried back something like two thousand years, both spouts and
tripods are characteristically absent. They do occur occasionally, as spouts occur
sporadically in Mexico, and tripods in Peru; and these exceptions are significant
§   M4                        OTHER HABIT CHANNELINCS                                     I59

because they prove that the ideas of spouts or tripods were not beyond the
capacity or range of any of these pottery-making peoples.                They were in fact
tried,   but did not take exccjn each in the area where             it   became typicaL In
short, though traits hke tripods and spouts are relatively unimportant, they can
nevertheless be extremely persistent        and characteristic. From the angle of the
successful functioning of the native cultures of the three American areas, it was
of course immaterial whether they went in for spouts or legs or neither. Yet,
having made one        stylistic   choice or the other, they adhered to       it   over long
periods during which       more important features of government, technology, or
subsistence were altered fairly drastically.
     Such cultural happenings are comparable to the ordinary habits of a person
his nonessential mannerisms.        An individual early in his life acquires a particular
shrug or gesture, a posture or way of seating himself, a manner of articulation,
of forming or spacing his letters in handwriting. He goes through periods of
good luck and bad luck, his fortunes fall or rise; but the mannerisms persist.
This is not to say that habits in persons and cultures consist entirely of insig-
nificant idiosyncrasies. As a matter of fact, habit formation enters just as much
into the bigger and more important features of human Hfe and culture. But in
such cases we think of habit as character or attitude system; and these, being
large and complex things, not only are bound to be partially modified with the
wear and tear of time, but their persistent core is          less   easily extricated  and
defined. The smaller habits, those of the type of mannerisms, are               more easily
traced just because they are discrete,         and because, being of indifferent im-
portance, their very neutrality sometimes enables           them to go on          practically
unaltered for surprisingly long periods.
     Further examples on the cultural level are teapot-shaped               vessels,   with a
double -curved spout and a handle, which in Japan have an archaeological his-
tory stretching back of the introduction of tea into the early Iron Age and even
the Stone Age; and pile houses in the regions around the Alps, as illustrated
by the Stone Age lake dwellings of Switzerland, the Bronze Age terramare of
Lombardy, and by modern Venice. The North American side of the Atlantic
was a clam-eating coast in prehistoric Indian times, as attested by shell mounds,
and is so today. By comparison the mussel was neglected as food, and still is,
except for a partial change in tastes recently introduced by French and Italian
immigrants. On the European side of the same ocean, on the contrary, the clam
is little esteemed   and the mussel is eagerly eaten; and this was true in the Stone
Age as it is today. This difference may be due in part to the quality of the
species available, or to environmental factors; but it cannot be wholly accounted
for on such grounds because the same species of mussel, Mytilus edulis, occurs
on both sides of the Atlantic        —in fact has a nearly world-wide distribution.
Hence it would seem that the factor of long-term taste habits has contributed
to the picture.
l6o                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                                    §   MS

                                      145.   INVENTION

      The most incisive form of cultural addition is invention, the finding things
out, or, etymologically, "coming into"             something new.
      In studies of culture the word "invention" is used with a somewhat wider
meaning than its current popular sense. To the man on the street "invention"
denotes a new machine or technological process. In anthropology and culture
history it includes this and more. We can for instance speak of institutional
inventions, such as the matrilineate, kingship, moiety organization, representative
government, or written constitutions. If it seems that this is stretching meanings
unduly, because institutions are social growths, usually accepted gradually, so
are machines social growths, having antecedents and being accepted gradually,
as we shall see. Then there is intellectual invention           :   a scientific discovery, a new
philosophical idea.      We can just as properly speak of the Copernican invention
as the Copernican discovery ; perhaps more properly, because if the theory should
ever be found incorrect, it would remain an invention although disproved as a
discovery of the truth. From here            it   is   only a step to the discovery of a new
planet, and from that to the discovery of the South Pole. The point is not that
all   these inventions are exactly identical in character, but that they grade into
each other. Above         all,   that they behave       much alike, as regards their causes,
manner, and effects. It is thus wiser to direct attention to the common features
of the behavior of societies when they do something new, rather than to spend
much attention on distinctions that are mainly logical.
      There is one idea it is necessary to be rid of in order to understand the
process of invention in general. This is the assumption that our contemporary
Western habit of seeking or planning inventions is at all normal. Deliberately
planned or sought invention, in fact, is nearly lacking in most of the history of
civilization. It      began timidly to come up in Europe around 1300 or 1400, in-
creased in the i6oo's, but did not become systematic and important until the
nineteenth century. It is therefore an exceptional feature of our own civilization.
In fact it would have been extremely difficult to plan much invention until both
theoretical science      and practical technology reached a development, about the
seventeenth century, such as had never before been attained.



                                       146. NECESSITY

       The old byword of necessity being the mother of invention must be heavily
discounted. It is true only in so far as ordinarily there must be a need, or at least
a use, for a new thing before it will be devised, and especially before it will be
accepted by a society. Necessity may therefore be a spur; it is never a sufficient
cause by    itself.   Above all, need is a relative and subjective factor. Your need
may not be mine. We feel that we need three meals a day. Many ancients ate
§ 147                                      ACCIDENT                                     l6l

and primitives cat only two and are content. Some obtain food so irregularly
that they may not average much more than one meal a day; when they get
enough, it is eaten up. These same people will cheerfully eat three times if they
arc fed; but they hardly feel that they must or ought to have meals so often.
Their circumstances and habits are different, hence their orientations and ex-
pectations also diflfer from ours.
    A Negrito wants a little sloping roof over his head;          it   does not occur to him
that he wants a house with walls. If a river          is   to be crossed   and recrossed, he
may build a suspension bridge that shows him possessed of mechanical in-
genuity. But a house instead of a leanto windbreak would be extra    work and
would give him nothing that he really wants. His family is small, his posses-
sions few, and in several days or weeks he expects to move elsewhere because
food will be exhausted where he is now. So he does not sense a need that we
might regard as imperative.
    On the contrary, most primitives obviously desire certain things on which
we are much less intent. They strongly want close and constant association with
their kin. The floating laborer of our society who leaves his home folks, drifts
about without ever seeing them again or without rearing a family of his own,
is as good as unheard-of among them. If a savage leaves his home, it is to settle

down and marry among another group.
    Similarly with religion,  which all primitive peoples evidently feel a need
of, since   they   all          and the overwhelming majority of individuals
                         possess one,
                                  —
seem genuinely to believe in not to mention the much greater number of men
in societies that are beyond the primitive. Yet many Russians of today, and a
fair number of people  among ourselves, get along comfortably without religion.
One might contend that the Soviet social program constitutes the prevalent
Russian religion. But though a program that leaves no room for God or the
soul, which does not recognize anything supernatural, may function emotionally
as the equivalent of a religion, though it may surround itself with satisfying
social rituals and with sanctions, it obviously does not quite constitute a religion.

    In short, necessity is so largely a function of orientation, of goals already
established by the extant culture, that it is too variable a factor to be invoked
very often to explain invention. It is wants that determine what people do, and
wants are states of mind, largely determined in their turn by already existing
culture.

                                        147.   ACCIDENT
    On the other hand, accident is unquestionably one factor in invention and
discovery. There are a number of cases in the history of medicine. Sulfanilamid
was first made as far back as 1908 as part of a dye fixative. In 1935, the dye was
found to be powerful against streptococcus infections; research then isolated
sulfanilamid as the active agent. Penicillin was "invented" as a result of Flem-
ing's working with staphylococcus cultures and noting that where these became
l62                                CULTURE PROCESSES                              § 147


infected with mold the adjacent colonies of bacteria were dissolved away. The
shock cure for dementia praccox was discovered through a schizophrenic's being
given, by a nurse's error, an overdosed insulin injection for the diabetes that
he also had. He almost died, but recovered improved, and the way was pointed.
Pasteur was led to the theory and the method of immunization by happening
to inject an overlooked and stale bacterial culture of chicken cholera and finding
that it failed to kill. It then occurred to him that an attenuated culture might
immunize. By contrast, it may be pointed out that for several generations medi-
cine has felt the urgent need for a nonoperative, non-radioactive treatment of
cancer, and has brought all the planned resources of several laboratory sciences
to bear on the problem, without being able to find a solution.
      Daguerre solved a crucial problem in the invention of photography through
forgetting that he had an open vessel of mercury standing in a cupboard. Into
this cupboard, because it was dark, he put away overnight an exposed bromide-

coated silver plate. In the morning, the latent image had begun to develop.
Daguerre, in a flash, suspected fumes from the mercury, and trial confirmed his
suspicion.   Other chemicals in time came to replace mercury vapor, but the
essential and hitherto undiscovered factor of "developing" invisible images had
been found (§ 187). Yet to see the situation in its entirety, it must be remem-
bered that Daguerre was a conscious inventor, long seeking a way to a specific
goal. That is why he was able to profit at once by his fortunate accident   :   he was
alerted to take advantage of it.
      Malus's discovery of the polarization of hght came from his happening to
be looking at a crystal as he turned it idly in his fingers against a reflection of
the rays of the setting sun in facing      windows; he noted that the refraction
altered perceptibly with the turning. If     he had held the crystal against un-
              —or even with reflection the rays had not been coming in
reflected light                             if

nearly horizontally — there would have been no       Malus had
                                                    alteration.   head    his
                 phenomena at the time, so he promptly verified his chance
full of refraction

observation, and determined its meaning by experiments. Another physicist,
preoccupied with different problems, might have filed the observation and only
followed it up years later, or forgotten it. The average layman would probably
have thought the phenomenon odd and have done nothing about it. It is evident
that the degree of experience and the direction of interest of the person to    whom
the accident happens is at least as important as the accident itself.
      Thus, one F. P. Smith was testing ship's screws. An unduly long one hit
a snag, broke off, and the boat went faster. This accident might not have been
profited by at all except for happening in the course of trials deliberately aimed
at invention.

      Similar was Goodyear's accidental discovery of hard or vulcanized rubber
by heating with sulphur, a process he invented in 1839 and patented in 1844.
Yet the "accident" only happened after Goodyear had been in the rubber-goods
§   m8                              invention and play                                   163
business and had failed because of the deterioration which articles of rubber
underwent. He had in fact previously experimented to prevent this deterioration.
     Farther back      in   the history of culture there are a     number of instances
on which direct evidence is lacking but which suggest the factor of invention
by accident, or as a by-product of some other effort. Rye, for instance, is be-
lieved first to have been a      weed in wheat or barley fields of western Asia. As
the cultivation of wheat was carried farther north, or to higher altitudes, the
hardier rye throve at the expense of the wheat. There are regions where the two
are put in together: if the wheat fails in a bad year, there is at least a partial
rye crop to    fall   back on. In    still   colder climates, rye, on account of   its   de-
pendability, came to be sown pure as a crop in its own right. In the same way,
oats seem to have begun as a weed in fields of emmer wheat.
     So with the fire drill. It is an uncertain enough implement; in most primi-
tive communities only the more adept individuals attempt to use it. It requires
wood that is neither too hard nor too soft and is both seasoned and kept dry, and
especially a rather delicate balance of manipulative strength and skill. This
makes it unlikely that anyone who noted that friction produces heat, and who
deliberately attempted to apply the principle in the fire drill,       would have suc-
ceeded. Without previous experience or teaching, it would be perhaps a thou-
sand chances to one that the trial would fail and that our putative inventor
would discard his invention. It seems much more probable that in the boring
of a hole not only would warmth be felt, but sooner or later the ground-out
wood dust would collect in a little heap and send up a wisp of smoke and
show a glowing spark; whereupon it would only be necessary to repeat the
operation with a new purpose. Much the same holds for the other friction de-
vices, fire plow, fire saw, and fire cord. While there is no proof that these

inventions were actually       made as unintended by-products, it is mechanically
plausible that they were. In any event, it is inescapable that the "invention" had
antecedents.
     The occasional part that accident plays among apes in the solution of prob-
lems that are akin to simple inventions has been discussed in § 28.
     That accident has an occasional hand in invention is certain, but its im-
portance must not be overestimated. Without awareness of want or problem,
favorable luck will be wasted.        It is   again true that states of mind determine
inventions, in individuals and in societies. Only as against this background does
accident become significant.



                             148.   INVENTION AND PLAY
     Inventions motivated by play impulses are fairly common. The old "high"
bicycle,   with a very large wheel, was purely an instrument of sport.             When
about 1890 the modern type, with two equal and smaller wheels, then called
safety bicycle, began to appear, it was hailed with acclaim. Bicycle parades were
164                                 CULTURE PROCESSES                            §   H^
held, bicycle racing became        an intercollegiate sport, century runs were sched-
uled every Sunday, hundreds of clubs were organized, then federated into a
great League of American Wheelmen. It was only later that the bicycle began
seriously to be used as a means of getting around on business. From this posi-
tion, in America, it was again partly displaced by the abundance and cheapness

of automobiles; but in Europe, where relatively         few people have been able to
afford motorcars of their own, the bicycle has remained standard as a middle-
class   means of local    transportation. In 1944,   when the American forces re-
entered a western Europe denuded of railroads and gasoUne, it was about the
only civilian means of locomotion.
      The history of the automobile is parallel. It too began essentially as a
vehicle of sport, luxury, and recreation.
      Ballooning, the    first   form of aviation, commenced partly    as a scientific

demonstration and partly as an adventure. The practical and economic utiliza-
tion of all aircraft came much later.
   The first invention of the bow and arrow may fall into the same class. A
bow must have passed beyond a certain threshold of effectiveness before it can
have any utility as a weapon. It seems dubious whether any primitive, starting
from nothing and thinking up a bow and arrow by insight, could give it the
several points of efficiency needed for killing even a small animal. Besides, cer-
tain manipulative skills are required in addition to aim, such as an arrow grip
and a string release. Our hypothetical inventor out of the blue would therefore
quite likely have given up his idea as unworkable on first actually trying it out.
On the other hand, a string on a bent stick is under tension and will twang.
Just such a "musical bow" is used by many primitive peoples as a sort of "Jews'-
harp" or jaws'-harp, set against the teeth. The same strung stick could also be
bounced in a game, or have sticks bounced off its string. From that it would be
a short step to sliding or shooting light sticks at a near-by mark. Now, with
something to build on, both in the way of a working instrument and manipu-
lative skill, a little more strengthening or improvement of both     bow and arrow
would much more easily result in a workable weapon. This reconstruction is
wholly speculative, and no assurance can be put on any step in the process
outlined. The suggestion is merely that something of the sort is likely to have
been the development, because the invention in toto, at one stroke, seems over-
difficult mechanically; and the play factor, perhaps aided by accident, seems the

most likely to have entered into the transitional stages. The influence of pattern,
of existing similar forms, must also be reckoned with, as antecedents not only
                                                                           :




a musical or game bow, but the spring trap or noose holding down a bent-over
sapUng. In both cases taut cords and the elasticity of wood are utilized. Un-
fortunately,   we have no more actual knowledge of the origin of the sapUng
snare than of the bow.  We do know that the bow as a weapon is not really early
in prehistory. Its first record is late Palaeolithic or Mesolithic (§ 274-276), and it
§   149                                    ANTECEDENTS                                   165

was preceded in Europe by a well-developed spcar-throwcr in the Magdalcnian
(§269).
       A
       second prehistoric instance             is   American. It has long been known that
even the most advanced native cultures of the                  New World— Aztec, Maya,
Inca   — totally lacked several basic technological devices that had long been im-
portant in the Eastern Hemisphere. These included ironworking, stringed
musical instruments, plows, and wheels.* In 1944 wheeled toys of pottery were
reported from excavations in the Panuco River region in Mexico, near Tampico.
They consisted of effigies of dogs with the paired legs perforated, presumably
for insertion of a slender rod or reed, on the ends of each of which pierced
pottery disks were jammed. The axles have decayed, but the baked clay figures
and sets of disks remain. These are indubitable little four-wheel wagons in prin-
ciple,     though applied to toys (or possibly           cult objects)   on the order of the
stuffed lambs or wooden horsies that our children drag around. Subsequently it
was noted that similar pieces had previously been discovered scatteringly all the
way from Michoacan to Panama.
     As compared with all the other instances here discussed, this case is incom-
plete. The principle of the device was achieved in play, but it failed to be ap-

plied for utility. Actually this nonuse of the wheel after its discovery makes
native America stand out in sharper contrast with the Old World. Literally and
mechanically, the ancient Mexicans made the invention; socially speaking, they
refused it   — threw   it    away.
      Genetically,     all   the discoveries    and innovations of pure science and fine
  —those intellectual and aesthetic pursuits which are carried on without
art                                                                                    refer-

ence to technology or      —may be credited to functioning of the human play
                              utility

impulses. They are adult sublimations, onto a largely supermuscular level, of the
sensorily exploratory and kinaesthetic activities that constitute play in children
and mammals. They rest on the play impulse, which is connected with growth
but is dissociated from preservation, comfort, or utility, and which in science and
art is translated into the realm of imagination, abstraction, relations, and sensu-
ous form.

                                        149.   ANTECEDENTS

       The bow is of interest, not only because of its presumptive relation to play
before utility, but also because it illustrates the necessity of antecedents to

almost any invention. These antecedents, prerequisites, or conditions must be
present— both before an individual can make a workable invention, and before
a culture can accept it. These antecedents are of the utmost importance to recog-
nize, because     we men are by nature romantic and unhistorical-minded, and,
except under intellectual discipline, we prefer and shape for ourselves emotion-

     ^ There were indigenous spindle whorls, but these were only disk buttons or weights

on a rod twirled free by hand. They might at best be called near-wheels. The axle did not
spin in a bearing, and the wheel edge engaged nothing.
l66                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                                 S 149

ally       appealing stories of how inventions are brought about by sheer resolve,
superhuman insight, dire necessity, or mere blind luck. On analysis every in-
vention on which    we have information proves to depend on antecedents, as
regards both individual creation and social acceptance.
     The essential feature of the modern automobile is the propulsion of a
wheeled vehicle by an explosion engine. Wheels were known for thousands of
years, the explosion engine for decades, before the combination was made. It is
completely certain that the idea of combining a vehicle and an explosion engine
occurred to hundreds of men long before any automobile ever ran. The problem
was not to put one and one together, but to make them fit workably. This in-
volved all sorts of complications, which had to be mastered gradually.             We need
not go into the mechanical complexities of transmission and gearshift; simpler
features will illustrate the point. To be effective, the gas explosion must occur
in an enclosed chamber or cylinder against a piston whose plunge outward
moves the machinery. How introduce an intermittent flame rapidly into this
tight cylinder? The most feasible answer is an electric spark, and this is what
has chiefly been used in gasoline motorcars. It could be used when automobiles
came along, because by then first static electricity, next current, and then electro-
magnetism had been discovered. Until these prior discoveries had been made,
the principle or abstract idea of an automobile could have been invented, but
hardly a car that ran." The difference is like that between Leonardo da Vinci's
dreams of flying machines and the Wright brothers' realization at Kittyhawk.
Leonardo merits high credit for his imagination; but he was four centuries too
early. His time could not have produced a machine that would fly. It possessed

too few scientific and technical antecedents.
     Patents, by the way, are not issued for an idea, but for a specific device,
process, or machine that is presumably workable, and which is concrete enough
so that it can be drafted or a model can be supplied. If the Patent Office believes a
proposed device to be unworkable, it refuses the patent. It is true that if a device
includes a new idea, this idea also becomes protected by its patenting; but only
secondarily, by inclusion. It is easy to see why the law takes this stand. Without
it,   there    would be a scramble to pre-empt all possible new ideas, largely by
people incompetent to translate them into effective execution. Patents would be
held by those working out combinations of words instead of working out parts
of machines. The point is significant for the understanding of culture history.
       Sometimes the prerequisite antecedents are indirect and unexpectedly re-
mote. The really first automobiles did not have gas engines, but were steam-
driven. This was as early as 1770 in France, soon after 1800 in England, long
before the gas engine was invented. Some of these early road machines have been
preserved and may be seen in the United States National Museum Annex. They

       2   Some progressive dates are: workable gas engine, Otto, 1877; Selden basic patent,
1879; practical automobile, Serpollet in France, 1889; first gasoline motor of oresent motor-
car type, Daimler, 1892.
§   149                                   ANTECEDENTS                                 167

look something like monstrous steam rollers. Trcvithick's car of iHfj3 ran on the
streets of      London with lo-foot drive wheels. By 182^ tuhular boilers had been
introduced. These road cars were not a practical success, and for several reasons;
but one of the reasons was that roads were bad. Locomotives, which       is what

these contraptions really amounted to, were accordingly put on rails, where
they no longer shook to pieces, could go much faster, and could better haul
cars. Thus the steam railway was born about i(S29; is really was a transfer from

the idea of the free-ranging automobile, which was then dropped for nearly a
century. The idea of rails was much older than that of self-moving engines.
Wooden rails for hand-pushed cars are said to have been used in small-scale
mining operations in Germany as early as 1546, and certainly were used before
1700 at Newcastle; iron-shod ones in 1716, and cast-iron ones in 1767, all these
last in England. Passengers were hauled in horse-drawn cars on rails near

                     —
London in 1801 the same year that Trevithick carried them in a steam-driven
locomotive      —a   full   twenty-eight years before Stephenson's steam locomotive
proved practicable on the Liverpool-Manchester rail line.
        It   should be added that several factors were involved in the nonsuccess of
the early road locomotives. In England, where industry had become heavier and
more mobile than in France, and roads were far better than in America, the
directors and promoters of steam railways exerted competitive pressure as soon
as the railways had proved successful and were promising to             make money. Be-
ginning as early as 1832, they induced turnpike trustees to exact prohibitive
tolls from road machines. When this was not sufficient, they got legislation

passed which put a 4-mph ceiling on any road engine-vehicle             —a rule that was
not relaxed in England until 1896, when the gas-engine automobile was already
successfully racing across France.          Such blocking of the development of inven-
tions by use of influence is not mere wickedness. The railroads did represent a
growing investment, much larger than any for road, machines; and money is
like life in seeking self-protection. Indeed, the early railway-builders were genu-
inely farsighted in their fears, as the later automotive competition beginning
in the decade 1920-30 was to show.
        A weakness of railways      is   that they involve heavy capital for right of way,
roadbed, track, and maintenance, and that they reach only a limited               number
of points. Recognition of the desirability of a mechanical vehicle that could
range freely on all roads was therefore bound to recur. Shortly before 1900, the
immediate ancestors of our modern automobile began to appear, in three forms.
One used the newer explosion engine already discussed; another, the old steam
engine, though in a shape extremely light for the power produced, with 1000-
pound-pressure flash boilers; the third, a storage-battery electric motor. For years
the three forms competed, until the gas engine won out through greater adapta-
bility to      most demands. One thing, however, helped the modern automobile,
even in its infancy, as against its precursor of a century before: the solid rubber
tire,     which eased some of the jolts as speed increased. This tire had come in
l68                                 CULTURE PROCESSES                           S   ^49

toward the end of the horse-and-buggy days for pleasure vehicles: "Bring out
your rubber-tired hacks." Soon the hollow, inflated rubber tire took its place;
this had developed with the low or safety bicycle a decade or so before, and had

there proved its advantage and feasibility. Without rubber and pneumatic tires,
the automobile would have had to take a racking pounding at speeds of more
than six or eight miles an hour on most roads of that time; but now the auto-
mobile's tires were awaiting it. Undoubtedly if tires had not been ready, they
would soon have been developed; but the progress of the automobile would in
that case probably have been delayed some years.
     A simple case of antecedents, though an ancient one, is the calendar,
which could not have been devised without recorded observations and counts.
Reference is to a genuine calendar that recognizes a specified number of days
and of moon appearances within the year, and attempts to reconcile the three
factors     —                   —
        days, moons, year which are not related in integral numbers. Even
                                      true, it must be preceded by observations
if such a calendar is only approximately

whose cumulative count is carried on for many years, probably for several life-
times. This in turn involves some system of notation or record. Hence any com-
plex calendar can hardly be expected to have preceded writing by very long.
          Greek astronomy underwent a splendid development for some centuries,
then slowed and ceased progress. The Greeks had no real clocks with gears,
pendulum, or escapement. They had only water clocks depending on drip, and
sundials.       They knew optics and the lens in principle rather than in practice,
because they do not seem to have ground glass. Hence they had no telescopes.
Their other observational instruments were of the simplest. Looking back now,
it   is   evident that Greek intellect and imagination had developed astronomy
about as far as they were able to until clocks and telescopes were available   —and,
let us add,      until a mathematics with a computationally efficient number-symbol
system like our positional "Arabic" numerals was also available. It was by lack
of these antecedents that the further progress of       Greek astronomy was neces-
sarily checked. As a matter of fact, when basic progress in astronomy began to be

made again, it was by Copernicus and his successors some centuries after clocks
(§ 184)      and position numerals (§ 189) and algebra were in use. Within another
century the telescope was invented (§ 152) and was immediately utilized by
Galileo and others. Similarly, contemporary astronomy builds largely on the
photography and the spectroscope that the nineteenth century devised.


                  150.   CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS
    So important is this matter of antecedents that it is often difficult to deter-
mine reliably just what constitutes an invention or when it took place. The more
the situation is analyzed, the larger do the antecedents loom, and by comparison
the less outstanding does the new step or increment appear. This is contrary to
the popular view, which condenses a complex and gradual process into a single
§   150                  CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS                         169

dramatic act by one individual, with whom we can identify ourselves emotion-
ally. Hence the anecdotes about    Newton and the apple, or Watt and his mother's
teakettle,      which we are taught as children. We profess not to believe these
stories seriously, but they nevertheless tend to influence our thinking.

        It is   true that there is always insight at work   when something new is de-
vised or understood. It is no doubt also true that usually it is great men, genu-
inely superior individuals,       who have these insights. But there is also a long
chain of antecedents involved, in every case of which we have knowledge, with-
out which the insight and genius could have done nothing in the given situa-
tion. This intricate and largely impersonal       build-up is precisely the anthropolo-
gist's    or the historian's business to elucidate for true understanding of      what
happened; but it is horribly unromantic, and the lay mind shrinks from it, just
as a child could not grasp it. The popular mind loves being off duty as regards
criticism and skepticism,and has invested the whole matter of invention with
an atmosphere of fascinating mystery. It imagines a great intellect rushing along
out of nothing like a new comet out of space, and making a complete invention
at one stroke. The more inexpHcable this is, the more satisfying it is as a day-

dream story. In reality, however, we may say that most so-called inventions are
not a single act but a cumulative series of transmitted increments plus a series
of new elements when these become possible in the culture in which they appear.
        Kuznets neatly demonstrated this rule in a type study of the plow sulky.
This is a plow with wheels. The addition of the wheels undoubtedly made 't 1
new kind of plow, which we can define, and distinguish from other plows.
Kuznets went over data extracted from United States patent records on the
number of patents issued each year that had to do with plow sulkies       —new parts,
improvements, refinements. Each year after the initiating invention in 1865 the
number of new patents grew more rapidly, then began to level off, reached a
peak around 1882, then diminished, declined rapidly, and dwindled away by
1923. There was little more to perfect on the plow sulky, and inventiveness
turned to replacing it by new types of plows. The year-by-year curve of addi-
tions to and improvements of the plow sulky suggests a somewhat skew "normal"
frequency distribution.
        Now it cannot be maintained that all inventions develop as regularly as
this.   A physical or an economic catastrophe may come along and chop off the
curve; or a new and subversive invention may displace a still growing one.
The line of development would also look different if one chose a wider cate-
gory, say plows in general. In that case the line       would be a composite of the
curves for inventions of handled plow, share plow, plow sulky, disk plow, and
so on;     and it would presumably run more nearly level but with many minor
fluctuations. Also, in the absence of Patent Office records, we cannot be sure of
the precise       growth of many inventions. Yet what analysis of the plow-sulky
history does       show is that many inventions are not single acts of mind, but
170                                   CULTURE PROCESSES                            § 1 5°


cumulative results. They are social events, and therefore they usually are gradual
events.
       In the last analysis, the fundamental invention in the plow sulky was the
combination of two antecedents, the plow and the wheel, and two very old
antecedents at that. The rest of the history of the invention consists of improve-
ments and modifications; in other words, developments or consequences of the
original combination. A great deal of invention seems to boil down to just that.
   The more analytically facts are gone into, the more difficult is it to isolate
many really basic inventions. More and more do they resolve into combinations
of old elements, or into modifications that are reapplications of other old ele-
ments. What is new is often a new function, which is culturally significant be-
cause it is socially accepted, and which we can name. Such are the plow sulky
and the automobile, the bow and arrow, and the fire drill. Mechanically, it
is   often hard to delimit an invention. The mechanical principle or structure of
the shooting bow is the same as that of the drill bow, the game bow, the mouth-
harp bow. The bow becomes a bow when it is shot as a weapon. It is its use, its
human function, that makes it a weapon, its name, "bow and arrow," that gives
it   entity. For most of us, other than engineers and inventors, the cultural history

of the bow is more significant than         its   mechanical history. Similarly with the
automobile. Mechanically, the early nineteenth-century steam road-locomotives
were motorcars or automobiles, as much so as a White Steamer of 1908 or a
Chevrolet of 1948. But they failed to be successful, they went out, and culturally
the history of what we call the automobile begins in the decade before 1900
when flash-boiler steam models and gas-engine makes began to be produced.


                              151. SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE

       This brings us to the matter of social acceptance of inventions. We may
lay   it   down as a definition that, anthropologically, sociologically, and histori-
cally,an invention is not an invention until it is accepted in a culture. Until
then it exists merely individually or mechanically; it actualizes historically only
with its social acceptance.
       It is notorious that a great   many successful inventions have been claimed by
and for different nations. Which is the right one is often difficult to decide.
Where nationalism enters into the problem, it becomes still more difficult. Asked
who the inventor of the steamship was, the average American will answer
Fulton; the Britisher, Symington; the Frenchman, Jouffroy. A Spaniard may
even propose Blasco de Garay, who is wholly mythical as regards the steam-
boat. Each is reacting to what he has been taught. But Fulton had well-known
predecessors, bothAmerican and European. The story is set forth in fuller
                      it might be said here that what Fulton really did was
detail in § 185-186, but
to build a steamboat which convinced people that it was or could be made
economically successful. Historically, the definition of the inventor as the man
§    '5'                                SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE                                            I7I

who makes a utilitarian invention pay, or succeeds in persuading others that it
will pay, has a great deal to be said for it, especially in our contemporary civili-
zation with its heavy economic and technological slant. For all times and places
the definition is a bit narrow, since some successful innovations do not yield a
money profit, and some cultures have neither money nor profit. Broadened
accordingly, the definition reads that an invention                 is   only potential while         its

idea remains in the head of an individual, but that it becomes actualized when
it   begins to be socially accepted into a culture.
        The bars to adoption are of several kinds. First there is the direct economic
preventive.    We know how to extract gold from the ocean, or power from the
tides, but it costs more, in      money, to extract them than the gold and the power
are worth. Then there        is   the already discussed matter of antecedents, as with
Leonardo's ideas of flying machines. In 1500 Europe was technologically not
far enough along to execute his ideas.              Next is the factor of resistance. A new
religion usually encounters an established one.            An attempt to induce Americans
to eat taro meal for breakfast failed because they already had fixed eating habits
and a sufficiency and variety of foods, so an unexciting novelty made no appeal.
An efficient private express system may block institution of a public parcel post,
or vice versa. The two are competitive in serving nearly the                         same ends, and
economic, political, or monopolistic pressure will be directed against the new-
comer. Finally, there are innovations that may seem intrinsically desirable to
nearly everyone, but which are bound to exact a heavy toll of temporary con-
fusion and disorganization        :   a radical reform of the calendar or the alphabet, for
instance, as discussed in § 170 and 212.
        Converse conditions of course further the adoption of changes. An estab-
lished religion that has lost          its   hold, chronic food shortages, times of distress
when reorganization is in majority demand                — all invite     reforms that normally
include innovations and long-delayed inventions.
        A cultural novelty always encounters existing cultural conditions, and                      it is

these which determine whether, when, how, and in what form it gets adopted.
These preconditions of course are so variable from instance to instance that
it is   difficult to attribute the acceptance of particular inventions to their intrinsic

merit. In the realm of machines there certainly                is   something pretty         close to
intrinsic or absolute merit, in the degree of physical                    fitness,    efficiency,   and
economy. But even as between machines, their acceptance is always in part con-
ditioned by their relation to the local culture in which they are invented or
into    which they are introduced. Witness the story of the steamboat in § 185.
In nonmechanical matters, innovations are of course even more influenced by
the culture they are trying to enter.
        In this matter of their fate, or at any rate their date, being determined by
the cultural soil on which they fall, inventions from inside a society and                          dif-

fusions from outside it (§ 171) are much alike.
172                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                  S ^S*



                   152.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN

       The frequent simultaneity of inventions has been discussed in § 140 as a
manifestation of pattern growth, but it is obviously also a matter of antecedents.
If the prerequisites for an invention are lacking, it cannot be realized, even if the

idea should crop up. On the contrary, once the prerequisites have been supplied,
if   desirabiUty of a contrivance continues to be felt, a whole series of individuals
are likely to work on the problem, so that the prospects are considerable that two
or more of them will find a feasible solution. In familiar metaphor, we say that
the discovery is now in the air, or that the time is ripe for it. More precisely, in-
ventions are culturally determined. Such a statement must not be given a mys-
tical connotation. It does not mean, for instance, that it was predetermined from

the beginning of time that type printing would be discovered in Germany about
1450, or the telephone in the United States in 1876.         Determinism in this con-
nection means only that there is a definable relation between a specific condition
of a given culture and the making of a particular invention.
       The history of science is full of instances. Sunspots were first discovered in
161 1, independentlyand in different countries, by Galileo, Harriott, Scheiner,
and Fabricius. The specific antecedent is highly definite: the telescope was de-
vised in 1608. The telescope, in turn, has three claimants to        its   invention. All
three were Dutch, probably because the manufacture of lenses       was developed
farthest in Holland at the time. Only a little later, Spinoza, now remembered as
one of the great philosophers, was earning his daily bread as a lens-grinder.
The compound microscope also originated in Holland; and the discoveries
through it of animalculae, egg development, blood circulation, insect anatomy,
and the like were made later in the i6oo's by two other Dutchmen, Leeuwen-
hoek and Swammerdam. All this means that the culture of seventeenth-century
Holland included a pattern in which lenses figured with more weight than else-
where. In short, the Dutch were lens-minded and lens-making, which was the
antecedent that led to the telescope, and this in turn was the antecedent to the
discovery of sunspots.
       To a certain extent we may even speak legitimately of the inevitability of
inventions   —provided we mean by      this nothing more     than that, given an exist-
ing sense of the desirability of a conceivable device, and the presence of the
needed antecedents, the device will necessarily be invented soon. Given enough
knowledge of optics, technological       skill   in   making lenses, and astronomical
curiosity, sunspots and the moons of Jupiter will be discovered promptly— if not

by Galileo, then by someone else. Given knowledge of electric current and elec-
tromagnetic induction and of sound vibration       —especially with telegraphs in
successful operation for thirty years   —and the idea of the telephone bound to
                                                                             is

occur to a number of technicians. It is only a question of who will first work
the idea out feasibly. Will it be Bell or Gray in 1876, cvr someone else in 1877
§   '5^                     SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN                           I73

or 1878 or perhaps as early as 1875? To the individual inventor the "Who?" is
all-important, because it means who is to get the prize. To his society, and to
the world at large, the       "Who?"     really a matter of indifference —except for
                                          is

sentimental partisanship      —because the invention was going to be made anyway
about when and where it was made.              We cannot always see this fact at the mo-
ment, and still less can we judge in advance whether all the necessary antece-
dents have been gone through with and the economic requirements satisfied.
But after the event, especially at some little perspective from it— provided it is
not so long ago that the record has again begun to get dim or lost we can     —
recognize the piling-up of the antecedents until the invention or the innovation
follows as their consequence. See for instance the histories of mills, of the
steamship, of the telegraph and telephone, in another chapter (§ 183-187).
      This view of the inevitability of inventions is now pretty generally accepted.
That it is not yet common popular knowledge is due to the persistence of what
may be called the "great-man theory" or fallacy. No one denies that there are
great men and that they do great things. The fallacy is to infer from this that
everything important in history must have had a great man as its specific cause
From the fact that the telegraph and the telephone are extremely important in
the mechanics of modern living, it does not follow that Morse and Bell were
outstandingly great men; though obviously they were more than mediociities.'
It is the personalizing, anthropomorphizing habits of nonscientific thinking that

lead us loosely to assume not only that such men were supremely great, but that
they were so much greater than all their contemporaries that we might still be
doing without the benefits of their inventions if they had not been considerate
enough to make them. This is patently absurd, since they had rivals treading on
their heels, and in fact sometimes stepping out ahead. Let us examine another
instance or two, where the circumstances are unusually clear.
      We have seen (§ 140) that Alfred Russell Wallace was the independent co-
discoverer in 1858 of the "Darwinian" concept or hypothesis of natural selection
as a mechanism explaining the          change and origin of species and therewith of
continuous evolution. At that time Darwin had had the idea for twenty years,
and had discussed it with a few of his friends; but, not sufficiently winning
their approval,       he hesitated to publish until his hand was forced by Wallace,
Suppose that Darwin had died during his two decades of indecision. Wallace's
would almost certainly be the name now on our tongues. Suppose he too had
died, say in 1857. Does it seem more likely that in that event biologists would
have gone on indefinitely believing in special creation for each species ? Or that
within a few years some third man would have had the concept of natural
selection occur to him and have announced it? The idea of evolution was "in
the air"   —   as a   matter of fact it was more than that, Herbert Spencer having
developed it before Wallace and Darwin. Their explanation after all is only that

      ^ Morse was also an able portrait-painter.
174                               CULTURE PROCESSES                              § 15^


            mechanism by which the general process of organic evolution is
of a specific
supposed to have worked. Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, and Lamarck, had
already had the idea of developmental transformation. It is evident that natural
selection was really a link in a chain, one idea among several whose union
made a broad system of evolutionistic thought possible. All of which together
would seem to build up to this that science and philosophy having got where
                                    :




they were in western Europe around 1858, it was inevitable that the notion of
natural selection should be thought up by someone within a very few years of
i860 at the latest.
       By contrast we have Aristotle actually imagining and mentioning the idea
of natural selection as something logically thinkable, but immediately dismissing
it   as something not worth testing against evidence. The Greek way of thinking

favored the finite and the definite;      its   world view was not evolutionistic. The
set of the culture pattern   —the "spirit" of the Greek times—was against anything
hke natural selection, and so it was rejected, and remained out for two thousand
years. Incidentally, thinking of the idea when he did can be credited to Aristotle
as a mark of his individual genius. But his rejection of it is not to his personal
discredit, because that      was the    result of his   Greek environment and    social

heritage.
      The case of Mendel, founder of the science of genetics, is extraordinary
because his genius almost did never get recognized. In 1866 Mendel pubUshed
in the proceedings of a learned society at        Brno an account of his experimental
breeding of peas. In this he announced the basic quantitative laws of heredity,
and correctly: they have been much elaborated since but still stand. Except for
the Swiss botanist Nageli, who went unheeded, no one took any notice. Darwin,
Galton, and hundreds of other biologists were studying heredity, but they either
missed seeing Mendel's paper or failed to realize its significance. Surely this is
a case of the time being not yet ripe: Mendel was ahead of it.        He died in 1884
as an abbot, but scientifically an obscure person. In fact, he     was so discouraged
by his failure to impress anyone with his discovery that he is said to have
abandoned belief in it himself. Then, a generation later, in 1900, within three
months three biologists, the Dutchman De Vries, the German Correns, the
Austrian Tschermak, who were studying heredity, and evidently were now
severally approaching the point of view that Mendel had reached in the sixties,
made his discovery over again (§ 140), and clicked to its importance, Correns
also rediscovered  Mendel's forgotten publication, and announced it. Literally
and personally, the Mendelian laws thus date from 1866; culturally and socially,
from 1900. From the angle of understanding human history and the workings of
civilization, which is the effective date.?

     This array of evidence may seem to depreciate the great man, to make him
merely a function of his culture. This is both so and not so. As compared with
popular thinking, it is largely true, because popular thinking wants to drama-
tize and build plots around conquering heroes. But recognition of cultural forces
§    153                        INVENTION OF INSTITUTIONS                          I75

or drifts is obviously quite compatible with recognition of genius or individual
superiority. They can and do coexist.      We can be sure that no important inven-
tion is ever made by a dub. If he made one by accident, he would not know it;
but some more intelligent person might see the significance and communicate
it,   thereby becoming the real discoverer.    We can be just as sure that there are
superior individuals, whom we call highly talented and geniuses, as that there
are inferior ones who are incompetent and unintelligent. It is the talented and
the geniuses who make inventions. But they make them only when and if their
cultures permit; and they make only the specific inventions that their cultures
allow, within a narrow range. Other inventions have already been made,             and
still others   are as yet impossible, given the culture as it is. Biography is a recog-
nized literary genre, which has usually been assumed to have a laudatory pur-
pose, and of late has tended frankly to assume semifictional dress. Biographers
thus are free to cut out any cultural analyses that would make the human interest
of the plot drag, or again to admit bits of culture as picturesque background.
If however our        purpose is to understand the history of human civilization, the
cultural factors loom as decisive, just because they are the larger determinants.
They determine what, where, and largely when and how. The individual deter-
mines the precise date, the particular manner or coloring of the event, and the
mnemonic label of his personality and name.


                         153.   INVENTION OF INSTITUTIONS

        At the bottom of every invention there is an idea or a principle, whether
formulated or not. Fundamentally, therefore, invention is one in kind, whether
it    relates to   implements and machines or to institutions and beliefs. When a
concept like that of divine kingship first appears in human history, it is, in our
sense of a new idea, an invention, though an anonymous one.        We know nothing
of the inventor or the circumstances that led  him to originate the idea, but it
exercised a profound influence on millions of men from ancient Egypt to modern
Japan. Against this, its persistence into recent centuries in Europe is but a frag-
mentary survival. This king-godship became one of the bases of an extensive
politico-economic-religious system or major type of culture in protohistoric times
(§286). The first sure record of the invention's being accepted is in Egypt. It
                                                    —
must have been a stardingly original invention first to conceive that a human
being was a god and then to persuade people to believe it.
     Among modern institutional inventions may be mentioned the form of
ballot that is officially prepared, marked in privacy, but deposited under con-
trol: a system devised to minimize intimidation and fraud. It originated in

Australia, whence its name after its spread to the United States.
     There are also the initiative and the referendum, which come from Switzer-
land. Their roots are mediaeval, in the small cantons where every citizen could
personally participate in government, much as in a Greek democratic city-state
176                              CULTURE PROCESSES                                § 153


or a New England town meeting. In modern form, the referendum was first
worked out by the minute, rural, and conservative canton of Schwyz in 1848.
The idea received impetus when larger, liberal, and urban Ziirich accepted it in
1869. Five years later it was written into the Swiss federal constitution; and in
1891 the initiative followed. South Dakota in 1898 was the first American state
to adopt both institutions.
      An American contribution is the written constitution. There were Magna
Cartas and the like before, but they were essentially confirmations of concession
or privilege. The American constitution was an attempt not to modify or retain,
but to create a new political order, and in unambiguous terms free from the
interpretations of usage or custom.      It   took over from existing English practice
certain features, such as the bicameral legislature.       But it developed as a new
feature the differentiation of representation in the two Houses of Congress
                                                                             by    —
political unitsand by population size. Also new was the explicit co-ordination
of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. But perhaps
the most radical innovation of the American constitution was its outrightly
creating the basic foundation of a political structure.       By contrast, the English
constitution is a cumulative growth. As such, therefore, it is unwritten:        it is   a
sort of direction followed through centuries of development. The American con-
stitution, on the contrary, being made        up at one stroke, had to be explicit and
written out. The parallel shows that conscious, abrupt efforts toward production
of new culture form and content may have functions and results closely similar
to semiconscious, gradual efforts, and that as processes the two may intergrade.
      Analogous    to these political   inventions are socioeconomic ones such as
banks, credit, double-entry bookkeeping, social security and old-age pensions,
installment mortgages. There is no difference in principle.
      All these institutional inventions cited spread widely. In fact it is their spread
beyond the point of origin that has made them historically important. In thus
showing invention and diffusion as closely associated, the cases are typical. Just
as an invention becomes culturally significant only upon its social acceptance, so
an innovation by one population obviously becomes significant in world civili-
zation in proportion as it is accepted by other populations.



                  154.   INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION
    There is one type of situation in culture history that is interesting because
diffusion and invention enter into it equally. It can be called either stimulus
invention or idea diffusion. In ordinary diffusion, as of the just-mentioned Aus-
tralian ballot or the automobile, both the principle and its mechanism are taken
over by a receiving culture from the inventing one. Occasionally, however,
there are difficulties about acceptance of the mechanism, or the mechanism has
not been fully learned. The idea or principle may then also fail to be accepted.
But again, the idea may exercise an appeal that causes it to penetrate. An effort
§   154                    INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION                             I77

may then be made in the receiving culture to devise another mechanism that
will produce the desired result. Thus an invention, or reinvention, is stimulated
by contact transmission or diffusion.
      It is   in the nature of such events that they tend to leave      little   historical
trace of the processes at      work. But there is documented evidence of several
cases, and there are a number of probable ones.
      Porcelain   is   a pottery containing a feldspar clay, kaolin,   which on high
firing vitrifies all through the ware, instead of only on the surface like a glaze,
and hence is brilliant, hard, and waterproof. The Chinese gradually evolved
porcelain around iioo after a long series of groping experiments. In these step-
by-step inventions accident may well have played a part, as well as blind trials.
By the time Europeans came into direct sea contact with China soon after 1500,
the porcelain art    was highly developed there. Its products were brought to
Europe and admired; but they were costly. Attempts to imitate porcelain were
made, but with only partial success. This was because European ceramics were
still only in the stage of development of Chinese ceramics some centuries before:

they operated with surface glazes.         The   seventeenth-century delftware, and
similar developments, represent this incomplete         European     imitation. Finally
deposits of the necessary ingredient kaolin were found in Europe, the techniques
were mastered, and in 1708-09 true porcelain was reinvented by Bottger and
Tschirnhaus in Dresden. That is why we eat off "china" plates today. But with-
out a mark having been set by the previous Chinese invention, Europeans would
have had nothing to shoot at, and conceivably they might not have devised
porcelain until much later.
      In the early nineteenth century a half-breed Indian called Sequoya in his
native Cherokee, and John Guest by white people, realized the value of writing.
He was illiterate. Perhaps this is what made it seem desirable to him that his
people should possess an instrument comparable to that of the white man. Had
he been sent to an American school he would probably have been content to write
English as a substitute. He wrestled with the problem for years. Finally, about
1 821,    he evolved a Cherokee writing of which his fellow tribesmen were at first
incredulous, but which proved to be entirely adequate and simple to learn, and
which they adopted and used. The characters are derived from English in fact       :




Sequoya had in his house a spelling primer, which he could not read, but many
of whose letters he used for his own purpose with entirely different values.
Eighteen of the Cherokee characters are straight English capitals; some are
modified or extended or inverted capitals; a few are lower-case                  letters   or
numerals; about a third or a quarter of the          total of   86 are freely invented.
That Sequoya's feat was however a genuine and singlehanded invention is
shown by two facts. Not one of the characters has the same value as in English;
and all the characters denote syllables, not letter sounds. Thus A is read as "go"
in Cherokee, B as "ya," C as "tli," D as "a." We have thus a true and real in
vention, with a high degree of originality; and yet we also have the assurance
178                              CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 154

that but for the influence and example of the aUen culture, the invention would
never have been made. It is another instance of "antecedents," though unusual
ones.
      An entirely parallel invention of writing was made by a West-coast African,
shortly before 1849, for his native Vai language. He had had a bit of missionary
schooling in his youth; but he made the invention in a dream, in middle life.
It is also   a syllabary, as against the alphabetic system of English that had stim-
ulated him. But the      number of characters is over 200, and they bear no re-
semblance to English, nor of course to Cherokee. The names of primitive in-
ventors are rarely known, so this one is cited   :   Doalu Bukere.
      Stimulus diffusion accordingly is also stimulus invention. Therein lies its
interest.

      This is perhaps not one of the most frequent processes in culture. However,
its nature is   such that its results look wholly novel and original even when they
are not; and the factors involved tend not to get into the historical record and
often become quickly forgotten. The number of occurrences of the process may
thus be considerably larger than appears. Several instances can be cited in which
derivation by diffusion has actually been suggested by one and another culture
historian without their being able to find direct evidence of the derivation. Yet
the resemblances and the space-time tie-up are such that the operative mechanism
may quite possibly have been reinvention stimulated by previous foreign exist-
ence of the trait. Such possible examples are

    The seemingly independent invention of pottery by the early Basket Maker-
Pueblo (Anasazi) in northern Arizona-New Mexico at a time when pottery surely
was already being made in central Mexico (Archaic) and perhaps in southern Ari-
zona (Hohokam; see § 323)
      Monks in Christianity, some centuries later than Buddhist monasricism, with
convents, celibacy, begging, and tonsure
      Development of Greek grammar some centuries after Sanskrit grammar, and of
Japanese two centuries after Latin and Dutch contacts
      In converse direction, Sanskrit drama following the Greek
      Quantitative meter appearing in Arabic poetry, and then by known transfer in
Persian and Turkish, after it had long been established in Greek and Latin

      None of these can at present be either proved or disproved as examples of
stimulus diffusion, but there seems an inherent probability that some of them
may turn out demonstrably to be such.


                 155.   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION
      In general, more invention means more machines and more institutions
more physical and social apparatus to be handled. This somewhat dismaying
prospect is partly relieved by a type of invention that works through simpUfica-
§   155                   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION                                     I79

tion or reduction. Perhaps "extraction" or "segregation" more nearly describes
the process. Metaphorically it would be a .sort of curdling or clotting-out.
       The most striking case is the alphabet (§206 and 207). Previous systems
of writings consisted of idea signs, word signs, syllable signs, and, in the case of
Egyptian, of sound signs also (§202-205). Moreover, a word might be spelled
but according to its sound and then an ideogram for it be added, as if to make
sure that one representation         would be read if the other were missed              —see the
example in Figure 20. Not only was the writing of particular words cumber-
some, but each method of writing required several hundred symbols. Thus
Egyptian hieroglyphic comprised 460 characters, cuneiform Babylonian around
600, Indus Valley writing nearly 400. As against this, the true alphabet rests upon
the realization that       if   pure minimum-sound symbols           — true   letters   —are con-
                                i.                   2.

 Hieroglyphs

    Transliferafion                     ^(^                "t   ,^         ®               (p)

 Pronunciation                         p^t                ®nt^-k         [ n®b ]          p®t
 Translation                          heaven              you-are        lord-of         heaven




      ^twb®nf                                     wb®l<                                 s®
 l<h®ft              ub^n-f                               ub«n-k                    S®-anl<b
 when                he-rises                          you- rise                   make -live

      FIG. XO.       MIXED PICTOGRAPHIC AND PHONETIC ELEMENTS IN
                            EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHS
      Phrases from a page of Egyptian hieroglyph papyrus.       The circled P denotes a picto-
graph or ideograph; the rest of the writing is by pictorial consonantal letters. In i,
heaven is written alphabetically and confirmed by a conventionalized pictographic "deter-
minative" (the vault of heaven); in 2, by pictograph alone.          The first words of 2 and 3
are   wholly phonetic: pictographs for the ideas of "when" and "you are" would be hard
to devise.    The grammatical suffixes -/ and -)^ added to uben, "rise," in 3 and 4 illustrate
another reason for the development of consonant letters. In the first of these, the confirm-
ing pictograph (sun with rays)    is put in the middle of the stem uben; in the second,

between     and the suffix. In the first words of 2 and 3, the letters in the word read
             it

downward; elsewhere, mostly horizontally. The true alphabet was devised by a process
of segregative reduction out of mixed-method writing such as this.
l80                               CULTURE PROCESSES                               S 155


sistently used, all the characters for syllables,   words, objects, ideas, and "de-
terminatives" or classifiers can be discarded; and anything that can be spoken
can also be written, and with complete intelligibility, by means of from two to
three dozen simple signs. It took two thousand years for this realization to be
achieved. In one sense the cardinal quality required by the inventors of the
alphabet was resolution, the courage to break with the multiple reinsurance of
ways of denoting meaning that was characteristic of the older mixed picto-
graphic-ideographic-phonetic systems. In a rough sort of sense, the invention
was like a cripple's finding he could walk free when he threw his crutches
away.
      If the Egyptians missed a bet by failing to discard all their    writing symbols
except their 24 true letter-signs scattered among the rest, they did achieve an-
other mental simplification: the invention of a pure solar calendar (§ 291). The
"natural" tendency seems to be to take cognizance of time by nights and days,
by moons and their phases, and finally by years and their recurrent seasons.
The difficulty bred by this is that the moon's revolutions around the earth and
the earth's around the sun do not gear. There are more than twelve lunations
in a year, but considerably less than thirteen. They average a bit over 29'/4 days,
so that a twelve-moon year is nearly 11 days short.          A rough correction can be
made by putting a thirteenth month into every third year. Yet not only does
this have the inconvenience of the years being quite unequal, but the correction

is still   short by three and a fraction days. More elaborate intercalations are more
accurate, but also more cumbersome. But no such system can be wholly ac-
curate, because earth and moon revolutions are incommensurable. Hence the
Chinese, Mohammedan, and ritual Jewish calendars, which really observe the
moon, are always beginning the year at a different absolute and seasonal date.
The simplification made by the early Egyptians consisted in disregarding what
                                                                 —
the moon was actually doing, and substituting months arbitrary periods of
thirty days. There were always twelve of these in the year, plus five supple-
mentary days; and the Egyptian year accordingly always was of the same length
                                                                   —
and always began at the same seasonal or astronomical time except for the few
hours' gain that we correct by a leap day.     We   still   follow the Egyptian plan of
months' being independent of the physical moon and its phases, though we do
not use the supplemental days, and        we have our months of unequal length
"Thirty days hath September," and so on. The cardinal act in the devising of
the Egyptian calendar, and a feature that we retain, was the discarding of the
moon's revolution from any relation to the earth's revolution or year.
    Another example of the process is the way in which astronomy and astrol-
ogy were originally associated in one system in Mesopotamia, as discussed below
in connection with the origin of the week (§ 196-197). It used to be thought that

the segregation was effected wholly by the Greeks, who discarded the omens and
portents and developed the pure science. It is now known that in late Mesopo-
tamian days, after the fall of Assyria and especially after that of Persia, there was
§   »55                      INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEGREGATION                              l8l

a school of genuine or pure astronomy in Babylonia on which the Greeks were
more dependent            —both for observation and for interpretation— than their           sclf-

centeredness had led us to believe. But however the credit may fall between the
two nationahties, they did manage to curdle a purely naturalistic science out
from a previous amorphous, naturalistic-supernaturalistic mass of knowledge
and beliefs regarding the heavenly bodies. This astronomy maintained itself for
a number of centuries; but about the time               it   stopped progressing, by      Roman
Imperial times, it was reinvaded by a new wave of magic. This was astrology,
of the type still followed by a remnant of the mystically incUned and the credu-
lous among ourselves.           The earlier Mesopotamians had been concerned mostly
with eclipses as portents. The later astrology crystallized chiefly               at   Alexandria
and dealt with the continuous fortunes of men as determined by the positional
relations of the planets, or rather of the seven moving heavenly bodies visible
to the human eye. From then on until about 1600 astronomy was astrology-
ridden, among ancients, Arabs, and Europeans. Occasional astronomers dis-
avowed the astrological component, more accepted it, some were ardent over it.
It was close to 1700 before scientists were once more unanimous in repudiating

astrology as wholly nonscientific.
     The relations of alchemy and chemistry were similar except that here there
was no ancient attempt at autonomy of a self-sufficient science. The result was
that a wholly naturalistic chemistry never emerged as a productive and sys-
tematic activity anywhere until in the most recent centuries of European civili-
zation. The magico-mystic ingredients in alchemy were the elixir of life, the
philosopher's stone, and the transmutation of metals into gold. The search for
these transcendentals was not calculated to encourage preoccupation with ordi-
nary "base" substances and their humble quantitative properties. In the West,
alchemy first appeared in the turgid atmosphere of Imperial Roman Alexan-
dria about contemporaneously with planetary astrology.* In the East, substan-
tially identical beliefs were        rampant in China apparently a little earlier, during
the first half of the Han period of 206 b.c.-a.d. 220. Alchemy still had some repute
in Europe as late as the sixteenth century.
          The type of inventive change by reduction or extraction has been called
"etherealization" by Toynbee.      The connotations of that word seem inappro-
priate,     and perhaps unfortunate. But it is evident that the process deserves a
name. It is not a process of outright specialization, though                 it   somewhat re-
sembles differentiation by specialization. For instance, medicine begins with
general practice, from which after a time eye-ear-nose-throat treatments separate
off.      With added knowledge, instruments, and skills, certain doctors begin to
limit themselves to the eye and are called oculists. The               remainder for a while
go on as a unit, but in time the aurists perhaps again split off as specialists. In
       *This   is   the   usual version. Another interpretation   makes the Alexandrians crude
chemists concerned with producing deceptive imitations of gold. Both accounts may be true.
l82                               CULTURE PROCESSES                                 § 1 55


this medical specialization there is no discarding or repudiation of one element

or ingredient; they are all developed further, and therewith           it   became advan-
tageous and desirable for individuals to choose among the subspecialties. In the
process here discussed, however, the essential step      is   that   an encumbering in-
gredient, which is either unnecessary or false, is got rid of. There is accordingly
a reduction of total compass of a system or activity through a segregation of its
more valuable or efficient elements from its inferior or impeding ones.
     Apparently, a process somewhat reminiscent of this reduction-segregation
is observable in technology. In the main this technological happening is obscured

by the fact that many machines grow more complex as they develop, because
their functions      and powers increase. But as each kind of machine approaches
the limits of its inherent possibilities as a type, it tends to revert to simplicity, to
emphasize economy of means, and to achieve what engineer and artist would
agree in calling beauty of design and function. An example in point is the
clipper ship       coming to its peak in the very days when steam was beginning
to supersede sails. The superb swords of Japan in an era of cannon are another
instance.    We have here a field of social process that has been inadequately ex-
plored, but in which interesting possibilities can be glimpsed.



                                 156.   CULTURAL LOSS
      Popular romance maintains a half-belief in supposed lost arts of the ancients,
such as hardening of copper to equal steel, miraculously Hfelike embalming of
mummies, and the like. Actually, it is likely that no art of serious consequence
has been lost from total human civilization. Copper can be hardened by alloys
most of which the ancients did not possess; it can be somewhat hardened by
hammering, a quality which we know as well as they did but do not utilize
precisely because we have very much harder steel. Lenin's body in Moscow is
probably preserved much better than any Egyptian master embalmer would
have known how to preserve it. And so on.
      There is considerable cultural "loss" that is actual, but it relates to particular
cultures rather than to human culture as a whole.         Most of it, as will be seen
presently,    is   displacement, properly speaking: a   new custom, art, worship, or
belief crowds out an old one. Utilitarian arts, such as hardening copper, dyeing

with cochineal or with Tyrian shellfish, retire to a humble spot in the techno-
logical   background as metallurgy improves steelmaking and chemistry devises
anilines. Most of what we shall have to consider as cultural "losses" possess this

character of replacement or displacement. In addition, particular societies do at
times undergo genuine or downright losses of specific items of their culture,
owing to environment, loss of materials or skills, shrinkage of population, im-
poverishment, and other or unknown causes. Some instances of both kinds will
be briefly analyzed.
§   157                        DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS                                183


                        157.   DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS

      In 1912 Rivers demonstrated a series of convincing examples of the dis-
appearance of useful arts in Oceania. The things given up were of unquestion-
able utility: canoes, pots, bows.     The canoe went out of use in Torres Island
in Melanesia,       was replaced by sailing rafts in Mangareva. In a series of Mela-
nesian islands     —Malikolo, Pentecost, Lepers, Ambrym—potsherds are found in
the ground, but pottery has not been            made in the historical period. In several
areas the bow was still known recently, but it was used only as a toy, in sport,
or in small-game hunting of rats, birds, or fish            —not in war. These areas of
fighting without        bow and arrow covered nearly all Polynesia except Tonga
and Samoa; in Melanesia, most of New Britain, New Ireland, and the Ad-
miralties; and some of the coast of New Guinea. The causes of the several
disappearances were various. Lack of material was the least common cause. It
would be applicable chiefly to canoes, but was not the reason for abandonment
in either Torres or Mangareva. Sometimes the guilds or families of tohunga or
craftsmen who had been taught magic as well as manual skills by their elders
died out. This happened to the canoemakers in the Torres Islands, and to the
stone-adz producers in Woodlark. Sometimes in Oceania a single community
specializes in manufacturing one article, such as pots, and supplying it by trade
to a large area. A catastrophe overwhelming such a village might result in the
whole area's coming to use wooden vessels instead of pottery. As to the bow,
there was generally no large game in the Oceanic islands to sustain one custo-
mary economic utility of the weapon. Of warfare there generally was enough,
but it was sometimes ceremonial rather than waged for practical advantage.
And in Polynesia war tended to be dominated by standards of bravery, chivalry,
or manners of fighting: fashion exalted the hand-to-hand club.
     All in all, the array of cases is significant in showing that the actual his-
torical behavior of cultures cannot be predicted from an a-priori notion that

practical utility    —economic motivation— invariably determinative.®
                                                 is

      There also are conditions of natural environment under which particular
utilitarian activities can wither away fast. In 1818 the explorer Ross discovered

some two hundred Eskimo along the east shore of Smith Sound in northern
Greenland— later also named Peary's Eskimo, or Eta or Polar Eskimo, because
they live farthest north of any permanent human community, at Igita beyond
latitude 78°. Ice and cliffs had long cut them off so effectually that they no

      '   One consideration that Rivers did not stress is that the Oceanian continent of native
AustraUa also lacked canoes, pottery, and bows, and almost universally so. Australia seems
to be a case not of having possessed and lost, but of never having had the inventions   in—
the main perhaps of not wanting them (see § 253, 310). Nevertheless, the proximity of
Australia to    New Guinea, Melanesia, and Polynesia makes it seem that the two negative
distributions    may be connected, according to the principles of distributional evidence set
forth in § 223-224.
184                                  CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 157


longer had clear knowledge of any other people. They possessed no kayaks          —the
decked-over boats of skins stretched on a light wooden frame which were so
widely prevalent among the Eskimo that it is assumed that all once had them.
This group lacked them because driftwood does aot carry into Smith Sound.
From 1818 on, they got wood from Ross, and from subsequent explorers and
whalers; but still they made no kayaks: they no longer knew how. About 1868
a vigorous,       restless   Baffinland   Eskimo took   his family,   pushed north with
sledges, crossed Smith Sound on the winter ice, and found a new home among
the Polar Eskimo.            Then the kayak reappeared among them: this newcomer
from a region of driftwood and knowledge of the kayak taught them how to
make it. During the fifty years preceding this Baffinlander's coming the Polar
Eskimo had again got the necessary material through the whites. But this had
not helped them, because the design and art of joining a seaworthy frame had
been forgotten in the preceding centuries of their isolation.
    Technological skills can generally be taught only imperfectly by words.
There must be visible example and, above all, manual practice. That is one
reason why the teaching of chemistry and other science insists on laboratory
periods. Useful technologies         do not tend intrinsically to disappear faster than
other parts of culture; the weak link in the matter of transmission of technolo-
gies lies in the      acquirement of manipulative practice, the formation of motor
habits. Interfere with these and the continuity of the art is broken   and may be
lost.

        It   was a deficiency of environment that was at the bottom of the Polar
Eskimo's losing their boatbuilding ability. But having once lost the skill, the
fresh accession of the         needed wood did not suffice to cause them to reinvent
the art. And meanwhile their lack of boats helped to pen them in their habitat.
        However, nature gave the Polar Eskimo something else. Three large
meteorites, now carried to  New York City, had fallen in their habitat. From
these they managed to           whack off slivers of nickel-iron with stones; these they
beat to an edge and set end to end in a groove in a bone handle and thus made
themselves iron knives— something that no other Eskimo group had, except for
rare pieces of drift or trade iron coming from Asia into Alaska. Here then we
have both an invention and a loss connected with the same environment              —an
apt illustration of how complexly culture operates.



  158. EFFECTS OF ISOLATION:                SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS
        Small, isolated peoples are especially interesting because of the unexpected
things that happen to them. While contacts remain open, complete losses are
less likely to occur. Wholly localized increments, and fixations at an ancient

level,       are also less expectable under    open   contacts, because   knowledge and
customs have a chance to spread both in and out.
§   158    EFFECTS OF ISOLATION: SOUTHAMPTON AND EASTER ISLANDS                185

       On Southampton Island, at the entrance to Hudson Bay, Hvcd a second
Eskimo group who had lost boats from their culture. They were therefore cut
off    from intercourse with the world unless other Eskimo, or subsequently
whalers, ventured to them. They did have a makeshift substitute for alongshore
hunting: inflated sealskins that they paddled, riding them like hobbyhorses. But
with only these they could probably secure nothing more than occasional small
seals. Their maindependence accordingly was on a large herd of wild reindeer
thatroamed the two-hundred-mile-wide island. With this herd once eaten up,
reduced by disease, or impossible to get at, the Southampton Eskimo were
doomed. In fact, this fate overtook them in 1902, when they starved to death.
All in all, their tools were not those of the other eastern Eskimo, but represented
a   somewhat deteriorated form of what is called the Thule phase of Eskimo
culture. This phase is estimated to have flourished quite widely in the American
Arctic around a.d. i 000-1300, after which it became superseded elsewhere by the
more modern or historical Eskimo culture. It looks therefore as if the Southamp-
toners, once they had settled down with their simplified and boatless version of
the Thule culture, managed to get along and survived for centuries before dis-
aster caught up with them.
     The Polynesians of Easter Island, though they must originally have come in
canoes, were also nearly boatless   when discovered, because of lack of logs or
planking. They had a very few small canoes, carrying from two to four persons,
ingeniously sewed together of many patches and splinters of wood. The island is
only ten by thirteen miles in size, is grassy and windswept, and very isolated. It
Ues sixteen hundred miles from Polynesian Mangareva, twenty-two hundred
from South America. Tapa-bark cloth was nearly as scarce as canoes, because
the paper mulberry withstands the cool winds of Easter Island only with con-
siderable coddhng. Breadfruit and coconuts are wholly prohibited by the cli-
mate; but bananas, sweet potatoes, taro, and yams were grown. All in all, the
                                                   —
Easter Islanders had a purely Polynesian culture as their speech was a pure
                    —
Polynesian dialect with its richness considerably thinned down by their small
numbers and by environmental lacks and limitations. But the culture was
thinned down more or less all over, without notable total losses at any one
point. There were the usual Polynesian gods, chants, myths, kings or chiefs,
wars, human sacrifice and cannibalism, houses, stone platforms, dress, foods,
and the. rest, in a somewhat meager provincial form.
     What is really remarkable about this isolated culture is not so much what
it had lost as certain unique positive increments that must have been local de-

velopments. Three of these stand out. The first was a peculiar bird cult culmi-
nating in a ceremonial race that was the great event of the year. The second
feature was wooden tablets incised with lines of figures that look remarkably
like a script and appear to have had some connection with prayers or chants,
but which could not be read, and probably were not true writing but decorative
symbols similar to large petroglyphs painted in connection with the bird cult
1 86                              CULTURE PROCESSES                             § 1 58


The third specialty consisted of gigantic rude statues of tuff rock weighing from
four or five to twenty or thirty tons. These statues have partial parallels else-
where in Polynesia in small stone carvings or fair-sized wooden ones. Conse-
quently they represent a heightening of degree        — the largest statues occurring
                                  —
on one of the smallest islands rather than a radically new idea. But the bird
cult and the tablets are without real parallels elsewhere in the Pacific and are
accordingly indicated as having been devised in the isolation of Easter Island.
In    this case, therefore, loneliness   had several unique and conspicuous results,
though they are probably balanced by many minor losses or impoverishments.
    The period during which Easter Island was occupied is not known, but is
estimated to have been less than a thousand years rather than more. Assuming
an average population of 3000, for which there is warrant in the reports of early
white voyagers, we must credit this small number of islanders with considerable
originality in having evolved their specializations in perhaps from five to eight
centuries. Withal, the originality puts no strain on credibility, as do some of the
fantastic theories   which blow up the Easter Island situation into extreme im-
probabilities   —sunken land bridges, vanished prior     races, or "writing" mysteri-

ously preserved from the Indus Valley script of five thousand years earlier.



                               159.      DISPLACEMENTS

    On the whole, "loss" appears often to consist of a displacement by something
new, rather than being an outright disappearance or a mere meking-away. And
the displacement is often only partial. Thus we still have candles and oil lamps
though gas came in a century ago and electricity in turn has been generally
                  The older elements survive, though with diminished or
substituted for gas.
specialized scope. The total culture is thereby so much richer than before. Much
of the enormous variety of our technology is due to this preservation of the old
alongside the development of the new. The established culture trait loses most of
its   functions but retains part, or even acquires new ones. It is a use that is lost
rather than the trait or item itself. There is, especially in contemporary civiliza-
tion, a constant    tendency for utilitarian devices that are dispossessed by new
inventions to persist in art, sport, luxury, religion, or symbolism.
       Thus, in North America the automobile has virtually displaced the horse for
transportation of both passengers and goods. Yet the horse is still used consider-
ably in certain situations, such as for small-farm plowing. It holds its own with-
out diminution in racing, horse shows, rodeos, circuses, polo, and as a form of
pleasurable exercise. All these serve the ends of sport or play.
       Similarly the bow still exists in our culture, but archery has become purely
a sport.
       Woodcuts used to be the ordinary method of illustrating books; only ex-
pensive works had steel engravings. Photographic reproduction has entirely
displaced the woodcut for practical purposes. Even apart from screen plates that
 §   159                                DISPLACEMENTS                                 1
                                                                                          87
 render light-and-shade values with transitions, the ordinary pen-and-ink draw-
 ing, which can be done by the artist in a fifth of the time required for cutting
 a block, gives the same effect, and if necessary a much finer one. Has the wood-
cut therefore disappeared? As a practical means of actually illustrating in print,
yes. But it survives, in fact is having a bit of a cult, as an art form, as an aesthetic

expression, as a conscious revival of         what is antiquated and simple and com-
fortable and rude, something like eighteenth-century furniture or imitations of
primitive utensils.     We do not live by utility alone.
       The horn lantern was used when people were poor and glass was expensive
as well as brittle. There was always a cow's horn available, and in winter there
were evenings in which the farmer could steam and pare and trim it. Glass
being much clearer, as soon as its price came down through industrial improve-
ments and mass production, it drove horn out; except that occasionally we still
buy sheets of horn for our electric bulbs to shine through with a "natural"
mellow amber glow while we talk in the living-room. The glass that was once
available only for the wealthy has now become universal; horn, once the poor
man's refuge, has become an article of luxury. Many of the losses of civilization,
especially in our own of the past century or two, are really displacements, or
even inversions of function, like this.
       A curious analogy is found in the history of the dog, the almost universal
domestic animal. Except where he is of specific value for transport, hunting,
herding, or watching, most cultures other than our own may be said to tolerate
rather than to protect him; he fends for himself and becomes a scavenger. There
are a few groups of primitive tribes that are exceptional in being dogless. There
was at least one of these groups in South America and another in native north-
ern California. In this latter area the dog was by no means unknown, but one
might have to travel through several Indian villages to encounter one or two.
These had been bought or traded from outside, and they were pampered, fed,
allowed in the house at night, named, and given formal burial when they died.
They were too soft and valuable to be used for hunting. They seem to have
been so scarce as to have had no chance, ordinarily, to breed; so the supply had
to be kept up by import from outside. This primitive luxury manifestation
strangely parallels contemporary New York, where tens of thousands of child-
less couples keep a dog in their apartment, and at night have the maid or a

husband lead him about a bit to foul the public street. It is the attitude of over-
cherishing a pet that is common to the two cases. How did these CaHfornia
Indians come to have their attitude? Evidently it was because they were essen-
tially dogless and knew no practical use for dogs when they did get them. They

may have been this way for one of two reasons. Either they had never in their
past history acquired a full-scale dog-keeping habit, or they once followed it and
it   went into disuse   —a case of   loss, or more exactly of near-loss displacement into

a luxury. The latter seems more likely in view of the near-universality of the
dog among American Indians, and the fact that the few non-dog-raising tribes
l88                                     CULTURE PROCESSES                          § 1 59


in California must for thousands of years liave been in some contact and com-
munication with the much more numerous dog-keeping tribes (§ 165).
      Displacements involving both loss and innovation occur also in situations
other than those of attitude or function. With cosmetics there may be substitu-
tions of bodily topography. Many primitives paint the body as well as the face.
The ancient Egyptians concentrated on the eyelids, the nineteenth century on
the cheeks. Lipstick was unknown. After this had come in, interest shifted to
the lips, at first timidly; but after a time the cheeks were toned or browned
in order to exaggerate by contrast the vivid redness of the lips. Painting of the
nails also developed       —a new area that primitives seem to have overlooked; but
at least   it   is                                       on the face. We tend to
                     a reversion to cosmetics elsewhere than
think first, in all such cases, of the new or intruding item;   it is what attracts

interest; but of course every innovation ordinarily involves a loss too. The whole

cosmetic custom went out once in our culture, with Puritanism. It might go
out again, though perhaps next time possibly as a change of taste rather than
from moral scruple.
                                       160.   KINDS OF LOSS

    There remains the more general, seemingly philosophical problem of how
large a factor cultural loss is or can be. For instance, can the loss be entire for
one feature? Beyond that, could losses be universal, so as to lead to cultural
death.? Actually, the questions are ambiguous.
     First of all, entire loss of features from what ? From the particular culture
of a particular people.'' In that case, the answer definitely is Yes. For instance,
"we" have lost slavery in the past century. That holds for the United States.
But does it hold for the totality of human culture, past and present, everywhere.?
Such a loss will obviously come more slowly: witness Ethiopia, which is still
de-facto slaveholding. And in many cases, even if universal loss had occurred, it
might be hard to establish. Things have a way of hanging on long in the
remote places; or they persist undercover, in the subcultures of unsophisticated
social strata at home       :   as astrology, crystal-gazing, voodoo, and magic do among
ourselves. Then, as we have just seen, an item of culture may be displaced by a
novelty from most of its uses, even from its primary use, but persist in one of its
uses, or even acquire a new luxury or play use.
      Second, it is necessary to narrow the question by defining what it is that is
being lost. Is it culture content or culture form.?         A specific element, a system,
a pattern, or an attitude  Or indeed do we mean that a whole culture may dis-
                                  .?




appear.? In the sections on progress (§ 127-128), we have seen that among those
civilizations        which by common consent are reckoned as higher there has been
an indubitable drift to discountenance behavior motivated by magic and ani-
mism, as well as that which is psychically infantile and unsocialized in its in-
humanity and its crude emphasis on the physiological. We may expect, and
most of us will certainly hope, that this drift toward the gain of reason, taste, and
§   l6o                             KINDS OF LOSS                                        189

humanity at the expense of practices based on more infantile motivations will
continue. But wc certainly cannot prove that       it   will continue indefinitely, nor

can we assert that there might not be conditions which would reverse the trend
and cause increase o£ what is now diminishing.
    On the basis of a breakdown into more precisely defined questions, some
generalizations can be made as to loss.
      Specific items, such as painting the eyelids, or       hammer-hardening copper,
are more Hkely to be lost, by outright giving up or by displacement, in any one
