PATTERNS

131. THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN            I32. SYSTEMATIC PATTERNS         I33. TOTAL-CULTURE PAT-

TERNS     134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE             I35.    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS           I36.

CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                I37.   STYLE PATTERNS       I38. BASIC   PATTERN
AND STYLE VARIABILITY I39. THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                             I40.   THE
MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS



CULTURE PROCESSES

141.CULTURE PROCESSES I42. PERSISTENCE I43. MOTOR HABITS I44. OTHER HABIT
CHANNELINGS  I45. INVENTION  I46. NECESSITY I47. ACCIDENT I48. INVENTION AND

PLAY 149. ANTECEDENTS I50. CUMULATIVE AND COMPLEX INVENTIONS I5I. SOCIAL
ACCEPTANCE        I52.   SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS AGAIN              I53.   INVENTION OF INSTITU-
TIONS     154. INVENTION BY STIMULUS DIFFUSION             I55.   INVENTION BY REDUCTION-SEG-
REGATION     156.   CULTURAL LOSS       I57.   DISAPPEARANCE OF USEFUL ARTS         I58. EFFECTS

OF isolation: Southampton and easter islands                 159. displacements        160.   kinds
OF loss    161.   problem of the death of cultures



CULTURE CHANGE

162. TYPES   OF CULTURE CHANGE          163.   SUBSISTENCE AND POPULATION CHANGES                 164.

FASHION CHANGE           165.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREEDING
166. LABILE SOCIAL               AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE 168. CULTURAL
                         STRUCTURES     167.
fatigue:     TABOO IN           CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION I70.
                           HAVl'AII   169.
CHANGE BY REVOLUTION I7I. EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION 172. RESISTANCE TO
DIFFUSION 173. MARGINAL CULTURES I74. MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS I75. IN-
TERNAL MARGINALITY 176. ACCULTURATION I77. ACCULTURATION WITH AND WITH-
OUT DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION 178. JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA
179. VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION    180. NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND

MESSIAHS 181. ETHNIC REVIVALS 182. ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY
                             EDITOR'S NOTE
This volume offers a selection of those chapters of Alfred L. Kroeber's classic
work  ANTHROPOLOGY          that deal specifically with matters of Culture Pat-
terns and Processes.

Ifno selection can ever take the place of the complete work from which it is
drawn, this holds doubly true of a work as closely integrated as Kroeber's

ANTHROPOLOGY, which covers a vast area of knowledge, illumines each
of its parts from a single fundamental point of view, and subjects an entire field
of scholarship to the searching inquiry of one    mind of uncommon scope.

The present selection (and its companion volumes, which contain other selec-
tions) claims   no more than that it will serve the convenience of those readers
who wish to study the narrower topic only. However, the section numbers, and
with them the many cross references, that run throughout the parent volume
                                 —
have been retained unchanged to point up how much Kroeber's ANTHRO-
POLOGY     is   a work that is of one piece, and indivisible.
Anthropology:

CULTURE
PATTERNS
     &
PROCESSES
           What Anthropology Is About

I.   ANTHROPOLOGY, BIOLOGY, HISTORY         2.   ORGANIC AND SOCIOCULTURAL ELEMENTS
3.    ORGANIC   OR   "physical"   ANTHROPOLOGY       4,   SOCIOCULTURAL    ANTHROPOLOGY
5.   EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES          6.   SOCIETY AND CULTURE
7. ANTHROPOLOGY      AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES


                     I.   ANTHROPOLOGY, BIOLOGY, HISTORY
     A NTHROPOLOGY   is the Science of man. Of course, this literal, etymological

     /\  meaning is too broad and general. More precise would be: "the science
 J    \ of man and his works and behavior." But even this needs an addition to
make it sufficiently specific, since no one means to claim sciences like physiology
and psychology as parts of anthropology. Now physiology and psychology focus
their attention on particular, men, whom they examine as individuals. This gives
a clue to the additional limitation        we are seeking. Anthropology obviously is
concerned not with particular men as such, but with men in groups, with races
and peoples and their happenings and doings. So let us take as our provisional
basic definition the following:"Anthropology is the science of groups of men
and their behavior and productions." This will include any findings on the total
human species, since this constitutes an aggregate of races or peoples, a sort of
supergroup or total society.
      However, man is an animal or organism and he is also a civilized being
having a history and social qualities. Thus he is investigated         —different aspects
of him are investigated    —both by the organic or biological or      life sciences and by

what are sometimes called the historical and more generally the social sciences.
True, this latter term, "the social sciences," though commonly used, is not easy
to define satisfactorily. But we can leave this difficulty for the philosopher of
science. In practice, anthropology    is   mostly classified as being both a biological
science and a social science. Some universities recognize this fact by having cer-
tain courses of anthropological study count as the one and certain as the other,
or perhaps even the same course counting either way. Such a situation of double
participation is unusual among the sciences. If anthropology is not concerned so
predominantly with man as an animal, or with man as a social human having a
history, that it can be set outright in either the life or the social-historical science
2                         WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                              § 1

category, both aspects are evidently represented significantly in its subject matter.
Could it be that the specific subject of anthropology is the interrelation of what
is biological in man and what is social and historical in him? The answer is Yes.

Or, more broadly, anthropology docs at least concern itself with both organic
and social factors in man, whereas nearly all other sciences and studies deal with
one or the other. Anthropology concerns itself with both sets of factors because
these come associated in human beings in nature. Often they are even inter-
twined in one and the same phenomenon, as when a person is born with heredi-
tary musical capacity and develops this further by study and training. They arc
not always easy to disentangle; but they must be separated if the processes at
work arc to be understood. That job is peculiarly the anthropologist's.


                2.   ORGANIC AND SOCIOCULTURAL ELEMENTS
    To the question why a Louisiana Negro is black and longheaded, the
answer is ready. He was born so. As cows produce calves, and lions, cubs, so
Negro springs from Negro and Caucasian from Caucasian. We call the force at
work heredity. Our same Negro is reputed amiable and easy-going. Is this too
an innate quality? Offhand most of us might reply Yes. He sings at his corn-
hoeing more frequently than the white man across the fence. Is this also because
of his heredity?   "Of course—he     made
                                     is         might be a common answer,
                                               so,"
"Probably    —why not?" a more cautious one. But now our Negro singing the
                                                                      is

"Memphis Blues," which his great-grandfather in Africa assuredly did not sing
As for the specific song, heredity can obviously no longer be the cause. Our
Negro may have learned it from an uncle, or perhaps from his schoolmates;
quite likely he acquired it from human beings who were not his ancestors, or
over the radio, acquired it as part of his customs, like being a member of the
Baptist Church and wearing overalls, and the thousand other things that come
to   him from without instead of from within. At these points heredity is dis-
placed by tradition, nature by nurture, to use a familiar jingle. The efficient
forces now are quite different from those which made his skin black and his
head long. They are causes of another order.
      The particular song of the Negro and his complexion represent the clear-
cut extremes of the matter. Between them lie the good nature and the inclination
to melody. Obviously these traits may also be the result of human example, of
"social   environment," of contemporary tradition. There are those who so be-
lieve, as   well as those who see in them chiefly the effects of inborn biological
impulse. Perhaps these intermediate dubious traits are the results of a blending
of nature and nurture, the strength of each varying according to the trait or the
individual examined. Clearly, at any rate, there is room here for investigation
and weighing of evidence. A genuine problem exists. This problem cannot be
solved by the historical or social sciences alone, because they do not concern
themselves with heredity. Nor can it be solved by biology, which deals with
^ 3                   ORGANIC OR "physical" ANTHROPOLOGY
                                                                                        3
heredity and allied factors but docs not go on to operate with the nonbiological
principle of tradition or with         what is acquired by men when they         live   in
societies.

      Here, then, is one distinctive task for anthropology: the interpretation of
those   phenomena into which both innate organic factors and "social" or ac-
quired factors enter or may enter.
    The word "social" is the customary untechnical one for the nonorganic or
more-than-organic phenomena referred to. It is, however, an ambiguous word
and therefore sometimes a confusing one. As will shortly be pointed out, "social"
refers to both social and cultural phenomena. Until the distinction between
them has been made, we shall either put "social" into quotation marks or use
"sociocultural" instead.



                3.   ORGANIC OR "physical" ANTHROPOLOGY

      The organic sciences underlie the sociocultural ones. They are more imme-
diately "natural," less    "humanized" in their concern. Anthropology therefore
accepts and uses the general principles of biology: the laws of heredity and the
doctrines of cell development and evolution, for instance, and        all   the findings
of anatomy, physiology, embryology, zoology, palaeontology,         and the rest. Its
business has been to ascertain         how far these principles apply to man, what
forms they take in his particular case. This has meant a concentration of atten-
tion, the devising of special    methods of inquiry. Many biological problems, in-
cluding most physiological and hereditary ones, can be most profitably attacked
in the laboratory, or at least under experimental conditions. The experimental
method, however, is but rarely available for human beings living in groups.
Sociocultural phenomena have to be taken as they come and laboriously sifted
and resifted afterward, instead of being artificially simplified in advance, as is
done in laboratory experimentation.
      Then, too, since anthropology is operating biologically within the narrow
limits of one species, it has sometimes been driven to concern itself with minute

traits, such as the zoologist is rarely troubled   with the proportions of the length
                                                       :




and the breadth of the        skull   —the famous cephalic index—for instance; the
number of degrees the arm bones are twisted, and the like. Also, as these data
had to be used in the gross, unmodifiable by artificially varied conditions, it has
been necessary to secure them from all possible varieties of men, different races,
sexes, ages,   and their nearest brute analogues. The result is that biological or
physical anthropology
                          —"somatology" it is sometimes called in Anglo-Saxon
countries, and sometimes simply "anthropology" in continental Europe           —has in
part constituted a sort of specialization or sharpening of certain aspects of gen-
eral biology. It has become absorbed to a considerable degree in certain particular

phenomena, such as human species or subraces and methods of studying them,
4                            WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                           S 4

about which general biologists, physiologists, and students of medicine arc
usually but vaguely informed.



                        4.   SOCIOCULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY

      The sociocultural sciences, usually, but somewhat loosely, called the social
sciences, overlie the organic sciences.    Men's bodies and inborn equipment are
back of their deeds and accomphshments as shaped by tradition, and are primary
to their culture or civilization as well as to their aggregations in societies. The
relation of anthropology to sociocultural science has therefore      been in a sense
the opposite of its relation to biological science. Instead of specializing, anthro-
pology has been occupied with trying to generalize the findings of history. His-
torians can never experiment; sociologists, economists, and other social scientists
only rarely. Historians deal with the unique; for to a degree every historical or
social or cultural     event has something unparalleled about it. They do not lay
down laws, nor do they verify them by the artificial trials of experiment. But
anthropology looks for such general and recurrent processes as may occur in the
multifarious events of history and in the diverse societies, institutions, customs,
and beliefs of mankind. So far as such processes can be extricated or formulated,
they are generalizations.
      It has sometimes been said that social and cultural anthropology    —that part
of the subject which is concerned with the more-than-merely-organic aspects of
human behavior— seems preoccupied with ancient and savage and exotic and
              The cause is a desire to understand better all civilizations,
extinct peoples.
irrespective of time      and place, in the abstract, or as generalized principles if
possible. It   is   not that cave men are more illuminating than Romans, or flint
knives more interesting than fine porcelains or the art of printing, which has
led anthropology to bear heavily on the former, but the fact that it wanted to
know about cave men and flint knives, which no one else was studying, as well
as about the Romans and printing presses that history tells us about so fully.

It   would be arbitrary to prefer the exotic and remote to the familiar, and in
principle anthropology has never accepted the adjudication sometimes tacitly
rendered that its proper field should be restricted to the primitive as such. As
well might zoology confine its interest to eggs or to protozoans. It is probably
true that some researches into early and savage history, especially in the initial
stages of anthropology, have sprung from an emotional predilection for the for-
gotten or the neglected, the obscure and the strange, the unwonted and the
mysterious. But such occasional personal aesthetic trends cannot delimit the
range of a science or determine its aims and methods. Innumerable historians
have been inveterate gossips, but one does not therefore insist that the only
proper subject of history is backstairs intimacies.
      This, then, is the reason for the special development of those subdivisions of
anthropology known as archaeology, "the science of what is old" in the career
5 5              EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES                            5

of humanity, especially as revealed            by excavations of the      sites   of prehistoric
occupation, and ethnology, "the science of peoples" and their cultures and life
histories as groups, irrespective of their degree of advancement/



          5.   EVOLUTIONARY PROCESSES AND EVOLUTIONISTIC FANCIES
      In their more elementary aspects the two strands of the organic or heredi-
tary and the sociocultural or "environmental" run through all human life. They
are distinct as mechanisms, and their products are distinct. Thus a comparison
of the acquisition of the power of flight respectively by birds in their organic
development out of the ancestral reptile stem millions of years ago, and by men
as a result of cultural progress in the field of invention during the past genera-
tion, reveals at once the profound differences of process that inhere in the                am-
biguous concept of "evolution." The bird gave up a pair of walking limbs to
acquire wings. It added a new faculty by transforming part of an old one. The
sum total of its parts or organs was not greater than before. The change was
transmitted only to the blood descendants of the altered individuals. The reptile
line went on as it had been before, or if it altered, did so for causes unconnected
with the evolution of the birds. The airplane, on the contrary, gave men a new
faculty without diminishing or even impairing any of those they had previously
possessed. It led to no visible bodily changes, no alterations of mental capacity.
The invention has been transmitted to individuals and groups not derived by
descent from the inventors; in fact, it has already influenced the fortunes of all
of us. Theoretically, the invention is transmissible to ancestors if they happen to
be still living. In sum, it represents an accretion to the stock of existing civiliza-
tion rather than a transformation.
      Once the broad implications of the distinction which tiiis example illustrates
have been grasped, many common errors are guarded against. The program of
eugenics, for instance, loses much of its force. There is certainly much to be said
in favor of intelligence        and discrimination in mating, as in everything else.
There is need for the acquisition of more exact knowledge on human heredity.
But, in the main, the claims sometimes made that eugenics is necessary to pre-
serve civilization from dissolution, or to maintain the flourishing of this or that
nationality, rest on the fallacy of recognizing only organic causes as operative,
when sociocultural as well as organic ones are active — when indeed the super-
hereditary factors may be much the more powerful ones. So, in what are mis-
called race problems, the average thought of the               day still reasons confusedly
between sociocultural and organic causes and effects.^ Anthropology is not yet
      ^   Ethnography is sometimes separated, as more descriptive, from ethnology, as more
theoretically or more historically inclined.
      ^   An example is the still lingering fallacy that individual development of organs by use
somehow gets incorporated into the heredity of descendants. This fallacy rests on the mis-
application to organic situations of a valid sociocultural mechanism. An example in reverse
D                             WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                                   § 5


in a position always to state just           where the boundary Ues between the con-
tributing organic causes and the superorganic or "sociocultural" causes of such
phenomena. But it does hold to their fundamental distinctness and to the im-
portance of their distinction,        if   true understanding    is   the aim.   Without sure
grasp of this principle, many of the arguments and conclusions in the present
volume will lose their significance.
       Accordingly, a designation of anthropology as "the child of Darwin"                  is

misleading. Darwin's essential achievement was that he imagined, and sub-
stantiated by much indirect evidence, a mechanism through which organic evo-
lution appeared to be taking place. The whole history of man, however, being
much more than an organic matter, a merely or strictly Darwinian anthro-
pology would be largely misapplied biology. One might almost as justly speak
of a Copernican or a Newtonian anthropology.
    What has greatly influenced some of the earlier anthropology, mainly to its
damage, has been not Darwinism, but the vague idea of progress, to the organic
aspect of which Darwin happened incidentally to give such support and ap-
parent substance that the whole group of evolutionistic ideas, sound and unsound,
has luxuriated rankly ever since. It became common practice in the older an-
thropology to "explain" any part of human civilization by arranging its several
forms in an evolutionary sequence from lowest to highest and allowing each
successive stage to flow spontaneously, without specific cause, from the preceding
one. At bottom this logical procedure was astonishingly naive. In these schemes
we of our land and day stood at the summit of the ascent. Whatever seemed most
different from our customs          was therefore reckoned as earhest, and other phe-
nomena were disposed wherever they would best contribute to the straight even-
ness of the climb upward. The relative occurrence of phenomena in time and
space was disregarded in favor of their logical fitting into a plan. It was argued
that since we hold to definitely monogamous marriage, the beginnings of human
sexual union probably lay in the opposite condition of indiscriminate promis-
           we accord precedence to descent from the father, and generally
cuity. Since

know him, early society must have reckoned descent from the mother and no
one knew his own father. We abhor incest; therefore the most primitive men
normally married their          sisters.   These are fair samples of the conclusions or
assumptions of the classic evolutionistic school of anthropology of, say, i860 to
1890, which     still   believed that primal origins or ultimate causes could be deter-
mined, and that they could be discovered by speculative reasoning. The roster
of this evolutionistic-speculative school         was graced by some illustrious names.
Needless to say, these men tempered the basic crudity of their opinions by wide
knowledge, acuity or charm of presentation, and frequent insight and sound
sense in concrete particulars. In their day, two generations or three ago, under
the spell of the concept of evolution in           its first flush,   and of the postulate of

is   the ascription of environmentally or historically produced cultural backwardness to   or-

ganic and hereditary inferiority.
§ 6                                  SOCIETY AND CULTURE                                  7
progress at    its   strongest, such     methods of reasoning were almost       inevitable.
Today they are long since threadbare; they have descended to the level of news-
paper science or have become matter for idle amateur guessing. They are evi-
dence of a tendency toward the easy smugness of feeling oneself superior to all
the past. These ways of thought are mentioned here only as an example of the
beclouding that results from bad transference of biologically legitimate con-
cepts into the realm of the history of human society and culture, or viewing these
as unfolding according to a simple scheme of progress.



                                6.   SOCIETY AND CULTURE

      The relation between what is biological and what is sociocukural has just
been said to be a sort of central pivot of anthropology, from which the range of
the subject then extends outward on both sides, into the organic and into the
more-than-organic. It is now necessary to consider the more precise relation of
society and culture within the "organic-plus." In man, social           and cultural phe-
nomena normally occur associated much as the joint sociocukural phenomena
co-occur with the organic ones. Nevertheless, the social and the cultural aspects
within the larger sociocukural field can nearly always be distinguished.
      The Latin word socius denotes a companion or ally, and in their specific
sense the words "society"            and "social" refer to associations of individuals, to
group relations. When we speak of social structure, or the organization of
society, it is clear what is meant: the way a mass of people is constituted into

families, clans, tribes, states, classes, sets, clubs, communities, and the like. A
society is a group of interrelated individuals.
      But in a much wider sense the word "social" is also used, loosely, for what-
ever transcends the biological individual for what we have so far designated as
                                                  :




more-than-organic or sociocukural. Thus popular usage and imiversity curricula
recognize the physical, the biological, and the social sciences. The last-named
usually comprise history, government, economics, sociology, anthropology, hu-
man geography.' All these branches of study deal not only with man but with
men. In fact they deal primarily with the interrelations of men, or groups of
men.
      It so happens that       man is an essentially unique animal in that he possesses
speech faculty and the faculty of symbolizing, abstracting, or generalizing.
Through these two associated faculties he is able to commimicate his acquired
learning, his knowledge and accomplishments, to his fellows and his descendants
—in   fact, even to his ancestors, if they happen to be still alive and are willing to

listen to   him. So he transmits much of his ideas, habits, and achievements to
succeeding generations of men. This is something that no other animal can do,
at least    not to any significant degree. This special faculty is what was meant
      * Psychology   is   sometimes also partly included, sometimes reckoned rather with the
biological sciences.
8                         WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                               § ^


when someone called man the "time-binding" animal. He "binds" time by tran-
scending it, through influencing other generations by his actions.
    Now the mass of learned and transmitted motor reactions, habits, tech-
niques, ideas,                                              —
                  and values— and the behavior they induce is what constitutes
culture. Culture is the special  and exclusive product of men, and is their dis-
tinctive quality in the cosmos.
    Not only is culture a unique phenomenon, but it can be said to have a large
degree of influence. Of course culture can appear and go on only in and through
men, men in some kind of societies; without these it could not come into being
nor maintain itself. But, given a culture, the human beings that come under its
influence behave and operate quite differently from the way they would behave
under another culture, and still more diflferendy from the way they would act
under no culture. In the latter case they would be merely animals in their be-
havior. They are human beings precisely because they are animals plus a cul-
ture. Somehow human beings began long ago to produce culture and have con-

tinued ever since to produce it. In that sense culture derives wholly from men.
But the other side of the picture is that every human being is influenced by
other men who in turn have been influenced by still others in the direction of
maintaining and developing certain ideas, institutions, and standards.         And a
shorthand way of expressing this is to say that they are all influenced by the
culture they grow up in; in fact, in a broad way, they are dependent on it for
most of the specific things they do in their lives. Culture is therefore a powerful
                            —
force in human behavior in both individual and social behavior. Any given
form of culture, whether of the Eskimo or of our contemporary Western civi-
lization, has behind it a long history of other forms of culture by which it was
conditioned and from which it derives. And in turn each culture is changing and
shaping the forms of culture that will succeed it and which therefore more or
less depend on it. Culture thus is a factor that produces enormous effects, and as

such we study it.
    To be concrete, the reason our Louisiana Negro of a few pages back sings
the blues, goes to a Baptist church, and cultivates corn is that these things are
parts of American culture. If he had been reared in the Africa of some of his
forefathers, his dress, labor, food, religion, government, and amusements would
have been quite different, as well as his language. Such is what culture does to
men. And, as has been pointed out, the process of transmission, a process of
acquisition by learning by      which culture is perpetuated and operates on new
generations, is quite different from the process by which heredity    —another in-
dubitable force  —operates on them. Equally distinct are the   results.   No religion,
no tool, no idea was ever produced by heredity.
    Culture, then, is all those things about man that are more than just bio-
logical or organic, and are also more than merely psychological. It presupposes
bodies and personalities, as it presupposes men associated in groups, and it rests
upon them; but culture is something more than a sum of psychosomatic quali-
S 6                               SOCIETY AND CULTURE                                        9
ticsand actions. It is more than these in that its phenomena cannot be wholly
understood in terms of biology and psychology. Neither of these sciences claims
to be able to explain why there are axes and property laws and etiquettes and
prayers in the world, why they function and perpetuate as they do, and least
of all why these cultural things take the particular and highly variable forms or
expressions under which they appear. Culture thus is at one and the same time
the totality of products of social        men, and a tremendous force affecting all
human beings, socially and individually. And in this special but broad sense,
culture is universal for man.*       -'

    This brings us back to the relation of society and culture. Logically, the two
are separate, though they also coexist. Many animals are social. Ants and bees
and termites are very highly socialized, so much so that they can survive only in
societies. But they have no culture. There is no culture on the subhuman level.

Ants get along without culture because they are born with many highly specific
             men have only few and general instincts. Society without culture
instincts; but

exists on the subhuman level. But culture, which exists only through man,         who
is    also a social animal, presupposes society.     The speech faculty makes possible
the transmission and perpetuation of culture; and speech could evidently arise
only in a somewhat socially inclined species, though the most socialized animals,
the social insects, are held together by instinctive drives and do not need speech.
In man, however, language helps bind his societies successfully together. And
then culture, with its institutions and morals and values, binds each of them
together more and helps them to achieve more successful functioning.
        Human society and culture are thus perhaps best viewed as two intimately
intertwined aspects of a complex of phenomena that regularly occur only in
association;    whereas on the subhuman level,           societies    occur but there   is   no
significant culture.

        The occurrence of cultureless true societies among the insects makes it clear
that,    much as living bodies and "minds" underlie societies and cultures, and
precede them in evolution, so also, in turn, society precedes and underUes cul-
ture,    though in man the two always happen to come associated. At any rate,
society is a simpler and more obvious concept to grasp than is culture. That is
apparently why sociocultural phenomena— the phenomena of man's total history
in the broadest sense, which necessarily contain both social facts              and cultural
facts   —usually have their social aspects recognized       first.   The result has been that
       * Culture as dealt with by the anthropologist is obviously different from what is signi-

fied by speaking of "a   man of culture," or "a cultured person," in the popular sense, when
high culture, or special refinement of it, is meant. Similarly with the word "civilization."
When we ordinarily, as laymen, speak of "civilized" and "uncivilized" peoples, we mean,
more precisely, peoples of advanced and backward culture, respectively. By many anthro-
pologists, ever since Tylor, the words "civilization" and "culture" are often used to denote
the same thing; and always they denote only degrees of the same thing.
10                                WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                                          § 6


the social-plus<ultural combination  came at first to be called merely "social,"
and in popular and general use still carries that ambiguous name.
         For those who like their thinking concrete, it may help if they conceive the
sociocultural total in         man as similar to a sheet of carbon paper, of which the
fabric side represents society            and the coated side culture. It is obvious that to
use carbon paper effectively, we must distinguish the sides. And yet the sheet is
                                           when we are not concerned with
also a unit. Moreover, in certain respects, as
manifolding but only with some operation Uke sorting, counting, or packing, a
sheet of carbon paper is comparable to and is handled like a sheet of uncoated
paper      —
           which in turn would correspond to the cultureless animal societies. But
if    what we are interested in is the use of carbon paper, the impressions made by
it,   or if we wish to understand how it makes them, then it is the specific carbon
coating that we must examine, even though this comes only as a sort of dry-ink
film carried by paper of more or less ordinary cellulose fabric and texture. Like
all similes, this one has its limitations.          But it may be of help in extricating one-
self from       the confusing difficulty that the word "social" has acquired a precise
                              —
and limited meaning society as distinguishable from culture—in anthropology
                                                                  —
and sociology, while still having a shifting double meaning society including
or excluding culture         —in popular usage and in many general contexts.
        There is a real difficulty in the confusion that results from the varying usage
of the word "society." The difficulty is unfortunate; but it can be met by keeping
it    constandy in mind. In the present book, the effort is made to be consistent in
saying "culture" or "cultural" whenever anything cultural is referred to. "Social"
or "society" are used only with specific reference to the organization of indi-
viduals into a group and their resulting relations. Culture, on the contrary, what-
ever else it may also be        —such as a tremendous influence on human behavior—                     is

always first of all the product of men in groups: a set of ideas, attitudes, and
      —
habits "rules"         if   one will   —evolved by men to help them in their conduct of
life."


       *   A further complication arises from the fact that human societies are more than merely
innate or instinctual associations like beehives or anthills, but are also culturally shaped and
modeled. That is, the forms which human association takes             — into nations, tribes, sects, cult
groups, classes, castes, clans, and the like    —   all   these forms of social structure are as   much
the result of varying cultural influences as are the particular forms of economies, technol-
ogies, ideologies, arts, manners,       and morals at different times and     places. In short, specific
human societies arc more determined by culture than the reverse, even though some kind
of social life is a precondition of culture. And therewith social forms become part of culture!
This seemingly contradictory situation is intellectually diflBcult. It touches the heart of the
most fundamental social theorizing. A good many anthropologists and sociologists still
shrink from facing the problem or admitting the situation to be significant. The beginner
is    therefore advised not to try to master the difficulty at this stage, but to wait till he has
finished the book.      He will then presumably understand what the problem is and be in a
position cither to accept the solution suggested here, or to give his own answer. And if not
he will still be in the company of a lot of professional social scientists of good standing.
5 7                    ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES                          II



                7.   ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
      All the so-called social sciences deal with cultural as well as social data.
Caesar's reform of the calendar was a cultural innovation. His defeat of the sena-
torial party   was a social event, but it led to institutional and therefore cultural
changes, just as      it   affected thousands of individual lives for better or worse.
When a historian analyzes Caesar's character and motivation, he has in fact
gone beyond both society and culture and is operating in the field of informal,
biographical, individual psychology. In economics, a banking system, the gold
standard,    commerce by credit or barter, are institutions, and hence cultural
phenomena.
      Of all the social sciences, anthropology is perhaps the most distinctively
culture-conscious. It aims to investigate  human culture as such: at all times,
everywhere, in all its parts and aspects and workings. It looks for generalized
findings as to how culture operates     —         how human beings behave under
                                            literally,

given cultural conditions       —and for the major developments of the history of
culture.

      To this breadth of aim, one thing contributed. This was the early anthropo*
logical preoccupation with the very ancient and primitive and remote, which we

have already mentioned as a possible foible or drawback. Unlettered peoples
leave no biographies of their great men to distract one with personalities,         no
written histories of rulers and battles. The one thing we know about them is
their customs;       and customs are culture. The earliest men in fact have left us
evidence of just two things: parts of their organic bodies, as represented by their
bones; and, more abundantly, their culture, as represented by those of their
tools   and implements which happened to be of stone and imperishable, plus
such of their customs as may be inferable from these tools.
      Now while some of the interest of anthropology in its earlier stages was in
the exotic and the out-of-the-way, yet even this antiquarian motivation ulti-
mately contributed to a broader result. Anthropologists became aware of the
diversity of culture. They began to see the         tremendous range of its variations.
From that, they commenced to envisage it as a totality, as no historian of one
period or of a single people was ever Hkely to do, nor any analyst of his own
type of civilization alone. They became aware of culture as a "universe," or vast
field, in   which we of today and our own civilization occupy only one place of
many. The result was a widening of a fundamental point of view, a departure
from unconscious ethnocentricity toward relativity. This shift from naive self-
centeredness in one's own time and spot to a broader view based on objective
comparison is somewhat like the change from the original geocentric assump-
tion of astronomy to the Copernican interpretation of the solar system and the
subsequent still greater widening to a universe of galaxies.
12                           WHAT ANTHROPOLOGY IS ABOUT                              § 7


      A considerable differentiation of anthropology occurred on this point. The
other social sciences recognized culture in        its   specific manifestations as they
                                                             —
became aware of this or that fragment or aspect of it economic or juridical or
political or social. Anthropologists became aware of culture as such. From that

they went on to try to understand its generic features and processes and their
results.

      This is one of the few points that sets off from anthropology a science which
in the main is        almost a twin sister: sociology. Sociologists began mainly with
the analysis of our own civilization; they kept the exotic in its place. Therefore
as regards culture they tended to remain autocentric somewhat longer. Also, in
dealing with ourselves, they dealt mainly with the present, and from that they
went on to deal with the future, immediate and ultimate. This inevitably gave
to much of early sociology some reformist or ameliorative coloring, and often a

program for action. On the contrary, the reproach used to be directed at anthro-
pology that it did not concern itself with practical solutions, or aim at better-
ment. So far as this was true, it had at least the virtue of helping anthropology
to remain a general or fundamental science, undistracted by questions of appli-

cation from its search for basic findings and meanings. One other distinction
is that sociology has been more concerned with strictly social problems: the

relations of classes, the organization of family and society, the competitions of
individuals within a group. The names are indeed significant here: sociology
tends to be concerned with society, anthropology with anthropos, man, and his
specifically human product, culture.

      All in   all,   however, these are only differences of emphasis. In principle,
sociology and anthropology are hard to keep apart. Anthropologists rate Sumner
as one of the great names in the history of the study of man; and they feel they

stand on    common ground with American sociologists like Thomas, Ogburn,
Chapin, Sorokin, Wirth, Maclver, Parsons, and Lynd, to name only a few, and
with Britons and Frenchmen like Hobhouse, Ginsberg, Durkheim, and Mauss.
Sociologists on their side have been if anything even more hospitable. Almost to
a man they are culture-conscious, know anthropological literature well, and use
it   constantly.
      The relations of anthropology to psychology are obviously important. The
nature of human personality        —                                       —
                                or let us say simply human nature must enter
                man's social and cultural activity. However, the relations of
vitally into all of

anthropology and psychology are not easy to deal with. Psychologists began
by taking their own culture for granted, as if it were uniform and universal,
and then studying psychic behavior within it. Reciprocally, anthropologists
tend to take human nature for granted, as if it were uniform, and to study the
diverse cultures which rest upon it. In technical language, we have two variables,
