correctness that seems to    them absolute and permanent, but which is               really
only the hallmark of a class or a locality to which they choose to give priority.
As a matter of actuality, the condemned form may or may not succeed in be-
coming established. He don't, for example, might in time attain to "correctness"
—                               —
  meaning social reputability although ain't is perhaps less likely to become
legitimized, and them cows, though old, to have still smaller prospect of ultimate
general recognition. That a form departs from the canon of today of course no
more proves that it will be accepted in future than that it will not. What is
certain is that if it wins sufficient usage by the right people, it will also win
sanction, and will become part of the standard of its time.
    Linguistic instances like these differ    little   if   at all in principle, in their

involved psychology, from the finding of the Supreme Court that a certain
legislative   enactment is unconstitutional and therefore void, or from the de-
cision of a religious sect that  Sunday baseball is wicked. The chief point of
divergence would seem to be that a court is a constituted body endowed with an
authority that is not paralleled on the linguistic side, at any rate in Anglo-Saxon
countries; although the Latin nations possess Academies whose dicta on correct-
ness of speech enjoy a moral authority      —though a sanctionless one—approxi-
mating the verdicts of a high court. And it is notorious that courts and religious
denominations, like speech purists, may begin by condemning and yet end by
tolerating or even accepting innovations, after actual usage of the times has
drifted far enough. Witness the fates of the      American income tax, Methodist
dancing, and the rule that prepositions are not words to end sentences with!
    It is also of interest to remember that the power of nullifying legislation

was not specifically granted the Supreme Court by the Constitution of the
United States, but that the practice grew up gradually, quite like a speech in-
novation that becomes established. Certain elements in the American population
look upon this power as undesirable and therefore take satisfaction in pointing
out its unsanctioned origin. The majority, on the other hand, feel that the sit-
uation on the whole works out well, and that a Supreme Court with its present
powers is better than the risk of a Supreme Court without power. Still, it re-
mains curiously illogical that the preservation of the Constitution should take
§111                    LINGUISTIC AND CULTURAL STANDARDS                       59
place partly through the cxtraconstitutional functioning of a constitutional body.
In principle such a case is similar to that of grammarians who at the same time
lay down a "rule" and exceptions to the rule, because the contradictory usages
happen to be actually established.
     Codes, dogmas, and grammars are thus normally reflections, secondary
rather than primary causes. Such influence as they have is mainly in outward
crystallization. They produce an appearance of permanence. In the field of
speech, it is easy to recognize that it is not grammarians that make languages,
but languages that make grammarians. The analogous process evidently holds
for culture. Lawgivers, statesmen, religious leaders, discoverers, inventors   seem
to shape civilization when actually they much more express it. The complex and
often obscure forces that shape culture also mold the so-called creative leaders of
society as essentially as they   mold the mass of humanity. Progress, so far as it
                can be construed as something that happens rather than as
exists objectively,

something we make as we set out to make it. Our frequent assumption to the
contrary   is   probably the result of a reluctance to realize our individual near-
impotence as regards remodeling the culture we live in, as contrasted with the
overpowering molding we receive from it. But how much does any one of us
create or shape or alter his language? Culture no doubt is a bit more malleable;
but the comparison with speech should make us cautious not to overrate our
capacity for initiative.
    Undoubtedly we do have social influence as individuals. It is an influence on
the fortune and the careers of other individuals, sometimes on larger segments of
society, and it is concerned largely with aims of personal security, relative domi-

nance, or affection     among ourselves. We also have many choices among the
alternatives contained in our culture and in our speech. To some extent we can
manipulate certain alternatives and ambiguities of the culture in our personal
favor, or in the direction of our ideals.   Now and then, perhaps, we succeed in
establishing, with the support of others, some altered behavior or idea or idiom,
some novel twist of custom or phrase. That seems to describe the range of our
exertion of influence on the form or content of those mass products and mass
influences which we call civilization and language.
                           CHAPTER SEVEN

                     The Nature of Culture

112.   WHAT CULTURE IS      1
                                1
                                    3.   COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE            II 4.   ORGANIC DIVERSITY,
CULTURAL HYBRIDITY        II5. THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                    I16. FOLKWAYS AND THE

RELATIVITY OF MORALS        II7.         CULTURE AND SOCIETY        II 8.    INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF
SOCIETY     119.   SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES             120.   NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARA-
SITIC CULTURES       121. RURAL AND URBAN        —FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                    122. IN-

TEGRATION   —INHERENT OR INDUCED               I23.   MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL                 I24. PARTICI-

PATION      125.   CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS VALUES     :                    I26.   MATERIAL AND
NONMATERIAL CULTURE             1 27.    THE IDEA OF PROGRESS        1 28.    MORE ABOUT PROGRESS
129.   FUNCTION      130. PURPOSE AND NEED



                                    112.    WHAT CULTURE IS

WHAT               CULTURE is can be better -understood from knowledge of what
            forms it takes and how it works than by a definition. Culture is in
            this respect like life or matter: it is the total of their varied phenomena

that is more significant than a concentrated phrase about them. And again as
with life and with matter, it is true that when we are dealing with the actual
manifestations we are less often in doubt as to whether a phenomenon is or is
not cultural than we are in deciding on what is includable in the concept of
culture when we reason abstractly about it. Nevertheless, it will be worth while
to consider some definitions briefly.

    Tylor says that "culture or civilization is that complex whole which includes
knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, customs, and any other capabilities and hab-
its   acquired by man as a member of society." Linton equates culture with "social
heredity." Lowie calls it "the whole of social tradition." All three statements use
the term "social" or "society," but in an attributive or qualifying sense.                       We can
accept this: society and culture, social and cultural, are closely related concepts.
There can obviously be no culture without a society              —much as there can be no
society without individuals. The converse             —no society without culture—holds for
man: no cultureless human society is known; it would even be hard to imagine.
But it does not hold on the subhuman level. As we have seen (§ 6, 20), ants and
bees do have genuine societies without culture, as well as without speech. Less
§   112                               WHAT CULTURE IS                                       6l

integrated and simpler associations arc frequent            among animals. Even a pair
of nesting birds rearing their         young constitute a society, though a small and
temporary one. Accordingly, so far as              man is concerned, culture always has
society as a counterpart;     it   rests on, and is carried by, society.   Beyond the range
of man there are societies, but no cultures. Cultural phenomena thus characterize
man more specifically than his social manifestations characterize him, for these
latter he shares with vertebrate and invertebrate animals.

       Roughly, then, we can approximate what culture is by saying it is that which
the human species has and other social species lack. This would include speech,
knowledge, beliefs, customs, arts and technologies, ideals and rules. That, in
short, is what we learn from other men, from our elders or the past, plus what
we may add to it. That is why Tylor speaks of "capabilities and habits acquired
by man," and what Lowie means when he says "the whole of social tradition,"
or Linton by "social heredity." The last term is unfortunate because heredity
now denotes in biology precisely what is received organically or genetically to
the exclusion of what is acquired socially or culturally. But if we substitute for
"heredity" the more noncommittal near-synonym "inheritance," the phrase then
conveys much the same meaning as Lowie's "social tradition."
       The terms "social inheritance" or "tradition" put the emphasis on how
culture is acquired rather than on what it consists of. Yet a naming of all the
kinds of things that we receive by tradition—speech, knowledges,             activities, rules,

and the rest   —runs into quite an enumeration. We have already seen in               § 2   that

things so diverse as hoeing corn, singing the blues, wearing a shirt, speaking
English, and being a Baptist are involved. Perhaps a shorter way of designating
the content of culture is the negative way of telling what is excluded from it.
Put this way around, culture might be defined as all the activities and non-
physiological products of human personalities that are not automatically reflex
or instinctive. That in turn means, in biological and psychological parlance, that
culture consists of conditioned or learned activities (plus the manufactured re-
               and the idea of learning brings us back again to what is socially
sults of these) ;

transmitted, what is received from tradition, what "is acquired by man as a
member of societies." So perhaps hotv it comes to be is really more distinctive of
culture than what it is. It certainly is more easily expressed specifically.
    In one sense culture is both superindividual and superorganic. But it is
necessary to know what is meant by these terms so as not to misunderstand their
implications. "Superorganic" does not mean nonorganic, or free of organic in-
fluence and causation; nor does           it   mean that culture is an entity independent
of organic    life   in the sense that    some theologians might assert that there is a
soul   which is or can become independent of the living body. "Superorganic"
means simply that when we consider culture we are dealing with something
that is organic but which must also be viewed as something more than organic
if it is to be fully intelligible to us. In the same way when we say that plants

and animals are "organic" we do not thereby try to place them outside the laws
62                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                   §   "2
of matter and energy in general.   We only affirm that fully to understand organic
beings and how they behave, we have to recognize certain kinds of phenomena
or properties   —
              such as the powers of reproduction, assimilation, irritability—as
added to those which we encounter in inorganic substances. Just so, there are
certain properties of   culture— such as transmissibiUty, high variability, cumu-
lativeness, value standards, influence on individuals      —which   it is   difficult to ex-

plain, or to see much significance in, strictly in terms of the organic composition
of personahties or individuals. These properties or qualities of culture evidently
attach not to the organic individual man as such, but to the actions and the be-
havior products of societies of men   —that   is,   to culture.
      In short, culture is superorganic and superindividual in that, although car-
ried, participated in, and produced by organic individuals, it is acquired;          and it
is   acquired by learning. What is learned is the existent culture. The content of
this is transmitted   between individuals without becoming a part of their in-
herent endowment. The mass or body of culture, the institutions and practices
and ideas constituting it, have a persistence and can be conceived as going on
their slowly changing way "above" or outside the societies that support them.
They are "above" them in that a particular culture, a particular set of institu-
tions, can pass to other societies; also in that the culture continuously influences

or conditions the members of the underlying society or societies      — indeed, largely
determines the content of their lives. Further, particular manifestations of cul-
tures find their primary significance in other cultural manifestations,            and can
be most fully understood in terms of these manifestations; whereas they cannot
be specifically explained from the generic organic endowment of the human
personality, even though cultural phenomena must always conform to the frame
of this endowment.
      An illustration may make this superorganic quality more vivid. A religion,
say Roman Catholicism or Mohammedanism, is of course a piece of culture, and
a typical piece or sample. Obviously Catholicism exists only in so far as there
are Cathohcs; that is, when and where there are human individuals                who have
acquired the faith. Once established, however, the Catholic hierarchy, beliefs,
rituals, habits,and attitudes can also be viewed as going on century after cen-
tury. Popes, bishops,   communicants succeed one another; the church persists.
It certainly possesses a continuity and an influence of its own: it affects not only

its adherents but the   course of history. On a smaller scale, or for shorter periods,
the                                                           —
     same thing holds for smaller segments of culture institutions, beliefs, or
customs down to short-lived trivialities of fashion and etiquette. On a larger
and more general scale, the same holds for the totality of human culture since
it first began to develop. Big or little, then, culture affects human action. It is

the accident of what culture happens to be in Occidental countries toward the
middle of the twentieth century which determines that when I get up in the
morning I put on a shirt and pants and not a chlamys or a toga or just a breech-
clout. Can we call this contemporary Western culture the cause of my shirt-
§ 112                             WHAT CULTURE IS                                   63
wearing? In ordinary parlance, we might; the specific custom can certainly not
be derived from anything in human hereditary constitution. Dialcctically, the
cultural causation    might be challenged;   it   depends on logical definitions. But
everyone will agree at     least that the concrete cultural    fact of habitual shirt-

wearing is specifically related to or conditioned by other cultural facts, such as
antecedent dress styles, manners, laws, or religion.
       Again, the English language is a piece of culture. The faculty of speaking
and understanding some or any language is organic: it is a faculty of the human
species. The sounds of words are of course made by individual men and women,

and are understood and reacted to by individuals, not by the species. But the
total aggregation of words, forms, grammar, and meanings which constitute the

English language are the cumulative and joint product of millions of individuals
for many centuries past.    No one of us creates or invents for himself the English
he speaks.     He talks it as it comes to him, ready-made, from his millions of
predecessors    and from his elders and age mates. English is obviously super-
individual in the sense that it is something enormously bigger and more signifi-
cant than the speech of any individual man, and in that it influences his speak-
ing infinitely more than his speaking can hope to contribute to or influence the
English language. And English is superorganic in that its words and meanings
are not direct outflows or consequences of men's being human organisms          — else

allmen would spontaneously talk as much alike as they walk alike. Instead, how
they talk depends overwhelmingly on how the societies in which they were
raised talked before.
       A piece of culture such as the English language is therefore a historical
phenomenon. This means that its specific features cannot be adequately ex-
                                                  —             —
plained by the organic features of our species nor of a race ^but are most intel-
ligible in the light of the long, complex, and locally varied history of the insti-

tution we call English speech. In short, a cultural fact is always a historical fact;
and its most immediate understanding, and usually the fullest understanding
of it to which we can attain, is a historical one. To a large degree calling culture
superorganic or superindividual means that it yields more readily to historical
interpretation than to organic or psychosomatic explanations.
       A simile that may further help the realization of what culture is and how
it   works is that of a coral reef. Such a reef may be miles long and inhabited by
billions of tiny polyp animals. The firm, solid part of the reef consists of calcium
carbonate produced by the secretions of these animals over thousands of years
a product at once cumulative and communal and therefore social. What is aUve
and organic in the reef is these innumerable little animals on its ocean-fronting
surface.   Without their ancestors, there would have been no reef. But the reef
now exists independently of the living polyps, and would long continue to en-
dure even if every polyp were kiUed by, say, a change in ocean temperature or
          would still break the surf, would now and then wreck ships, and
salinity. It

would bar off quiet water behind. While a coral reef is the accumulated pre-
64                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               §"2
cipitate of dead polyps, it is also a phenomenon affording to millions of living
polyps a base and a foothold, and a place to thrive.
     This parallel is incomplete. It breaks down in that a reef is actual physical
matter, whereas only the artifacts and the manufactures of culture are material
or physical, most of culture consisting of ideas and behaviors. Also, a reef deter-
mines that and where new polyps are to live, but not how they will Uve, not
the specific way of many possible ways in which they will function, which on the
contrary is just what culture does largely determine for men. Yet the simile is
valid and suggestive on one point: the minute role played by the individual
polyp or human being in proportion, respectively, to the mass of reef or of cul-
ture.Each of us undoubtedly contributes something to the slowly but ever
changing culture in which we live, as each coral contributes his gram or two of
lime to the Great Barrier Reef. In the main, though, it is our culture that directs
and outlines the kind of life we can lead. There is left to our individual gifts
and temperaments the relative success and happiness we attain in life; and to
our own volition, the alternative choices provided by our culture     —the choice,
perhaps, between being doctor, lawyer, or merchant chief; or whether our next
drink shall be water, beer, tea, or milk. Even this last set of choices would not
be wholly free to the individual if he were a participant in strict Methodist or
Mohammedan culture; and in old China the beer would not be available and
the milk considered too nasty to want.
     At any rate, the comparison may be of aid toward seeing things in per-
spective; with a consequence, perhaps, of somewhat deepened personal humiUty
in the face of the larger world and human history.



                       113.   COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE

     One general characteristic of culture is what may be called its openness, its
receptivity. The culture of today is always largely received from yesterday   :   that
is what tradition or transmission means; it is a passing or sending along, a
"handing-through" from one generation to another. Even in times of the most
radical change and innovation there are probably several times as many items
of culture being transmitted from the past as there are being newly devised.
Historians would be unanimous, for instance, that with all the important
changes produced by the great French Revolution, France of 1780 and France
of 1820 nevertheless still were far more alike than different. It would take a
series of revolutions, or a quite   long series of generations, before the changes
equaled the persistences. Even French culture of 1520 would almost certainly
be rated as more like than unlike that of 1820.     We might have to go back to
A.D. 820,   or even to a.d. 220, before the alterations could safely be estimated as
surpassing the transmissions. This does not        mean merely that mankind         is

generally hidebound and unimaginative, and that its cultures are therefore in-
clined to be persistent. It means also, put in terms of process or dynamics, that
§   113                          COMPOSITENESS OF CULTURE                                      65

on the whole the passive or receptive faculties of culture tend to be considerably
stronger than its active or innovating faculties. This is something that seems to
be pretty deeply ingrained in the nature of culture because it is deeply ingrained
in the nature of man, something without which it would lose its continuity, and
therewith    its   stability.   And most participants in most cultures— most human
beings, in short    —seem to want a pretty high degree of social          stability on account

of the security      and repose it gives them. A culture that was so unstable and
novelty-mongcring that           it   could continually reverse   its   religion,   government,
social classification, property, food habits, manners, and ethics, or could basically

alter them   within each lifetime— such a culture can be imagined. But it would
scarcely seem attractive to live under, to most men             and women; and it would
presumably not survive very long in comparison or competition with more stable
cultures, through lacking the necessary continuity. If what was on today were
mostly off tomorrow, there would be little chance for institutions or sets of habit
to be carried on long enough to develop to their most successful fruition. There
would be conflicting ideas, ideals, and aims, in place of the at least partly co-
herent ideology which characterizes most actual cultures; and along with them,
confusion, indecision, and a constant starting all over again.- In short, we can
see that it is profitable for cultures to carry a considerable degree of ballast in
the shape of consistency              and continuity, and   that those     which have        fallen

markedly short in these qualities have soon disintegrated and perished; quite
likely that is why they are so inconspicuous in history. But to maintain a real
continuity, a culture must put a genuine value on what each generation hands
on to its children; it must, in short, be receptive to its own past, or at least
largely acquiescent to it.
      Now allied to this receptivity of its own past is a receptivity that every cul-
ture shows toward cultural material worked out by other cultures. Such accept-
ance of foreign elements and systems of course constitutes a geographical spread;
and the designation most in use for it is "diffusion" (§ 171). Such spreads oc-
casionally are rapid, but often they require a considerable time interval. Accord-
ingly, much of what is acquired by diffusion from outside-also has its origin in
the past, much as what a culture receives by internal handing-on of traditions;
but the characteristic of diffusion, the emphasis of the process, is on transmission
in space.   The amount of diffusion which is constantly going on between cul-
tures that have contacts is impressive, and the             amount of cultural material or
content of foreign origin which gradually accumulates within any one culture
may fairly be said to be normally greater than what is originated within it. Also,
an integrating process, discussed again in § 122 and 171, brings it about that as
soon as a culture has accepted a new item, it tends to lose interest in the foreign-
ness of origin of this item, as against the fact that the item is now functioning
within the culture. One might say that once acceptance is made, the source is
played down and forgotten as soon as possible. So it comes about that a large
proportion of every culture was not spontaneously developed by                       it,   but was
66                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                   §   "3
introduced from outside and fitted into it, after which the people of the culture
were no longer much concerned about the fact of introduction. Probably the
greater part of every culture has percolated into it.
       We do not think of our American civilization as something that          is   particu-
larly discordant or ill-assembled. Yet we          speak an Anglo-Saxon form of a Ger-
manic language that contains more original Latin than English words. Our
religion is Palestinian, with    its   specific   formulations into denominations made
chiefly in Rome, Germany, England, Scotland, and Holland. Our Bible is trans-
lated partly from Hebrew, partly from Greek.             We drink coffee first grown in
Ethiopia and adopted in Arabia, tea discovered in China, beer               first   brewed
in ancient Mesopotamia or Egypt,           hard liquor invented in mediaeval Europe.
Our bread, beef, and other meats are from plants and animals first domesticated
in Asia; our potatoes, corn, tomatoes, and beans were first used by the American
Indians; likewise tobacco. We write an Etruscan-Roman variant of a Greek
form of an alphabet invented in or near Phoenicia by a Semitic people on the
basis of nonalphabetic writing in still more ancient cultures; its first printing
took place in Germany, on paper devised in China. It is needless to extend the
catalogue. We no longer feel these things of foreign origin as being foreign; they
have become an integral part of our culture. It is only when we pause for scien-
tific analysis, for historical retrospect, that we become aware of their alien or

remote source. They are a part of our culture, and are used as such.
      This is not because modern American civilization is particularly polyglot,
but because so far as we can tell such a condition is typical of all cultures. If
ancient Egypt, Sumer, India, or China seems less flooded with import and more
original, it is only because historical record fails,     and we get no more than oc-
casional indications of the alien and still more ancient sources of their culture
content.
       This is not to say that there are no resistances, strains, and dislocations when
particular culture import takes place.        They may or may not occur; they fre-
quently do.     We shall consider some of these resistances later (§172, 176). But in
spite of them, in the long pull, absorptions          and assimilations continue to take
place.     How far such assimilation is also an integration, or how far       it    may be
simply a collocation of things that are treated as if they were functionally fitted
together even though they are not— this is a complicating problem whose con-
sideration we must also defer. But it is a fair question:        Why is cultural recep-
tivity so high, and the amount of diffusion and absorption so great.?

       There are several reasons. A steel knife or ax just is physically more effec-
tive   than a stone one; a motortruck more so than a freight wagon. In other
words, in the sphere of practical, mechanical things, there are objective superi-
orities,   and the invention of a superior artifact in one culture anywhere tends
to start the process of its adoption by other cultures as soon as they learn about
it.   Then, whatever comes from a society that is stronger, wealthier, cleverer, or
has greater prestige comes with a favorable recommendation. Missionization
§   114                   ORGANIC DIVERSITY, CULTURAL HYBRIDITY                            (f]


may accentuate this process; and there often is conscious missionization for
products and brands, for poUtical and social ideas, as well as for religions.
Finally, man is an animal who has a great faculty for getting bored, and many
things are taken up just because they are new and different. Some of these will
be dropped again for the same reason; but others will stick. There probably arc
still   other factors at work; but those mentioned may suffice to make it reason-
able that there should be so          much cultural receptivity, diffusion, assimilation,
and compositeness.


                   114.   ORGANIC DIVERSITY, CULTURAL HYBRIDITY

        It is a   striking fact that on the organic level there is nothing parallel to this
cultural assimilativeness. Animals and plants absorb and assimilate their food
note the identity of the words, but with the metaphorical connotation quite
different    —but they do so by breaking    down. It is no longer grass or seed or
                                               it

flesh; it has become muscle or blood or bone in a  new organism. But Christianity
and the Roman alphabet are still Christianity and the alphabet after our culture,
or that of our ancestors or successors, has taken them in, has "absorbed" them.
The counterpart of course is that no part of Christianity is destroyed or made
over into something radically different on being taken into a new culture, as
food is in the body. There simply is more Christianity in the world than there
was before, instead of less. This is one way in which culture may be said to work
cumulatively, in comparison with organisms.
   Another comparison, or rather contrast, with the organic may be made, A
cow and a bison can, with some difficulty, be crossed or hybridized, so that an
intermediate form results. This is because they are both of the family Bovidae;
that is, sprung from common ancestors from whom they have not yet diverged
very far.     A horse and a donkey will hybridize, but the offspring          is   sterile. It

seems impossible to produce a self-perpetuating species of mules. If the di-
vergence is a little greater, there will not even be offspring. Cows and horses
simply cannot be amalgamated. In other words, the organic process, while it
allows enormous persistences, is also, so far as its general or longer course is
concerned, both diversifying and irretraceable. Once the genetic diversification
or "evolution" has gone beyond a certain quite narrow^ degree, there is no more
possibility of reversal and assimilation.
        By contrast, cultures can blend to almost any degree and not only thrive but
perpetuate themselves. Classic Greek civilization was a mixture of primitive
Greek, Minoan, Egyptian, and Asiatic elements. Of the Asiatic elements, the
alphabet, the zodiac, and the system of weights (§ 191, 208, 229) are only a
few examples. Japanese civilization is partly autochthonous, whence its god-
descended Emperor and Shinto ritual; partly Chinese, such as its writing and
philosophy; Indian in its prevalent Buddhism; Western in its factories, export
trade, telephones, and movies. It is needless to pile up examples: as has already
68                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 §114

been said, the greater part of the content of every culture is probably of foreign
origin, although assimilated into a whole that works more or less coherently and
is felt   as a unit. However diversified or specialized a culture grows in its devel-
opment, it can therefore always largely retrace its course; and it does normally
do so, by absorbing more generalized content from other cultures, and thereby
assimilating not only to them but to the totality or the average of human cul-
tures. Cultures are       always tending to equate themselves by imparting their
characteristics to one another, even while another set of impulses pushes each
of them toward particularistic peculiarity.
      It is   as if, let us say, a rabbit could graft into itself the   ruminant digestive
system of a sheep, the breathing gills of a fish, the claws and teeth of a cat, some
of the tentacles of an octopus, and an assortment of other odd organs from else-
where in the animal kingdom; and then not only survive, but perpetuate its new
type and flourish. Organically, this is of course sheer nonsense; but in culture, it
is   a near-enough figure of what happens.
      A result of this difference is that the course of organic evolution can be
portrayed properly as a tree of life, as Darwin has called it, with trunk, limbs,
branches, and twigs. The course of development of human culture in history
cannot be so described, even metaphorically. There is a constant branching-out,
but the branches also grow together again, wholly or partially,              all   the time.
Culture diverges, but it syncretizes and anastomoses too. Life really does nothing
but diverge: its occasional convergences are superficial resemblances, not a join-
ing or a reabsorption.     A branch on the tree of life may approach another branch;




                 THE TREE OF LIFE AND THE TREE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF
                GOOD AND EVIL    THAT IS, OF HUMAN CULTURE
§    115                         THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                                    69

it will not normally coalesce with it. The tree of culture, on the contrary, is a

ramification of such coalescences, assimilations, or acculturations. The schematic
diagram in Figure 18 visualizes this contrast.
     It is true that no figure of speech or of drawing will really prove a point

like this. Nevertheless the illustration, both in words and in diagram, does

validly represent something significant: that the specific processes of life and
the specific processes of culture are drastically different.



                          115.   THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE
     This unlimited receptivity and assimilativeness of culture make the totality
of culture a continuum: the parts merge into each other without definite breaks.
            assumed that all life is also a continuum; but the continuity of life
It is generally

              by going back in its history and then reascending other branches.
is traceable only

One moral of our diagram is precisely that culture is a far more closely and
frequently interconnected continuum, in space and time as well as in develop-
mental relations.
       Perhaps this is why we have only the one word "culture," or its equivalent,
"civilization," for its broadest as well as its narrowest exemplifications.               We use
the same term for the totality of human culture considered philosophically, and
for the specific and distinctive culture of a little tribe of a hundred souls. This
is    because the English language, like other            modern languages, has not yet
evolved distinct terms for the big and the              little,   the general   and the special
aspects of culture. Nor have anthropologists and other social students managed
to agree       on any technical terms to help out the distinction         —which     is   perhaps
just as well, since sharper terms might help, but once the process of free coining

starts, everyone prefers his      own words and there are endless quarrels about them.
But it is interesting to note how different this condition is from what we have
                —
in biology even in popular biology. Everyone knows that life falls into two
primary divisions, animals and plants, which can nearly always be distinguished
without difficulty. The animals fall into phyla, of which the vertebrates are one,^
among which the mammals constitute a class, and so on down the line to
                                        Homo sapiens or Equus caballus; and
orders, families, genera, and species, like
the species may have subspecies, and within these we get the near-repetitive in-
dividuals with only their individual or personal peculiarities.       To all these dif-
ferent ranks of manifestation of life            we have scarcely a counterpart in the
terminology for culture. Such distinctions as are made are expressed in terms
of societies or areas, such as tribal versus national, or local, provincial, national,
and continental; and even these concepts intergrade somewhat in actual prac-
tice, precisely because their cultures intergrade.

       ^   Popularly speaking; technically, of course, the vertebrates are only the largest and
most important subphylum of the chordates (§9).
yO                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 § 1 15


        Let us run down an example. It needs no proof that total human culture
shows a number of well-marked varieties, such as contemporary Western or
Occidental or Eur-American civilization; the East Asiatic, the Indian, and the
Islamic civihzations; and a     number of cultures that are possessed by smaller
societies   and are often labeled "primitive" or "savage." Within each of these,
subvarieties are recognizable without difficulty, such as Chinese      and Japanese
within East Asiatic. From the point of view of the outsider, Japanese culture is
still very similar to Chinese culture, because   so much of it has been derived from
the Chinese or through the Chinese. Yet recent Japanese culture contained a
native cult religion, Shinto, that was without counterpart in China; but Japan
lacked any Taoist establishment. It provided for a ruler who was also a god
an institution lacking in Chinese culture; but it never accepted the women's
foot-binding or men's queues which so long characterized the latter. And so
on. Deviations of a roughly similar degree separate the       main areas or nations
within Occidental civiHzation: Italian from German,          German from French,
French from British, American from British, in ways that are familiar. Some-
what lesser are the differentiations v/e generally call regional: as of Bavaria
within Germany, the Midi in France, Scotland in Great Britain. To the for-
eigner, these regional peculiarities   may be a bit elusive, but a native is likely
to be oriented about them.    He will know roughly how New England and the
South or the Middle West diverge in denominational and party affiliation, in
degree of industrialization or agrarianism, in manners, temperament, and dia-
lect.   A step lower, and we come to what is usually called provincial distinc-
tiveness, as of   Normandy from Brittany. To this there might correspond the
differentiation   between North and South Carolina. Beyond         this,   there   is   the
cantonal or local   —Swiss Geneva being Calvinist, watchmaking, and interna-
tional-minded; but Swiss Schwyz, Catholic, agricultural, home-centered. It was
on this level that until recently peasant costumes and folk dances varied from
valley to valley, or even from village to village, in much of Europe. At present
in Europe, and almost from the first in historically shallow-rooted America and
Australia, differences of the scope of these cantonal cultures are more likely to
be expressed between economic classes or professions than locally; as between,
say, doctors, barbers, printers, railroad men, and ministers, rather
                                                                   than between
counties.    There is no doubt that, quite apart from their vocational skills, the
average culture of these professional groups differs slightly in dress, manners,
standards, tastes, knowledge, habits, and amusements.      We might call them pro-
fessional subcultures or sub-subcultures.
        This example shows how the same term is actually applied to the important
                                                  and to their more transient
cultures of great societies spread over large areas
                         There even seems to be a degree of good reason for
local or divisional phases.

applying the same term. Occidental civilization no doubt represents something
more generic and more important than the subculture of Midwestern clergy-
men. But it cannot possibly be defined as rigorously as the latter, because it
 §    "5                      THE CONTINUITY OF CULTURE                                    7I
 is   itself only   a composite, a common denominator, of innumerable such phases,
which have the greater dehnitencss. That is to say, it is the subcultures of clerical,
sporting, transjwrtational, and other such groups, and the Southern,          New Eng-
land, Midwest, Pacific-coast variants of these,          which possess the sharper char-
acterization, as against      which     total   "American" culture is a slightly blurred
composite or average. On the other hand, these local and divisional phases die
out, merge, or get absorbed, like the cantonal cultures characterized by costume
and dance. They are being obliterated by the spread of communications, by the
rise   of syndicated newspapers, by radio and films, and by ready-made-clothing
factories.    While the larger cultures are therefore less easily definable in terms
of precise combinations of the traits characterizing them, they tend to be more
durable in their main aggregations. There is thus a continuous transition from
the greater to the minutest manifestations of cultures, with corresponding varia-
tion from more permanence to more precision; but all of them are significant.
    Similarly, where sessile primitive populations live in small groups, it has
been found that their local cultures vary almost exactly in proportion to dis-
tance.     Thus the Pomo Indians of California lived in independent groups or
tribelets of   perhaps two hundred, each owning a tract of land and a main
settlement. These settlements averaged possibly ten miles apart.             A careful esti-
mate, based on count of culture traits found present and absent, has shown that
adjacent communities shared about 95 per cent of their culture, and that each
was likely to have evolved perhaps i per cent of innovations or specific orig-
inalities.   The other 4 per cent of their cultures consisted of a border zone of
traits     known to both communities but used by one only, or practiced by one
for the other. In this cultural transition there might fall a ritual performed only
by tribelet A but attended by B; a fishing harpoon known to all communities in
the area and used by B but not used by            A because the streams in A's territory
were too small for fish of harpoonable size; and so on. Tribelet C            —say twenty
miles from A, beyond   B— would differ from A more than B differed from A,
but by the same ratio; D      more; and so on; the process continuing in all
                                still

directions until perhaps a       mountain range or an uninhabited tract, a radical
change of speech, or some not too ancient movement of people or other accident
of history, produced a slightly greater jump in the continuity. Where the situa-
tion of the tribelets or     communities was linear, as along the coast from Cali-
fornia to Alaska, the gradualness of the change             is   particularly striking,   and
renders it quite difficult to decide, except on the basis of speech, where one cul-
ture type ended and another began. Surprisingly, it seems to have               made little
difference whether adjacent communities were prevailingly friendly or hostile.
All this seems very much like the locally variant forms of culture in Europe,
especially rural Europe, of only a century or two ago.
       A moment's reflection will show that a well-known historical phenomenon,
the continuity of history, parallels in time this continuity of culture in space.
72                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                §   "5
The fall of Rome did not mean that a former culture was completely obliterated
in A.D. 476, or that a new kind of history first began then; it is just a convenient
landmark. Culture in Western Europe, even in the city of Rome itself, almost
certainly changed less in the decade enclosing 476        —say from 470 to 480—than
in the two decades before or the two after        —say from 450 to 470, and from 480 to
500. At any rate historians would say that this is a fair example of normal his-
torical change.     The same thing is involved in what we have already seen in
regard to cultural changeability (§ 113)      :   while cultures practically cannot stand
wholly still and do always alter, their prevailing behavior is one of inclination
toward dominant stability, so that their normal change is gradual.
     It is just   that we are more familiar with the principle of continuity in his-
torical time than    we are with that in geographic space. Country L is red on the
map, country      M blue. Their speech,     at least the   standard or official language,
changes abruptly at the frontier. The inhabitants pay taxes, in different cur-
rencies, to a     nominal King directed by a prime minister in one capital, to a
republican President in the other. The two states are sometimes at war, and in
between times erect tariff barriers and require passports. The whole setup is cal-
culated to emphasize the thoroughness of the break at a political frontier. Con-
temporary governments usually do their best to emphasize it; national preju-
dices often reinforce it; and finally the colors on the maps rub in an equally
false visual image of it. There    is   never as great a uniformity within a national
frontier as is aimed at or pretended, nor as deep a change across            it.


     The upshot of all of which is that human culture is a continuum or con-
tinuity,   but a continuity gradually changing, and changing equally as              it   is

followed through space and through time.            We recognize, and for convenience
label, culture periods like the Periclean age, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment

or the Rococo in Europe, the Colonial period in America.                We recognize also
culture areas, such as the Occident, the Far East, India, the Nearer or Moham-
medan East. Ethnologists recognize a good many more for illiterate native
peoples outside the scope of documentary history; such as the Southwest of the
United States, the United States Plains, the Arctic coast of America (again in-
cluded in a larger Circumpolar Zone), Andean South America, western Poly-
nesia, Congo-West African coast.        An accidental difference is that culture periods
are often named after something cultural that           happened within them, such as
reformation, enlightenment, exploration, colonization, increase of ignorance and
rudeness; whereas culture areas are mostly named geographically. Nevertheless,
they also really denote a particular culture rather than          its   mere geographical
frame. "Southwestern" culture primarily refers to peaceful, maize-farming, heav-
ily ritualistic Indians living in storied stone     communal houses, only incidentally
to the area this type of culture covered in       New Mexico and Arizona.
     Context alone, then, decides whether the word "culture" refers to a culture,
a particular larger form or manifestation of   it, such as Southwest Indian or
§   "6                 FOLKWAYS AND THE RELATIVITY OF MORALS                        73
Korean; or to a subdivision thereof, such as Zuni; or to all culture seen as a
whole, as a generalization, as when we say that culture is carried by society, or
that it tends to change gradually.



             1 1 6.    FOLKWAYS AND THE RELATIVITY OF MORALS
    In the eighteenth century o£ the "Enlightenment" in Europe .t began to be
widely recognized that the variety of national and tribal customs the world
over was not merely a lot of strange oddities, but had certain significances. If
Huron "savages" took their family line from their mothers, and if "Esquimaux"
felt it their duty to dispatch their aged   parents, this might well have some bear-
ing on original man, as contrasted with members of the highly "polished" so-
cieties of   western Europe. This original or "natural"       man proved to be an
effective club       with which to pound contemporary civilization for its departure
or corruption from an imagined condition of primeval purity. The motivation
was variously anticlerical, antireligious, nostalgically daydreaming, or idealisti-
cally imaginative.

       The nineteenth century came to adhere more and more passionately to the
idea of progress. This idea forbade any looking backward and up to the "noble
savage," but it was favorable to attitudes of relativity, instead of fixity or a per-
fection already achieved.       There was accordingly a growing realization among
intellectuals, during the latter part of that century, of what came to be called the

relativity of morals.      The Eskimo custom which obligated killing off one's old
father was part of an ethical code as genuine as ours. If, in reverse of our way,
the Jew put on his hat and the Moslem took off his shoes on entering a house
of worship, that did not prove        them "wrong," but did prove that there were
many and even opposite ways of showing respect. The diversity in fact sug-
gested that probably there was no absolute right or wrong in such matters: it
was clear that the Arab and the Jew were as convinced as the Christian that they
were doing right by doing the opposite from him.
    Moreover, as soon as people were opposed, pressed, or cross-questioned on
customs of this sort, they manifested resentment: it was evident that they held
to their rules of       conduct with emotion. When asked as to the reason for the
observance, they either had none beyond the allegation that that was the way
it   had always been done (which belief could often be proved erroneous)    ;   or they
gave a mythological justification that was obvious fantasy. All in all, compara-
tive studies not only revealed great diversity, but showed that moral codes were
essentially mere group habits or customs. They were nonrational, though often
falsely rationalized;      and they were emotionally charged. Moreover, the customs
were "blind" those who followed them might be unconscious of them until the
                 :




customs suffered infraction; and the followers were usually unconscious of any
 larger system of principles uniting the customs, or of partial contradictions of
    logic between customs.
74                                  THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            §"6
       The general effect of these nineteenth-century recognitions of course was in
favor of tolerance and in diminution of ethnocentrism          —that tendency   to assume
the universe as pivoted around one's particular people and to see one's in-group
as always right and all out-groups as wrong wherever they differ.             The realiza-
tion that every culture is more or less right in its ways when judged in terms of
its   own premises, and that no culture is provably more right than others in the
abstract, was achieved by a much wider circle of minds than the scattering an-
thropologists of the later nineteenth century. But anthropologists, being in most
continuous contact with a wide series of highly divergent cultures, were perhaps
most consistently impressed, and they came to take the principle for granted
as underlying their work.
     The most eloquent exposition in English of the point of view is Sumner's
Fol\ways of 1906. A somewhat heterodox sociologist and economist freely using
ethnographic and historical data, Sumner wrote brilliantly and exemplified
vividly and abundantly. To him, folkways are ways of the folk, of the un-
sophisticated, unanalytic mass of mankind. They are, in short, customs, held to
with much momentum but with incomplete rationality; and crossing them may
cause a flare-up of fear or anger. They grow unconsciously; they are not crea-
tions of purpose; but they are basic societal forces. Mores," Latin for            customs
and the origin of our word "morals," is a somewhat more special concept that
Sumner helped to establish in nontechnical English usage. Mores are folkways
which include a belief that they are desirable for social welfare and which people
insist that their fellows conform to, though the mores are not derived from

politically constituted authority. They are not laws, though they may produce

laws, just as they result in taboos. "Folkways whose ethical sanctions have risen
into consciousness" might be a fair definition of mores.
     Similar ideas as to the nonrational and unconscious elements in culture were
widely diffused throughout the field of later nineteenth-century social thought
and studies. Marx, for instance, was certainly convinced that he knew the right
understanding of past history as well as the solution of the problems of the
future. Yet his economic determinism is tempered by considerable reahzation of
the unconsciousness of social forces.           He holds that it is not consciousness or
purpose but methods of material production which determine the social, politi-
cal,   and spiritual processes of life— in other words, the noneconomic culture;
and then, in turn, this socio-politico-spiritual culture "determines" or produces
consciousness or recognition of itself.
       Psychology has arrived at much the same basic concepts, largely by a route
of its     own—a route of reaction in some ways. Formally, psychology began as a
branch of philosophy after this had become preoccupied with the problem of
how we know things and what knowledge is valid. The early psychology was
introspective, self-conscious,         and rational. As it drifted, in the later nineteenth
       ^   The little-used singular is mos.
§   117                              CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                 75

century, from philosciphical and deductive affiliations into inductive and explora-
tory aims, it worked on the one hand into objective experiment and test; on the
other, into the liclds of the nonraiional, the emotions              and the subconscious,
where     direct introspection prettymuch breaks down. Psychoanalysis is one
special manifestation of this general psychological trend. The realm of the non-
rational    is   also the realm of   custom and morals, analytically viewed; and cul-
tural, social,    and psychological thinking have more and more approached and
                                                      new culture making a
reinforced one another. The element of relativity, of a
new environment for the individual, came into psychology latest, because there
was nothing in the antecedents of psychology to suggest that differences of cul-
ture had much significance. Introspection in its nature emphasizes the ego and
underemphasizes environment, social or other. Also, the philosophy in which
psychology had its root was so completely concerned with universals and con-
stants that it gave little notice to relativities and differences. Recent decades how-
ever have seen a thorough swing-over of psychology;                 and while as a science
directed at the individual  must operate quite differently from anthropology,
                                it

whose central concern is the superindividual aspect called culture, the two ap-
proaches now make essentially the same basic assumptions as to the relations of
individual and culture. They may therefore be said to be attacking the same set
of problems each from its own side         —each in     its   own proper way, but with co-
operative understanding.



                             117.    CULTURE AND SOCIETY
      Cultures are products of human societies operating under the influence of
cultures handed down to them from earlier societies. This description illustrates
the close relation of culture and society     :   they are counterparts, like the two faces
of a sheet of paper. To each distinctive culture there corresponds, necessarily and
automatically, a particular society: to Hottentot culture, the Hottentot nation-
ality, to   Chinese civilization, the Chinese people. It is rather futile to discuss
which of the two phases or aspects is primary. It is obvious that if there were
no people and therefore no societies, there could be no cultures. But equally, if
there were no cultures, humanity would be merely another species of brute
animals.     We should in fact in that event probably not even be organized in
tight societies like the ants, bees,      and termites, because of lack of the highly
specific instinctual faculties of these animals,       and of their altruistic devotion
to the hive.

      Occasionally someone or other still attempts to assert that culture           is   sec-

ondary to society and therefore relatively negligible; or that within culture the
domain of social relations is primary over the fields of economics, technology,
knowledge, and belief. We have already seen (§6) that the first of these
opinions is arbitrary. The second is equally so. It is true that social structure of
some sort cannot be dispensed with in any culture. But neither can a sub-
7^                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                §   "7
sistcnce economy be dispensed with.          And it is clear that the threats as well as
the final victories of nations and cultures in the two World Wars depended on
their technological capacities, which in turn are parts of their bodies of knowl-
edge. And as to beliefs      —                             —
                          ideologies and standards how can these be relegated
io a  humble secondary place when they permeate and express all of human
living? It is fair enough to select one aspect of this human living as a personal
interest or for special study; but it is unwarranted to insist on its superior
importance.
   As a matter of fact, culture and society are so interwoven as actual phe-
nomena that they are often quite difficult to disentangle. An upper class is
certainly a significant feature of the structure of any society in which it occurs.
Yet it is also a feature of the culture      —an overt feature    if    the aristocracy has
privileges in its      own name; an implicit but perhaps no less important trait if
the de-facto class is unavowed. There is a social and there is a cultural aspect to
a situation like this, undoubtedly; but the phenomena actually constitute but a
single cluster or nexus of facts.
    When the philosopher Comte, "the father of sociology," coined its name
more than a century ago, he appeared to be emphasizing the function of society.
But as soon as he classified societies according to the "stage" they had attained,
                                                                  —
he rated them as mythological, metaphysical, and positive in other words, ac-
cording to their beliefs or type of thought; which is certainly first of all a cul-
tural criterion, and not a societal one.
       Conversely, it is impossible to give an adequate picture of any culture with-
out including an account of its social structure, which almost inevitably ramifies
into economics,         government, law,   religion, art—in fact touches almost every
department of the culture.
       It is   customary to speak of social solidarity but cultural integration. The
two are related, but not quite the same thing. A society can lack solidarity yet
retain a fairly integrated culture.        France during the Great Revolution        is   an
example. England is socially a more class-conscious and class-observing country
than the United States, but most non-Anglo-Saxons would probably agree that
its   culture    is   somewhat more stable and     better-integrated.   American    culture
is    perhaps less differentiated, but the British differentiations seem more tied
together and adjusted, probably because England has had longer to shake itself
down.
    Nevertheless, social solidarity and cultural integration tend to go together;
and there is nothing against turning the terminology around, and speaking of
social integration or even cultural soUdarity.

       It is obvious that each class in a society will possess a slightly   different phase
of the same culture, just as each regional section or district will have one (§ 1x5).
The speech may differ a little, manners and dress are even more likely to, in-
comes and occupations almost inevitably will. Mediaeval Europe and East Asia
had sumptuary laws to enforce class distinctions of dress. We do not usually
^    117                        CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                       77
consider class cultures as actual cultures, because they are parts of "one society"
and this tends to correspond in modern life with the larger political unit of the
nation, and it is to this that we are wont to consider a type of civilization as
attaching. But if there is any need for it, it is just as legitimate intellectually
to speak of "lower-middle-class English culture" as of French culture: the one
is   part of all-class English culture and shades off into it; the other, of western-
European culture. For that matter, a class has as much right to be considered "a
society," at any rate within one locality, as has the total population of a country.

It is more homogeneous, can function more easily as a unit, may or may not

have more solidarity. But it is also a lesser thing, and normally of less signifi-
cance. In short, what has already been said about the range of inclusiveness of
the word "culture," of its being determined by the context, holds equally for
society.

       In the United States, classes theoretically differ less than in most Occidental
national societies. People do differ in income, but that is not supposed to put
them into separate classes. In part this condition is actual, having been initiated
by the newness of the country and the once nearly equal opportunities of start
for everyone. But in part it is an unreal condition   :   social classes exist in America,

yet our basic national ideology disapproves of them.          Hence we disavow them
as much as we can, or fail to be frank in admitting their existence. Our formal
institutions    have certainly long been geared against class segregation: for in-
stance, the franchise and the public school   —state-provided education for        all.   As
if   in conformity with the institutions and the ideals, a rather unusual degree of
outward class uniformity has been achieved in America. This means relative
cultural uniformity between the classes, or relatively similar participation of all
strata and occupations in the benefits and pleasures held out by the culture.

Owning cars, eating steaks, seeing films, and reading the funnies are more
widely shared than in other countries, except perhaps New Zealand and Aus-
tralia.    Actually, the American standard of living certainly has a lot to do with
this: the    standard is high enough to enable more of the population to partici-
pate regularly in these desirables. Nevertheless, the range of American culture
does get narrowed by the uniformizing, and the spread between our actual social
classes is obscured by our approval of uniformity.
       An interesting result of the American inclination to ignore or deny such
social stratification as exists is that social anthropology took a particular turn in

the United States under Warner.    He set out to show that classes exist among
us, how they are characterized, and how people operate in staying in their class
or getting out of it into a higher or a lower one. The classification is basically
in terms of the old common-knowledge recognition of upper, middle, and lower

classes,    more or less corresponding to the aristocracy, bourgeoisie, and prole-
tariat of    Marxian ideology. Following the suggestion given by the familial
British phrase "lower middle class" with its very definite connotations, each of
the three levels is further subdivided, in the     Warner scheme, into upper and
78                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            §   "7
lower. Individuals are put into the subclass to      which the community assigns
them: mostly, anyone in the community that knows a given individual agrees
pretty well with everyone else as to his place in the scale. In an old but smallish
New England town thinly disguised as "Yankee City," the percentage strength
of the six classes from Upper Upper to Lower Lower is:         1.5, 1.5, 10, 28, 33, 25,

with I per cent unknown. In this New England community the classes are also
very well characterized culturally, by what clubs or organizations their members
belong to, denominational affiliation, type of magazines read, and so forth; and
social mobiUty   —social climbing— low and slow.
                                      is

     It remains to be seen   how far this scheme is of general utility, even in other
American situations. It is of course possible to slice any population into three
or six levels; the question is:    How far will these levels represent natural segre-
gations, distinctions, existing de facto in the society and culture ? It seems doubt-
ful how far the seven million people of      New York City could be easily allocated
to the   same six levels; or for that matter the members of a prosperous rural
community in Iowa; and if it turned out that they could somehow be allocated,
it is certain that the cultural criterion of each class would be very different. For

instance, "Cottonville" in the Deep South proved no longer to contain any
Upper Upper old aristocracy, though it was still definitely under the influence
of the ideals and standards of that class. This recognition of a class existing out-
side the community would indicate that Cottonville was not a society complete
in itself; that its culture is only part of a larger culture (§ 119). At the other end
of the scale, its "poor whites" are set off as an essentially unitary Lower class;
and everything in between them and the nonpresent aristocracy, from Lower
Upper to Lower Middle, also seems remarkably homogeneous. All this is for
                             :                                      —
Caucasians in Cottonville the Negroes form a separate "caste" really therefore
a separate though interlocked society      —
                                      with its own social classes. Of these the
Upper, containing 5 per cent of the Negroes, is determined by sex morality,
education, and professional occupation rather than by income.
     "Plainville," as described     by West, is an agricultural Missouri community
with a small-town center. Just about half the population tends to describe itself
as "good, self-respecting, average people," less frequently as "better,"       "middle
class," "all right,"   or occasionally even as "upper class." This half would seem
to correspond objectively more or less to Warner's Middle Class, probably Lower
Middle. A few families among them are somewhat more prosperous and                    in-

fluential than the rest, and are occasionally referred to as "upper crust," "rich,"

or "think they're better." However, they do not differ in manners or in pro-
fessed social claims, and West refrains from designating them as a distinct
group. The whole upper half of Plainville lives overwhelmingly on prairie
land, the lower half, on hill land. Of this lower half, somewhat more than the
         —
majority say around 30 per cent of the total population— is described by the
upper half as "good lower class." The remaining 20 per cent or so segregate in
a ratio of about two to one respectively into "the lower element" and "people
§   117                       CULTURE AND SOCIETY                                79
who live like animals"— these last not only poor but without pride, ignorant,
and apparently often subnormal in intelligence. Both the groups above these
two lowest groups are in full agreement as to which families are to be assigned
there. The two lowest subgroups together would correspond roughly to Warner's
Lower Lower; the 30 per cent above them, to his Upper Lower. Here we have
another example of a community without an upper class within itself: if it has
a top, that exists elsewhere, in the larger national society. In other    words, the
community is not self-sufficient, nor is the culture wholly intelligible in terms
of community structure as such. This condition is probably true in some degree
even of fairly large communities, but is increasingly conspicuous as their size is
smaller.
    Plainville also agrees with our previous American examples in that the
bottom stratum is less numerous than those above it. The social classes do not
form a broad-based pyramid, as social theorists have often proclaimed or as-
          —
sumed and as may have been true until recently in countries of mediaeval
retardation like China, Czarist Russia, and parts of Latin America. The better
diagrammatic representation of social stratification in the United States is evi-
dently by the figure of a lozenge or diamond stood on end, as West employs it
for Plainville.
      Religion was still socially significant in Plainville as of 1941.   Nonchurch
people easily outnumbered any one sect, but the five denominations together had
perhaps twice as many adherents as there were nonchurch people. These de-
nominations would probably have been somewhat different in the next town,
but in Plainville they happened to be, in order of their strength: Baptist, next
Holiness, then Christian and Methodist about even, and          Dunkard last. The
distribution in terms of social rank    is   however quite uneven. Membership in
the Holiness Church is a full 95 per cent Lower Class. Dunkards are about half
and half, and Baptist somewhat more Middle. Neither of these sects includes
persons from the very apex of the local social structure; but Christians and
Methodists do. Both these denominations, and especially the Christian, also
penetrate only very slightly into the lower half of the society. By contrast, the
nonchurch contingent reaches all the way up and down the Plainville social
                                   Middle Class apex, but a decreasing propor-
scale. It includes nearly half of the

tion as    one descends the Middle ranks. Then it increases again toward the
Middle border line and throughout the Lower half, finally taking in most of
"the lower element" and nearly all of the "live-like-animals" segment. It is evi-
dent that the church denominations serve as symbols and instruments of social
hierarchy, but that the distribution of the nonchurch population is due to other
and less obvious factors.
      In "Small Town," of less than 1000 souls in eastern   New York, Hicks found
only two classes, the upper one nearly twice as large as the lower. There is con-
siderable difficulty in defining criteria of distinction between the classes, but no
difficulty in assigning any resident to his class.   Public opinion seems spontane-
8o                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             §   "7
ously unanimous on that. In fact, the largest factor in determining class affilia-
tion in   Small   Town seems to be subjective admission of belonging. Some
accept lower-class affiliation with a dour sense of frustration, but   more do so
with a sense of relief at being able to let themselves go instead of having to live
up to responsibilities and standards.
    Obviously there is no one class pattern that can be applied everywhere.
Conversely, some class segregation can be expected in practically all societies
except the smallest and poorest in culture. The most important effect of the
Yankee City school of social anthropology is probably to prove to us that we
Americans too are socially stratified in spite of wanting to believe that we are
not. If the stratification proves to be locally variable, that only makes it so much
the more interesting.
     The trick of professing one thing and doing another is no doubt common
to all societies. They vary chiefly in what they are inconsistent about. The habit
of rationahzation has been discussed (§ 8i) and will be referred to again (§ 216).
One need not feel too harsh about it. Professions after all mean standards and
ideals; and it may be better for societies to have standards and fall short of them
than not to have them. Obviously, the important thing intellectually is to recog-
nize whatever discrepancy there is, instead of covering up to produce a sensitive
blind spot.

                    118.   INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF SOCIETY
     It has long been recognized that the size of a society can be expected to exert

certain effects on its culture. This influence appears to be most marked in the
periods   when higher civilizations first take shape. While reasoning on this
matter is somewhat a priori, the drift of history and archaeology confirms it.
     Assume a given population in a given area, but divided into a hundred
tribes,each owning a territory yielding it subsistence, each independent, each
jealous and suspicious of its neighbors. With a million people in the area, the
tribes would average 10,000 souls. There might be a council or a chief or a

kinglet to govern each of these tribes. There might be in each tribe some sort
of a central settlement or market or town, but nothing like a real city, nor any
serious accumulation of wealth. Most of the tribal members would be scattered
over the land getting their subsistence.      As in our wholly rural sections until
quite lately, every man would be something of a jack-of-all-trades, able to farm,
clear, build, fell, repair, or fight; his   women would know how to cook, spin,
weave, sew, milk, and thresh, or the equivalents of these in the local form of
culture. There would be little need for writing or records, hence limited learn-

ing. Arts would    most likely be home crafts. The priest and the doctor might
function as such mainly in their spare time after making a living; a smith or
                                                           —
two perhaps would work full time and professionally if iron and tools were
abundant enough to keep him busy. In short, the smallness of the social group
§   n8                     INFLUENCE OF SIZE OF SOCIETY                           8

would tend to keep it undifTerentiated in its activities, and therefore culturally
undeveloped.
       Now let our hundred little tribes be united into one society acknowledging
its   unity   —whether by voluntary conglomeration or by the conquests of one
leader.    The hundred councils or chiefs are replaced by a central government.
The seat of this would tend to become a city; its house, the largest in the coun-
try, would now be a palace of sorts; its shrine, a national temple. To tend the

shrine there might follow full-time priests, who would leave their offices to their
descendants or to trained successors. Revenues and trade would flow into the
capital;   craftsmen could now expect steady custom and could become         skilled.

The ruler's resources and inclination toward show might lead to patronage
which in turn would encourage the arts; the lifelong priests might pile up ob-
servations leading to the devising of a regulated calendar. All in all, the mere
size of the society, now a hundredfold greater and with its parts in closer inter-
                               —                            —
communication than before at least toward its center would trend toward
professional differentiation, accumulation of skills, new inventions, and an up-
surge of cultural content.
       To a greater or less degree this is what appears actually to have happened in
ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, China and Japan, Mexico and Peru, and again,
with intensification, in Western civilization since 1650. The period was by or
before 3000 b.c. in Egypt and Mesopotamia (§286); perhaps a thousand years
later in China (§ 299);    during the Christian era in the other countries. In each
case there  was more political unity than there had previously been, rulers of
greater authority and sometimes with attribution of divinity, the beginnings of
cities, development of metallurgical and other arts, and usually the formulation

or the introduction of systems of writing and calendars. Any one of these ad-
vances tended to bring advancement in others. For instance, city life meant that
there were classes no longer working the soil themselves: rulers, or craftsmen, or
merchants, or priests. Wealth could accumulate; and temples or palaces called
for new architectural endeavors. Similarly, writing opened a variety of new
avenues: bookkeeping for taxes, history on behalf of the reigning dynasty, more
exactly transmitted rituals, records for the calendar-framers. The entire complex
process of forward     movement may have been actually initiated by any one of
its   interwoven components, for all we know   —by urbanization, or by metallurgy,
writing, the divinity ascribed to rulers, or by some other factor. But the distinc-
tive accompaniment in any one of these cases was the political unification.

     That meant there was a much larger society, which could now diversify
into a variety of classes and professions instead of being broken up quantita-
tively into a series of nearly uniform tribal units. And of course a society di-
versified qualitatively means a richer culture instead of a repetitively narrow
one.
       This summary of what actually happened in the protohistoric period in
several parts of the world should not be construed as a universal "must."       The
82                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              §"8
successful development of Greek culture in a period of         autonomous tiny city-
states is enough to show that. Emphatically, the richness of civilizations      cannot
be measured in the abstract by the size of their societies. All that can be main-
tained is that, other things being equal, an integrated society large enough to be
socially diversified has a better chance to produce a richly diversified culture than

an equally large population broken up into many small units each with less
diversification. This seems especially true at a certain level or stage; namely,

after agriculture has made concentration of numbers possible, and          when tribal,
oral, folk culture   is   about to begin to convert into urban and Hterate culture.
The Greek states remained minute in the period of their cultural efflorescence;
but they were urban, and they had recently become literate.
    Also, it is possible for a society to attain new peaks in       its   culture while
many of its members are worse off than before through not sharing in the new
attainments. This is a price that tends to be paid for the gains of specialization;
and it can become fatal. This counterpart is discussed below under Participa-
tion in § 124.



                  119.     SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES

      We have seen how each class in a society exhibits a more or less distinct
phase, a subculture, of the total culture carried by the society; just as geographi-
cal   segments of the society manifest regional aspects of the culture. This prin-
ciple extends farther: to age levels and the sexes.   Men do not practice the specific
habits of the women in their culture, and vice versa. And though both sexes are
generically oriented about these habits   —they always know that certain peculiarly
feminine (or masculine) activities exist   —they may be so hazily informed about
them that they could not adequately practice diem or transmit them in their
entirety if they would. At the same time these sex phases are never felt as con-
stituting more than a side or an aspect of the culture    —
                                                        nor, indeed, do they con-
stitute more. A unisexual society could no more exist among human beings than

could a unisexual race; and neither are there unisexual cultures. The feminine
component is always a complement of the masculine: the culture is not felt as
complete, and is not complete, without both components. The same things holds,
incidentally, for the class phases, and often for the regional phases, of well-
integrated cultures. Scavengers and bankers will be recognized in such cultures
as quite properly following diverse strains of life and making diverse contribu-
tions, but their coherence within the body politic of culture and society is felt

to outweigh the separateness. They are both organs within the same body, like
the patricians and the plebeians in the old Roman fable about the stomach and
the limbs.
    The cultural differences between age levels within a society follow a some-
what different pattern. The ages are inevitably continuous and overlapping, as
sexes and many classes are not. Culture phases associated with age may be
§119                                SUBCULTURES AND PART-CULTURES                             83

assumed to correspond to changes taking place in the culture, rather than to
-eflect chronic or static lines of segregation like those between social classes.

Individuals above               fifty   will largely be trying to practice   and maintain their
established habits and status, and therewith a phase of culture                  some of which
is   just   beginning to pass; those under thirty will be interested in the phase that
is   trying to arrive.
        It is    now well recognized that in contemporary civilization adolescents in
the larger sense         — the individuals between dependent childhood and       ma-   full

turity with social responsibility      — learn more about many things from age mates
or near-age mates than from their elders. At any rate, they learn more willingly,
often eagerly, from age mates, and are more conditioned socially by them. As
for the effect of this fact               on culture, that is an intriguing and little-explored
problem. However, it seems that the constant change which is normal in every
culture is chiefly initiated not by its adolescents, but by its mature individuals,
especially by the younger half of these                mature individuals.
       What then do adolescents teach each other? It appears to be little in the
way of substantial cultural content. This substantial content, if well estabUshed
in the culture, would come of itself from the parental generation; if new, from
the younger or more progressive section of the adult population as a whole.
What adolescents impart to one another seems chiefly to be accepted cultural
content         stylistically    modified as to its manner or form. This means fashions,
mannerisms, ways of speaking,                    sitting,   dancing, or reacting, and the like:
special brands of slang, for instance, or of slouches and other postures; modi-
fications of existing traits, in short, rather than brand-new elements of culture.
The subadult age class goes in for certain choices among existing types of
clothes, such as low flat shoes and sweaters for coeds, or even only a certain way
of pushing the sleeves back; they do not ordinarily invent a new garment. This
example seems typical of adolescent culture. Its quality is a special twist given
to the standard culture; a conscious departure from some elements of it, or
a sort of deliberately distorted reflection. Ordinarily there is no real revolt, no
seeking a reform, but a basic conformity with the existing order, accentuated by
an assertion of age-class independence at points of no great moment. By the
time full social maturity is entered, most of the twists are abandoned by each
individual.         The whole phenomenon may be compared to the slight wave or
bulge of water that the bow of a moving ship keeps pushing just ahead of it.
    It must also be remembered that this kind of adolescent-culture phase is

specially characteristic of modern city life                and the leisure of prolonged educa-
tion.    In cultures or classes where economic responsibility is assumed early, the
more usual adolescent urge seems to be toward acquisition of adult status and
privilege in normal form.
       It also      seems possible that in our contemporary society the urge of each
adolescent generation to set itself off as an age class is an unconscious compensa-
tion for the relative lack of sharp demarcation of overt social levels.
84                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 § 1 19


     A particular kind of class   is   caste. Castes are closed classes.   Individual mo-
bility from one into    another class is forbidden by the larger society. Naturally,
each caste reflects one particular facet of a larger culture. This is true even where,
as in    most of the United States, the basic doctrine of democratic equality sets
limits to the functioning of caste. American Negro culture may aim at being
an integration into white culture or a repetition of it, but actually it is a variant
and not a duplication. In a country like India, differentiations are so intensive,
and so firmly entrenched, that the more extreme castes might almost be ac-
credited as following distinct cultures, so much do they differ       —not only in oc-
cupation and rank, but in food, manners, internal laws, education, amusements,
worship, and standards. Essentially it is the less extreme intervening castes, plus
intercaste community of regional speech, which succeed in holding the top and
bottom levels within the frame of one society and one culture in India.
    India is almost perversely unique in the degree to which it is caste-ridden,
and the American color situation carries a high-voltage charge of emotion, so it
may be well to examine a case that does not involve either race or a wholesale
caste system.    Through much of North Africa and Arabia smiths form an
in-marrying profession. They may be respected, despised, or feared, but are set
apart.    Among the camel-breeding Beduin of northern Arabia, such as the
Ruwala, smiths and the Negro slaves form the only separate castes not marry-
ing with the main population. The smiths alone know how to shoe horses, repair
guns, and the Hke, and get paid for their work, with which income they pur-
chase their food and living, instead of raising camels as do the rest of the Beduin.
They are uninvolved in the touchy honor system, vendettas, and raids of their
tribes. If   by oversight a smith is pillaged, the smiths in the raiding group ar-
range for his property to be returned to him. On the other hand, though they
do not fight, smiths receive what may be described as a small fixed percentage
of the spoils taken in battle. It is evident that the social and prestige system as
well as the occupational and economic activities of the smiths is wholly distinct
from those of the main body of the Ruwala Beduin. Yet the two form parts of
one society. The Ruwala would be paralyzed without their smiths, and the
latter of course could not exist at all without the Ruwala.



              120.   NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES

    Much the same sort of relation holds, on a larger scale, between the Beduin
and the neighboring settled Arabs. The livelihood of the nomads is in their
camels, whose milk is their main food, whose herds are their wealth and their
only salable produce (§ 165). Each midsummer when the water holes of the
steppe and the desert go dry, it is with their camels that they buy, in the settled
country, all their clothing and black tents, their carpets, their weapons and iron
pans, barley to feed their prized brood mares, and virtually all their own non-
             —
milk food wheat, rice, dates, and coffee. The very poor may have to do without
§    120                NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES                             85
this bought food;       but the reasonably prosperous consume close to a pound of it
a day per capita. Meat is too valuable to eat, ordinarily; a butchered camel is so

much capital eaten up. It is clear that without what they secure from the towns
and traders of the farming country, the Beduin would have so one-sided a cul-
ture that they could not survive by it: no clothing, shelter, weapons, few utensils,
limited diet. In one sense, accordingly, their own culture is no more than a half-
culture. At least they can produce only half of it, and are dependent on the
Hadhar, the "dwellers in brick," for the other half. Yet the Beduin are not a
mere occupational subgroup, nor a caste like the smiths. They are a full-fledged
society, or series of tribal societies, independent, autonomous, each owning terri-

tory, waging war.

     To some extent, this condition of possessing a "half-culture" holds for most
nomads. Their range is from Arabia westward across Africa through and south
of the Sahara; and eastward through Iran, Soviet Turkestan, Chinese Turkestan
                                                                  —
and Tibet, North China and Mongolia, to Manchuria the great transconti-
nental arid belt of Africa-Asia. With insignificant exceptions          it   is   only in this
belt that true pastoral      nomads occur: peoples making their living wholly off
their flocks without settling down to plant. Alongside them, however, in rainier
tracts and oases or on irrigated land within the belt, there normally are farmers,

and often towns or cities. These agricultural populations are frequently the more
numerous, though the herders loom large on the map because they need and
have more of the low-grade land. In some areas the herding people are politi-
cally dominant, like the Masai and Bahima and Banyankole in East Africa, and

the Fulah in West Africa. Elsewhere, the settled people are more often on top,
though it may be difficult, or not very worth while, for them to control the
roamers in the steppe. Jenghis Khan was a pastoral nomad Mongol when he
and his sons and grandsons in the 1200's conquered out from Central Asia as far
as to include Russia and China. But by 1600 Mongolia was again dominated by
China. Nomads in general feel free, are proud, and look down on the sedentary
groups, though they are fewer, poorer, and envious of the latters' luxury and
wealth. The roaming life in the desert largely colored early Arabic poetry; but
Mohammed, who launched the Arabs and their culture to greatness, was a
townsman and a trader. Lattimore has even advanced a theory that East Asiatic
nomadism developed secondarily out of the mixed farming and stockbreeding
of China when increase of population began to push this mixed method of Uve-
lihood northward and inland into marginal steppe and then into submarginal
desert. After a certain point was reached, it proved more profitable to renounce
planting altogether in favor of wide herd range and human mobility. This is
suggested as having begun to happen on the North China frontier only shortly
before the Christian era; whereupon the power of the Hiung-Nu arose as the
first of a succession of transient pastoral-nomadic states of which the Mongol

finally became the greatest. This interpretation still remains hypothetical; but

it   is    interesting because   it   does recognize pure pastoralism as a specialty      sec-
86                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                  §   120

ondarily segregated out of a     more balanced economy by accentuation of one
part.
      In passing, it may be mentioned that the view of a succession of stages of
human-culture evolution from hunting to herding to farming is now considered
a completely antiquated theory. It was a pseudo-philosophical guess aiming to
supersede actual history, and there are masses of scholarly and scientific evidence
to the contrary. In fact, the theory has been traced back in its germs to specula-
tions made by the Sumerians of lower Mesopotamia five thousand years ago.
      All in all, while it would be an exaggeration to say that all pastoral nomad
cultures would perish if they tried to become wholly self-sufficient in isolation,
yet it is clear that they are particularly one-sided and limited, and tend to stand
in a relation of complement to the richer and more varied cultures of adjacent
or interspersed sedentary societies. This is what is meant here by calling them
half-cultures or part-cultures. They   would not have been able to specialize to
the same degree if they were wholly isolated and independent.     They exist in
some degree of cultural and social symbiosis.
    Our cowboy world of Western fiction and films is much the same sort of
thing on a fantasy level. On that level, attention is directed toward romance, and
away from the fact that this appealing world of the Bar-X ranch would collapse,
or at least squalidly deteriorate, if it were really cut ofJ from the rest of the
United States. Riding range in actual life is just one occupation of many in our
economy, and in everything else the cowpuncher is a participant in American
culture and only in that. If he lived in the pastoral belt of Africa-Asia, the cow-
puncher would often be set apart from the nonpastoral population in race or
speech or religion also, and perhaps he would be politically independent. But
his complementary integration with the nonnomadic culture would remain
fairly similar to the cowpuncher's with ours. It is in his social consciousness that

the nomad is free, separate, and proud. His specific culture       may be almost as
largely a part of a greater culture as the facet cultures of classes or castes else-
where are only such parts.
    There are several other populations, ranging from castes to small races, to
                                                             —
whom something like half-cultures might be attributed and disputed.
    There are the Jews, whose culture differs from that of coterritorial Gentiles
primarily in religion and ritual practices. When this religion loses its hold, Jews
come to approximate Gentiles very closely, and generally tend to merge socially,
or at least are willing to lose their group identity. Where the culture of Jews
is   distinctive in nonreligious matters, as in their occupations,   it   is   most often
because they are confined to these through being shut out from other callings;
or through having been shut out legally from them until so recently that en-
forced habits still persist. The degree to which Jews are separate in their bodily
heredity has been discussed in § 68. It can be at best only a quite minor factor in
their culture determination. Their speech too     is   usually that of the country in
which they live. If it differs, it is through recency of immigration, as in New
§    I20               NOMADIC, CASTE, AND PARASITIC CULTURES                        87

York. Or it is because of enforced migration, as of the Spanish-speaking Jews
of Salonika, or the corrupt German called Yiddish which the Jews of much of
eastern      Europe spoke because they were driven       there   from Germany. Com-
pulsory ghetto segregation, as in Czarist Russia, has kept dialects like Yiddish
alive through the centuries. Biblical     Hebrew was a dead language to about the
same degree as Latin until it was resuscitated as a living national speech by some
hundreds of thousands of Zionists in Palestine; but whether with historical suc-
cess, only the future can tell (§ 107, 181).

    All in all, the Jews seem to constitute a social quasi-caste based originally
and mainly on a religion that of course is voluntary, not enforced. Their social
segregation is markedly stronger than their cultural distinctness, though the
latter is not absolutely lacking.

     The Gypsy situation is a little different. Fundamentally, the Gypsies are an
endogamous caste. They originated in India; and they show definite evidence of
that fact in their blood type (§ 72) and in the Romany speech of which they re-
tain remnants in addition to the language of whatever country they inhabit. In
religion they are more or less professing Christians; and they specialize in certain
occupations like horse-trading and tinkering. But what sets them off from the
rest of the population is not so    much positive cultural peculiarities as the inclina-
tion toward an unrooted and vagrant life. Their distinctness lies above all in an
                        which leads them to select a certain group of activities
attitude, or orientation,
in Western civilization and to discard most of the others. They want a horse
or an automobile, but not a house; silver jewelry, but not a bank account; music,
but no education; and so on. In many of their attitudes they are like hobos: both
elect to     follow one particular vein of the many that make up our culture      —the
vein or line of freedom, irresponsibility, and instability. But of course hobos have
no separateness of race or speech, nor are they strictly a caste, because without
women and families they lack hereditary continuity and are merely an asso-
ciation group constantly rerecruited by adversity or temperament. Gypsies evince
definite cultural distinctness; only, as they neither constitute a full society     nor
possess a complete culture, they serve as another example of half-cultures. They
certainly have an ethos (§ 125) all their own.
       At the extreme edge of this concept, we have peoples like the Seri Indians
or the Negritos, whose attitudes are in part like those of Gypsies. Here we have
indubitably distinct and autonomous social groups, each with its specific culture.
The Negritos are even markedly distinct in their miniature racial type (§64),
though they speak the languages of their neighbors.^ The mode of life of both
peoples is unsettled, and, in line with that propensity, the culture of both may
be described as kept simple. It contains nothing specific that is not known in the
surrounding richer cultures. The specializations consist of makeshifts like the

       ^   The Negritos of the Andaman Islands are the only ones who have no immediate
neighbors and who do have a language of their own.
88                           THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § I20


single shaft that the Seri use interchangeably as harpoon, mast, or raft-poler; or
like the   Negrito bow, which the non-Negrito Filipinos have discarded as use-
less to   them. Historically at any rate, cultures such as these are parasitic. They
have contributed little or nothing, so far as we can judge, to the stock of human
culture, while they    have taken from other cultures what they do possess, and
that with heavy reduction. The Seri, so far back as        we know them, have also
been outrighdy parasitic on other groups, so far as they could, by force, cajolery,
or sufferance,   much like Gypsies. On the contrary, the Negritos are sturdily
independent; so that the cases are not quite parallel. Moreover, the historical
dependence or parasitism of one culture on another is by no means the same
thing as the social parasitism of one group on another. Nevertheless, if all non-
Gypsies were suddenly blotted out of Europe and North America and those
continents left wholly to the Gypsies, it is reasonable to believe that the culture
of the Gypsies in a      few generations would    fairly   resemble that of Seris or
Negritos in orientation, and perhaps ultimately in simplicity of substance or
content also.
     This matter of partial cultures or half-cultures needs more defining and
exploring. It is evident that the relations between the larger or "enclosing" cul-
tures and the special smaller ones vary a great deal   —as much so as the relations
between "whole" societies and their castes or classes or regional segments. Un-
consciously we tend to think in terms of large ethnic units, such as the French,
whose geographic boundaries are within a single color block on the map, and
whose society, nation, language, and culture pretty well coincide. Actually of
course France includes not only "Frenchmen" but Gypsies, Jews, Bretons,
Walloons, Basques, hobos, and apache criminals, each of which groups has its
variant form of French civilization, just as French officials and French dirt
farmers have. And of course French civilization itself is only one phase or form
of Western culture. Also we tend to think of the units as static, whereas they
are constandy flowing, changing, and influencing one another. If we knew
better the history of peoples like Negritos, Seris, or even Gypsies, or if we kept
more in mind the total composite history of peoples like the French and the
Bretons, we would realize more clearly the continuity of the material of culture,
and how its segregations are never complete. In their origin and their history
even the greatest and richest cultures are only parts of the great nexus of human
culture as a whole.



      121.    RURAL AND URBAN           FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS
                                                                modern popu-
     It is customary to distinguish rural and urban components in

lations.There are of course corresponding rural and urban facets or aspects in
the culture of such societies. Moreover, whole societies and cultures can be
classified into those predominantly rural or predominantly urban. India,      China,
and Czarist Russia will serve as examples of the one; England or Massachusetts
§   121              RURAL AND URBAN       — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                  89

of the other         —cjr   even Australia, recent as it is, with the majority of its inhabi-
tants living in its capital cities. In this familiar form, the rural-urban distinction
is well enough known to need no detailed analysis                  —
                                                          except for one comment
on a fundamental though obvious fact. The rural condition is the underlying
one, logically and historically: there must be a country area producing more food
than it consumes before other people can live in cities.
      On the widest consideration, the rural-urban differentiation is a somewhat
special and modern form of a more general distinction of societies              and cultures
into those which are   more folklike and those which are more sophisticated or
"civilized." This is not an either-or segregation. Rather we must conceive of a
line or an axis along which societies and cultures, or the part-cultures of seg-

ments of societies, can be ranged from the one extreme or pole of greatest folk-
like or tribal       backwardness to the opposite pole of greatest sophistication. The
concept is of some importance because it gathers in and subsumes a series of
diverse but related recognitions that have gradually become established in social
science.
      A characteristic folk culture or tribal culture belongs to a small, isolated,
close-knit society, in which person-to-person relations are prevalent, kinship is
a  dominant factor, and organization, both societal and cultural, is therefore
                                      —
largely on a basis of kinship sometimes including fictitious kinship, as in many
clans and moieties. By contrast, political institutions are weakly developed "prim-  :




itive democracy" is the characteristic form; but this denotes only a maximum of

equality coexisting with a minimum of authority or control. Such a way of
doing works because of the strong integration within the small group involved.
Everyone knows everyone else, and many of them are blood or affinal relatives.*
It has long been noted that there seems to be a spontaneous upper limit of tribal

size: probably around five thousand souls, in many areas less than that. When

this limit      is   transcended, the society breaks into two, often painlessly.         Where
"tribes" of fifty or a hundred thousand or a million persons are spoken of, they
are either organized into a supertribal state, or they are really no longer tribes,
but nationalities. Nationalities possess a culture and a speech that they recog-
nize as common in essentials, but they may constitute many societies. This means
that, in the case of a nationality, ethnically         and culturally we are dealing with
a single people, but politically often           with multiple independent societies, each
one autonomous and owning its own distinct tract of land. Such would be
populations like the Lolo, the Ifugao, the Maya, all of whom are sometimes
inaccurately called "tribes" when they really are multiple-society nationalities of
nearly uniform culture. The mere fact of the narrowness of range of their social
integration holds them near the folk end of the polar axis.®

     * Related to the folk-sophisticate polarity are the distinctions made by Durkheim be-

tween "organic" and "mechanical" solidarity, and by Tonnies between "community" and
 'society," as his Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft are approximately translated.
      *   The subject of nationality is discussed also in § 80, 102, 180-81.
90                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § 121


     It is also    the smallness of the maximal social unit which keeps folk popu-
lations homogeneous and uniform, with only slight division-of-labor specializa-
tion, beginnings of class divisions, or slender concentrations of residence in per-

manent towns. Folk societies are attached to their soil emotionally by ties of
habit, and economically by experience. Consequently they belong to that group

of societies   which    identify themselves with their locality, in contrast to the
sophisticated city dwellers who float without roots but take pride in living in
their era   and day and are therefore constantly subject to the play of fashion
(§ 121, 164, 253).
     Finally, it is folk societies that are specially dominated in their culture and
their behavior      by the folkways discussed in § 116. Their moral and      religious
sense is therefore strong. They believe in the sacred things; their sense of right
and wrong springs from unconscious roots of social feeling, and is therefore
unreasoned, compulsive, and strong.
     Folk cultures afford their individual members full participation in their
functioning    —
              they invite and encourage such participation; their functioning,
however limited and inadequate, is therefore personalized and saturated. The
relatively small range of their culture content, the close-knitness of the partici-
pation in it, the very limitation of scope, all make for a sharpness of patterns in
the culture, which are well characterized, consistent, and interrelated. Narrow-
ness, depth, and intensity are the qualities of folk cultures.

     Maturely civilized societies are inevitably large. A population that has be-
come great, whether by its own growth, by absorption, or by the welding to-
gether of originally independent groups, inevitably becomes depersonalized on
the one hand, individualized on the other. The kin group, of lifelong close asso-
ciates bound by affective ties, has lost its force, except for the   immediate or bio-
logical family,     and often partly even within that. In consequence, each indi-
vidual's relations with others take on     an impersonal character. There are now
numerous such relations, but most of them are special, limited, shallow, without
emotional implications. We do not know our milkman, who in fact probably
represents a corporation none of whose members we have ever set eyes on. And
as for the actual delivery driver, if we do now and then see him, it is to extend a
greeting or a comment on the weather: we do not invite him to dinner or seri-
ously exchange views on religion or social problems with him. If we have real
business with him, such as ordering an extra quart, we usually make sure of it
by leaving him a note in an empty bottle       —about as impersonal and unemo-
tional a method as there is. In fact, most writing and all printing are inevitably
indirect, remote, and "denatured" as regards feeling, compared with face-to-face

contact. Writing, then, greatly reinforces population size as a joint cause of the
growing impersonalization of higher civilization. So do large-scale urbanization
and mechanical industrialization. The four constitute a set of interdependent
causes, and of intercorrelated effects as well.
§    121           RURAL AND URBAN        — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                     9I

     At the same time, kin and associative groups, which were dominant under
tribal cuhure, have lost most of their strength and influence, and the large total

society being only remotely and mechanically interested in persons, the indi-
vidual has become relatively free. He is free to try to develop as he wishes, free
to choose his own contacts and to change them. There is nothing to hold him
in the course of his forefathers, nor even in his own original course. Individuals
therefore       become highly differentiated          — not indeed in their inner personality,
which the immense society and great culture have difficulty in reaching inti-
            —
mately but in their behavior, their actions. This differentiation corresponds to
the differentiation of labor         and profession. With it also there tends to go a
certain instability. This shows in the fluctuating careers of individuals: they may
live here today, there tomorrow, with ever               new associates but perhaps never close
friends.     On the sociocultural side it shows in the fluctuations of fashion, not only
of dress but of fads, novelties, amusements, and the fleeting popularity of persons
as well as things (§ 164, 253). The influence of the total sociocultural                mass on
the individual is probably as great as in the small folk society; but it is indirect,
remote, "mechanical," because             it   is   impersonal, extensive instead of intensive,
and directed toward time co-ordination rather than toward association based on
spatial contiguity.
        With this diluting and spreading of the fervid intensities of attachment, it is
inevitable that religiosity, piety, regard for the sacred things, should tend to
evaporate with civilization. Shrines become                 show places rather than spots of
worship. Criticism and rationalism grow. As beliefs fade that have rested largely
on the social dictation of a homogeneous small group, empirical and actual
knowledge comes to seem more desirable, and accumulates. Faith in the super-
natural and the magical gives way to faith in science. The culture and the life
are secularized. Here again dilution of the affective social group into imperson-
ality      goes hand in hand with rationalization, secularization, and urbanization:
each tends to produce the others and to be further produced by them.
        It is   evident that our present-day Western civilization            is   near one polar
end   —the most urbanized,         lay,   depersonalized, sophisticatedly civilized end     —of
an axis that can be traced through all societies and cultures. Basically this classi-
fication or ranging on a scale is perhaps social in character, concerned with size

and integration of the group. It is however expressed also in culture, and ap-
parently more emphatically so; namely, as secularization, ceaselessness of the
swings of fashion, and cultural instability. Even the rural-urban and tribal-state
distinctions deal with forms that are cultural as well as social. And finally, there
is   a psychological expression of the polarity, manifest in affectiveness, deperson-
alization of relations, and the like.
        Of course, intergradations occur all along the axis. China, for instance, and
India are markedly         less   sophisticate-urban-depersonalized than Western coun
tries, but      much more so than most tribal nationalities.
92                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                           § 121


      An intermediate place is occupied also by peasantry. Peasants are definitely
rural   —yet   live in relation to market towns; they form a class segment of a larger

population which usually contains also urban centers, sometimes metropolitan
capitals.   They constitute part-societies with part-cultures. They lack the isola-
tion, the political   autonomy, and the self-sufficiency of tribal populations; but
their local units retain much of their old identity, integration,      and attachment
to soil and cults. Peasantries persisted in probably every European country along-
side growing urbanization and industrialization all through the nineteenth cen-
tury, and they had been modified but were by no means extinct when the crash
of World War II overwhelmed the Continent. In Russia, four-fifths of the popu-
lation in 191 7 consisted of ex-serf peasants.      New countries rapidly settled by
large-scale immigration,        such as the United States and Australia, leave small
room for peasant conditions or attitudes. There is too little rooting in the soil,
too little stabiUty or knitting together by kinship, for local particularity as ex-
pressed in folk custom or peasant art to develop. However, a close approxima-
tion to a true peasantry did develop in those Latin            American countries like
Mexico, Guatemala, Peru, and Bolivia where the Spanish conquest froze the
bulk of the native population resident on the land into a depressed class living
under its own partial or folk culture. In later prehistory, after food production
had become established, a number of societies exhibit rather conspicuous peas-
antUke qualities: the Neolithic Europeans, for instance, including the Swiss
lake dwellers (§ 283)     ;   also the Indian, Greek,   and other early Indo-Europeans
(§ 305). These are all peoples      who had become settled but, either from newness
or   from remoteness, had made little progress toward urbanization. The Near
East may have gone through a similar phase on which we are less well informed
because it happened two to three thousand years earlier. And there were some
interesting national differences in this regard; as         between Mesopotamia and
Egypt, for instance. In these two lands amorphous folk cultures grew simultane-
ously into early civilizations, with writing, towns, political organization, metallic
industry. But during the last millennium before Christ,          Mesopotamia had be-
come sophisticatedly civilized, with a conquered empire, great cities of metro-
politan character like Babylon, and prosecution of true science; whereas Egypt
had stood nearly still for a thousand years. This difference was perhaps pardy
due to the fact that the population of Egypt consisted overwhelmingly of a rural
peasantry, capped by little else than a governing bureaucracy.
    The question fairly arises whether the trend from the rural to the urban,
from folk to sophisticate culture, involves the gradual extinction of religion and
moraUty, as might seem inferable from the strength that the mores and beliefs
in the sacra retain in localized folk cultures, but tend to lose in civilization. In
short, can we project this tendency, so apparent at the present day, and perhaps
most strongly so in Western civilization, forward into the future to a vanishing
point? In hne with such a trend is the fact that as time has gone on, states or
empires have been growing larger; and that "universal" states and churches
S   121       RURAL AND URBAN      — FOLK AND SOPHISTICATE FACETS                  93
universal in the Toynbee sense of aiming at totality   —are regular and expectable
phases in the growth of major civilizations.
      However, any prophecy      resting   on the extrapolation   or projection of a
trend assumes that the trend is constant. There is no proof that such constancy
holds throughout for the change from folk culture to sophisticate civilization.
We know of pieces of history that show the change; our own American con-
temporary history is impressively so oriented; and over the total range of human
culture the net drift is perhaps to the same effect. But the trend is not universal
and is not irreversible. For instance, following Alexander the Great's conquest
and the fusion of mature Greek and mature western-Asiatic civilizations, there
first occurred a conspicuous development of many of the symptoms that char-

acterize   modern life: withering of the closer social ties, along with decay of
beliefs and piety, democratization, growth of population, cities and larger states,

industrialization,   marked accumulation of knowledge, general         sophistication.
This culture period is known as Hellenistic; in the early  Roman Empire its
character was both accentuated and spread to the western Mediterranean. How-
ever, from the beginning of the breakdown of the Roman Empire in the third
century, the drift    was reversed in most respects. The international state fell
apart; the fragments      had Uttle intercommunication; loyalties became ethnic,
often tribal; outlooks were parochial, at best provincial, instead of metropolitan.
Cities shrank tremendously; the self-sufficient economic unit now was the rural
villa. Knowledge and education decreased; religious convictions under Chris-

tianity were far firmer and more influential than they had been in late paganism.

The outcome was the western-European "Dark Ages" of rural custom, igno-
rance, piety, and folkway dominance, from which our own civilization made
its first step of gradual emergence when it attained to mediaevalism. In the East,

Constantinople and in a measure Alexandria indeed remained great cities of
wealth and sophistication for some centuries longer. But they finally fell before
the expansion of Islamic society, whose culture must in some ways be regarded
as recessive also; it certainly aimed at simplification.
      There have presumably been other reversals in history. The overturn from
the Indus Valley civilization to that of the Vedic Aryans certainly signified the
partial triumph of rural folkway living (§ 105). And even primitives vary con-
siderably in the strength of their piety and animistic beliefs (§250). It may
therefore be fairly concluded that movement along the rural-urban, folk-sophisti-
cate axis is not necessarily one-way or predestined.
      It is of interest in this connection that Soviet doctrine aims at bringing about

a condition closely resembling one of the polar extremes we are discussing. The
program includes a single world state with only one class of citizens, speaking
a single language; what remains of other idioms and of regional customs will
be harmless nostalgic remembrances of the order of folk songs and dances
(§ 182). Life will be fully industrialized, according to the Soviet program; it
will be lived urbanly even on the farm. Knowledge and enlightenment will be
94                                  THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                           § 121


universal; religion will be defunct, rationalism in full control, the individual a
willing, depersonalized cog serving the ends of the universal community. It is
really rather curious         how closely the goal of Communism approximates an
anticipatory projection or sensing from the drift of the last two or three cen-
turies: it is like a Lindberghian "wave of the future."

   Finally, the folk-sophisticate polarity, especially when it is viewed not so
much as a scale but as a one-way drift, definitely overlaps with the emotionally
tinged idea of "progress" that is discussed farther on in this chapter, in § 127-128.



                122.     INTEGRATION              INHERENT OR INDUCED
      The double proposition can hardly be overaffirmed that most of what is in
any one culture was produced outside of                  it,   but that the highly composite
product nevertheless is regularly felt as something coherent and integrated, and
normally is accepted as "right." It is so accepted because the average individual
is   so thoroughly   under the influence of his culture, has been so molded by it
in growing up and adjusting to it, that even its incoherences and contradictions
tend to be taken for granted as if they were logically sound and a-priori evi-
dent. It must be     remembered also that any "average" individual knows little
or nothing through convincing personal experience of other cultures, so that
his   own must appear to him as being natural and inevitable. He accepts his
culture, his social inheritance, as            he accepts the surrounding atmosphere he
breathes, or as a fish accepts water. What is fifty years old in this culture  and
what is three thousand years old touch him alike and affect him aUke. So do
elements that the culture originated, and elements which were introduced into
it. Thus it is no wonder that his immediate reaction to it is as to a homogeneous

unit. It is only dissective analysis and knowledge of history that reveal the com-
positeness of any culture.
      As regards the historical origin of its contents, accordingly, every civilization
is   what Lowie has called it        :   a "thing of shreds and patches," a "planless hodge-
podge"; but it does not ordinarily seem so to the people living under it, nor
does it function as such. Every culture is an accretion to a far greater degree than
any living organism. It is the end product of a long series of events occurring
mostly in other cultures, accidents from its own point of view, but ultimately
of influence upon it. Plan or pattern there always is             —and in some ways pat-          its

tern is the most imponant thing about any culture                —see the whole next chapter
nevertheless, as regards origin, plan or pattern is secondary. The plan modifies
the cultural material that flows in, sometimes rejects               it,   fits   it   all,   native    and
foreign, into something that is not too discordant, something that the majority
of the society can get along under tolerably and some of them successfully and
pleasantly. It is patternings that produce the internal consistency.                     But it is im-
portant to recognize that cultures do not start with a pattern or predetermined
plan and then     fill   it   in.   That is what inveterate reformers and dreamers of
§   122                INTEGRATION   —INHERENT OR INDUCED                          95
Utopias do. Actual      societies tend   to evolve the   plan of their cultures as the
content of these grows. And the plan changes as introduced content changes,
although traits of internal origin   — innovations—are likely to develop in accord
with the way the pattern-plan stands at the moment.
       In short, cultures are constantly and automatically acquiring or reacquiring
a sort of integration.    But this is a very different thing from the organic inte-
gration that holds together, say, a grasshopper or a rabbit. This organic in-
tegration involves a pattern of finished animal that is essentially predetermined
when two germ cells unite to start a new individual. Cultural integration or     —
for that matter human social integration— is invariably of a much looser sort.
It is an   accommodation of discrete parts, largely inflowing parts, into a more or
lessworkable fit. It is not a growth of parts unfolding from a germ in accord
with a pre-existing harmonious master plan. Such an unfolding has often been
assumed, insinuated, or asserted by writers as diverse as Frazer, Spengler, and
Malinowski. But it remains wholly undemonstrated, and history shows it to be
at least partly untrue.

       The point sometimes made, as by Radcliffe-Brown, that every society is
confronted by the constant problem of how it is to preserve or maintain itself,
seems a false analogy with the organic world, where the struggle for existence
mostly is indeed keen. But when one society incorporates another, it does not
ordinarily destroy it, except perhaps as a conceptually separate entity. Its mem-
bers go on living under somewhat altered conditions; the frame of the society
has been enlarged; whereas if a society splits, there merely are two instead of
one. Culture    we have seen to be even more plastic than societies in merging,
partly merging, or dividing.
       Moreover, while animals make every effort to maintain themselves, they
are evidently not aware of a constant need of self-preservation; nor indeed are
men, who are the most conscious of organisms. Food is necessary to life, and
animals get hungry and set about satisfying their hunger, with pleasure if suc-
cessful; but they do not feel it as an unremitting problem of self-preservation.
That is rather the intellectual attitude of philosophers, or emotionally of neu-
rotics. When it comes to societies and cultures, the problem of preservation seems

even more philosophical and remote. The normal attitude of the normal man
probably is that his society and culture were, are, and will be. If anything, he is
likely to assume more perpetuity for them than they possess. And not without
reason. Most cultures do continue for quite a while. Sooner or later they may be
superseded, or altered out of recognition; but ordinarily there is no immediate
prospect whatever of that.
       In fact, what has impressed most observers is the power of persistence of
cultures.   They always change, but they change slowly        —too gradually to suit
the reformer. Every nation or tribe has its conservative party, whether it is so
labeled or not. There is nothing mystical in this faculty of cultures to maintain
themselves and to resist overrapid alteration. Any culture, even the lowly one
96                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                            § 122


of a small society, is a pretty big thing, a complex of thousands of items and
activities, each interconnected   with many others. It just is a large mass to dent,
or roll along, or do away with. And this holds even more for the great civiliza-
tions of great nations. There is so much to them that it is almost a wonder that
they alter as much as they do. Even pieces of them are enormous. Take the
government of the State of Pennsylvania, or the Presbyterian Church, or the
educational system of Switzerland, or the commerce of England, and think of
all   they comprise, plus all that they touch or interlock with in addition.   How
can they be destroyed quickly, except by rare world catastrophes or revolutions.?
Big things at rest have great inertia, and if in motion they have great momen-
tum. Such seems the way to look at the enormous superindividual aggregations
that we call our greater civilizations. They change; they are always changing;
but at any given moment the expectation is that they will go on, mainly as they
are,   though never wholly so. To fail to realize this is to disregard the total
trend of history.



                       123.   MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL
       Through being born into a society, every individual is also born into a
culture. This culture molds him, and he participates in it.
       The degree to which every individual is molded by his culture is enor-
mous. We do not ordinarily recognize the full strength of this shaping process,
because it happens to everyone, it happens gradually, it is satisfying at least as
often as it is painful, and usually there is no obvious alternative open anyway.
Hence the molding is taken for granted and is accepted, Uke the culture itself
perhaps not quite unconsciously, but uncritically. The formal or deliberate part
of the process we call educationeducation through schools, in religion, and in
                                   :



manners and morals primarily at home. These agencies convey the mores and
some of the folkways (§116). But perhaps a larger fraction of the cultural tradi-
tion is acquired by each individual at his own initiative.    He is left to "pick it
up," to grow into it. In this class are his speech, bodily postures and gestures,
mental and social attitudes, which he imitates from his elders or from near-age
mates, and a thousand and one activities, such as putting on shoes, splitting fire-
wood, or driving a car, which a child "learns," often without any formal in-
struction, because he has seen others do these things and wants to do them too.
     How much of all that a person knows how to do, and does do, comes to him
from outside, from the cultural environment that surrounds him, and how much
from within, from his independent personality ? The former is surely much the
larger mass. That he speaks, say, English and not Chinese is the result of "where
he is born" or raised; that is, of which language forms part of the culture in
which he grows up. Similarly with his being a Christian instead of a Buddhist,
casting his vote in    November, observing Sunday, celebrating New Year on
January i instead of in February, eating with a fork and not with chopsticks,
5    123                    MOLDING THE INDIVIDUAL                                    97
and bread and butter in place of rice, tucking his shirt in and not out (in Kip-
ling's day at least), saying hello to his parents instead of using honorifics, steer-

ing a tractor and not a lightly shod wooden plow, writing with letters instead
of a thousand logograms, and so on endlessly. In fact, the mass of what any
person receives from his culture is so great as to make it look at first glance as
if   he were nothing but an individual exemplar of his culture, a reduction of it
abbreviated to the scope of what one personality can contain. All there remains
of him that is not induced by his culture consists of two sets of things. First are
his innate general  human capacities, and second, his individual peculiarities.
       The capacities— already discussed in §30-35, 87-89, 103-105, and again in
241   —merely ensure, just because they are generic, that our normal person has
the faculty of learning to speak, to read, to operate tools, to practice a religion of
some kind or other. What the kind of speech, tools, religion is depends abso-
lutely on the culture, not on him. In other words, his birth as a normal man
gives him certain potentialities, but his birth in a culture determines how these
potentiaUties will be expressed and reaUzed.
       Individual peculiarities comprise such   traits as   speaking with a   lisp   or a
drawl, having a bass or a tenor voice, worshiping piously or perfunctorily, being
naturally tidy or hasty or bright or the opposite. These are individual variations
from the average intelligence, energy, or temperament. They range all the way
from genius to imbecility, from superexcitability to ultrasluggishness; but of
course the great majority of individuals depart only slightly from the mean in
any one trait. These "individualisms" or idiosyncrasies do have a physiological
and hereditary basis, in the main. Yet in part their qualities too can be culturally
induced, as when a drawl is a Southerner's or a cowboy's, or the tidiness and
phlegm are those of Hollanders. In such instances it is the occasional Southerner
who doesn't drawl, or drawls infernally, the Dutchman who is precipitate and
disorderly, who represents the individual variation from the norm that is char-
acteristic of the culture or the subculture of his society.

       This brings us to a second class of features in which individuals differ:
roughly, those areas which are alternatives within one's culture. Shall         I    be a
farmer or a storekeeper or a dentist, go in for tennis or baseball or golf, join the
Army or the Navy, be a Methodist or a Presbyterian or a Quaker.'' Here the
culture leaves several choices      more or less open to the individual members,
though it is well to remember that each culture has a different array of choices.
In unwesternized China, for instance, there would be no choice of dentistry or
baseball or Navy, and the religious denominations available would be altered to
Confucian, Buddhist, and Taoist. Even among ourselves, not all choices would
be open to everyone everywhere: golf might be only a theoretical possibility to
a farm laborer or a sheepshearer      on the Great Plains. In fact in rigidly segre-
gated India only a few of     all   occupations, worships, amusements, and foods
known to Hindu civilization would be open to the members of any one caste.
98                         THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              § 123


     In summary, heredity gives us at birth certain generic human faculties.
How we shall use these, and therefore how we shall mainly live, the culture in
which we are launched thereupon decides. But it leaves us, theoretically at least,
certain choices between alternatives in its total scheme; and it leaves us also a
degree of freedom of departure from its norms in personal mannerisms, innova-
tions, and successes.
     This enormous influence of culture in molding the individual has a bearing
on psychology. This science is set up to study particular individuals in order to
reach understanding of human beings in general; that is, of what might be
called the abstracted human person. But since all individuals as they actually
occur in life are patterned by culture, and their behavior is full of culture, the
task of psychology is made difficult. This was not clear at first. But then psy-
chologists began to realize how great was the effect on individuals of their
happening to be exposed to different influences, as these exist within our civi-
lization; how the children of articulate parents generally come to be above-
average in verbal facility; how the children of unhappy or broken marriages
are more likely than the average to be emotionally unstable in their adjustments
to other persons; and so on. So "conditioning" came to be one of the slogans
of modern psychology where innateness of behavior had been assumed before.
Then, as psychologists gradually came to be culture-conscious also, the variety
of cultures was seen to increase enormously the range of the conditioning people
are subject to. The abstract man, or what the psychologist felt he could properly
say about him, shrank in proportion. This is why there is such great difficulty,
as we have seen (§ 86-90), in deciding how alike or different the heredity equip-
ment of races or descent groups is. It is not that psychological tests are unsound.
The tests are valid enough, within Umits, within the culture for which they
were constructed. They show at any rate how much culture an individual has
absorbed in comparison with other individuals. They are less good at showing,
per se, whether greater absorption is due to greater exposure or to greater inborn
capacity. And the tests break down, or become dubious, when they are applied
interculturally. Hence it is that we do not yet know how different the races are
in their endowment, while we do know that cultures differ enormously in con-
tent and orientation. And of course individuals differ both in their heredity and
in what their conditioning has made them.



                             124. PARTICIPATION

     Besides differing in heredity and conditioning, individuals also differ in
degree of participation in their culture.   How large a share does a given person
hold in the stock company of his society, and what dividends of satisfaction
does it pay him? It is evident that the complex culture carried by a large so-
ciety is just too big for one individual to take an active part in, in all its many
departments. It is only the exceptionally gifted or favored member of a large
§   124                               PARTICIPATION                              99
society who can hope to operate successfully in a number of its more important
activities.   The run-of-the-mill man is likely to be equipped to follow only one
or two occupations out of hundreds or thousands of existing ones, and to have
a run-of-the-mill income, wife, home, a run-of-the-mill seat in the church or at
the game, run-of-the-mill tastes, thoughts, and habits. With a little bad luck, he
may even come out below-average in all or most of these things. In a culture full
of books he may not read a newspaper; in a land of wealth he may be ragged
and half-famished.
     This is the counterpart, the seamy side, of what has already been discussed
in § ii8: that large societies make for division of labor and specialization of
function, therefore for professional training, advances in the arts, and inventions
or at least improvements in the ways of living. But as the total culture is thereby
varied and enriched, it also becomes more difficult for each member of the
society really to participate in most of its activities. He begins to be an onlooker
at most of it, then a bystander, and may end up with indifference to the welfare

of his society and the values of his culture. He falls back upon the immediate         >




problems of his livelihood and the narrowing range of enjoyments still open to
him, because he senses that his society and his culture have become indifferent
to him. If the society and the culture retain a degree of integration, the lower
classes may participate vicariously: in imagination, by symbols or through

pageantry. The British lower classes participate thus in the life of the aristoc-
racy, which is so much richer than theirs, and        even more in the doings of the
royal court.    No doubt Egyptian peasant-serfs of five thousand years ago got
some similar satisfactions out of what went on in the god-king's entourage at
Memphis, or even when they contemplated his pyramid tomb over which they
sweated for years in a labor draft. In fact, one of the uses or values of kings and
costly courts is precisely to serve as   symbols increasing the integration of large
        But vicarious participation at best is partial, and it may be lacking.
societies.

Wherever there exists a true urban proletariat, or where the mass of country
pdople are outright serfs, a large part of the population is participating very in-
completely in their culture and being denied many of its satisfactions. This in
turn means that those who are most largely supporting the culture economically
are getting the least of    its   rewards; and, reciprocally, that the values of the
culture are being continued in their development by only a fraction of the
society.
      Most revolutions, successful and unsuccessful, seem to be preceded by such
a condition of imperfect participation.   Only we must remember that there is
no absolute scale of measurement. A sufficient discrepancy in one country be-
tween actual participation and what is considered possible participation will
bring on efforts at remedy; whereas elsewhere there may be even less partici-
pation by most of the society in most of the culture, but the ideal of participation
being also low, the condition is endured fatalistically. Thus the French Revolu-
tion was precipitated not because the oppression and the nonparticipation of the
100                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                    §   124

lower classes were extreme       :   as a matter of fact, their situation
                                                               was better than
in some other European countries which did not revolt, and on the whole it had
probably improved in the generation before 1789. But just because France was
the home of enlightenment and considered itself the most highly civiUzed
country in the world, the gap between top and bottom was felt keenly and en-
gendered the revolution.
        The Russian muzhik had probably achieved even less participation by the
early twentieth century. Nor is it probable that Russia left to itself would have
achieved a deep-going social revolution at one stroke. But conscious Western-
ization, initiated      by Peter the Great two centuries before,       finally      brought in
its   train also the Marxian ideology, which was organized to operate by revolu-
tion on the gap of nonparticipation, and had as its ultimate aim the abolition of
the gap. Marxism completely missed its own prediction of first succeeding in
the most highly industrialized countries of Europe. It did succeed in a marginal
area of low industrialization, because the standard of living and cultural partici-
pation of the population in Russia had remained unduly low for twentieth-
                               —
century-conscious Europe and for twentieth-century-Europe-conscious Russian
intellectuals.

        The contrast of all this of course is with primitive cultures. Here societal
units are small; skills, differentiations,      and privileges are limited; and partici-
pations are reasonably equal. No one is evicted for nonpayment of rent, or left
on the sidewalk to watch the prosperous stream into the opera. The simpler
cultures have simpler and smaller problems to meet. Much of the eighteenth-
century admiration of the romantic and unspoiled savage, and our own occa-
sional hankerings after South Sea island idylls, stem from a vague sense of this
fact.   To be sure, it is well to remember that if the Ifugao and the Yurok and
other nonliterate people did not evict, they did enforce debt slavery; and that
others practiced       war enslavement, human sacrifice, and cannibalism. Yet the
total range of activities remained    small enough so that even a slave might par-
ticipate in more of the culture than a serf elsewhere, or than a free outcaste in

India. Larger and richer cultures just do have bigger and harder social problems
to solve.



           125.   CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS: VALUES
        It is worth   while to examine briefly certain overlapping distinctions among
several aspects of culture.      They are: content and form of culture; eidos and
ethos; and material and nonmaterial culture.
        The content of a culture is the sum of the items of which it is composed:
things present in it— whether present or lacking in other cultures. For instance,
kingship, hereditary titles of nobility, a state church, stringent libel and divorce
laws, driving left on the road, spelling labor and honor with a u, are several big
or little items contained in British civilization but not in          its   close   American
§   125            CONTENT AND FORM; ETHOS AND EIDOS: VALUES                       lOI

counterpart.    However, British and American culture share as content steam
engines and railways, alphabetic writing, representative parliamentary govern-
ment, dairy foods, and many other items that until recently were wholly lack-
ing in, say, China. It is content like these items which tends to increase and
accumulate in the aggregate cultures of mankind, and to a certain extent even
in one culture, and thus to give the impression of progress taking place (§ 127)
though the process may actually be one largely of quantitative enlargement.
    Cultural form is harder to describe or illustrate. We might approximate it
by saying it is what is left over when we subtract cultural content from culture.
What is this remnant? It may be a rearrangement, a transfer of an item or a
group of items to other departments of the culture, to another of its jurisdic-
tions.    Thus education can be in clerical or in lay hands; schools may be paro-
chial or public, as we say in America, parish or board in Britain. The education
given may be very similar. In its elementary stages it is bound to be practically
identical -.Cat will spell cat and      3X3 = 9 whether the school and the teacher
be democratic, religious, communist, or fascist. Yet we all know that the tenor
or purport and the outcome of the schooling will be different      —different enough
to fight for, often. This is not wholly an affair of totalitarian propaganda aiming

to thrive by liquidating everything else. Such extreme        propaganda began to be
developed chiefly some years after World War I. Yet even before then it ob-
viously mattered who controlled the schools. Besides content, such as reading
and arithmetic, education inevitably imparts an ideology, a system of beliefs and
sentiments and values, which if accepted is all-important for its influence on
conduct. An ideology or a system might also be called a pattern or configura-
tion; that is, a way of arranging things.
     Theoretically, one might conceive of two cultures whose itemized content
was identical, and which yet differed in the form or arrangement or system or
pattern of this content. Actually, form and content are far too interwoven for
just such a situation to arise; but the hypothetical example will help point out
what is meant by cultural form. A system or configuration is always, in its
nature, more than the mere sum of its parts; there is also the relation of the
parts, their total interconnections, which add up to something additionally sig-
nificant.   This   is   well recognized in "Gestalt" or configurational psychology.
The "form" of culture may therefore be regarded as the pattern of interrelations
of the contents that constitute it.
      Somewhat related to the foregoing are a contrasting pair of aspects that have
been called the ethos and the eidos of culture. Greek eidos, from which we have
"idol" as a derivative, denotes form or appearance or likeness. The eidos of a
culture would therefore be its appearance, its phenomena, all that about it which
can be described explicitly. This would primarily coincide with cultural content
as just discussed. The Greek word ethos, from which we have "ethics," denotes
first of all disposition.   With reference to a people, it means their ways or customs,
corresponding nearly to the Latin mores. Like that term, it carries an implica-
102                             THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             §   125

tion of  what is sanctioned and expected. Hence the connotation of right or
rightness, on which we have centered in our derivative Christian use of the
words "ethical" and "moral" in their everyday sense. However, when we speak
of the ethos of a culture, we revert at least part-way to the original Greek
meaning, and refer not so much to the specific ethics or moral code of the
culture as to its total quality, to what would constitute disposition or character
in an individual; to the system of ideals and values that dominate the culture
and so tend to control the type of behavior of its members.
     Thus, we might say that the ethos of Italian Renaissance culture was
sensuous and passionate, but that of the northern-European Reformation, puri-
tan and ascetic. Hindu civilization is not only otherworldly but mystical, ration-
alizing, and extravagant in its ethos; Chinese, this- worldly, prosily moralistic,
and matter-of-fact. The Japanese ethos differs from the Chinese in putting more
emphasis on action, precision of form, and neatness.
     It will be evident from these examples that ethos deals with qualities that

                               —               —
pervade the whole culture like a flavor as contrasted with the aggregate of
separable constituents that make up its formal appearance and are the eidos. The
ethos includes the direction in which a culture is oriented, the things it aims at,
prizes and endorses, and more or less achieves. We are here getting into meta-
phors that personify culture as if it had a will and a purpose of its own. That
is   a fault of the language of our day. Scientific thinking has penetrated so re-
cently into these fields that it has failed as yet to work out its own more exact
expressions.   When we say that a culture aims at, prizes, and achieves certain
ends, that is a shorthand way of saying that most of the members of a society,
through having been molded by its culture, aim at, prize, and help achieve those
ends. The ends or things referred to, the qualities that differentiate one culture
from another, are undoubtedly distinctive, are genuine attributes of phenomena
of history and nature. The difference between Western, Indian, and Far Eastern
civilizations obviously consists of more than a diversity of content as exemplified

by items of the order of eating with forks, fingers, and chopsticks respectively.
Beyond these concrete facts, there is a pervading difference of character and
outlook in the three cultures. That is what is meant by ethos.
      It is evident   that the ethos of a culture is pretty close to what a philosopher
or a historian might call its system of values. This somewhat technical term de-
notes something that physical and biological scientists are agreed they cannot
properly deal with by their methods, and therefore ought, as scientists, to leave
alone   —though most of them admit that there are such things as values, moral
or otherwise, and personally try to live up to them. Whatever "values" are, it is
clear that they have some relation to culture. Cultures differ in their values; each

one shapes, or at least colors, its own. Values in this technical or philosophical
sense might be informally defined as those things        —cultural products, standards,
or ideas  —which men living        in societies prize   and hold as having a high im-
§   126                   MATERIAL AND NONMATERIAL CULTURE                                        IO3

portance, for them, for their group and descendants, and in themselves, over and
beyond      their practical   utility.   Christianity   is   one of the great values of our
society and culture; so are the works of Shakespeare, and our democratic institu-
tions     and liberty   —even the Liberty     Bell, as a visible    and tangible symbol. In
China, Confucius would represent a similar value.                 No one would deny that
these values influence        human conduct and constitute real phenomena and ef-
fective forces in the world of history, and therefore of nature. This                is   true even
though these same values have not been measured, and are regarded by the
physicist and biologist as beyond the scope of their sciences. For the present, let
us carry in mind that values exist and that they are tied up with culture.                We shall
be coming back to them again.


                 126.     MATERIAL AND NONMATERIAL CULTURE
      A distinction often made between material and nonmaterial culture                     is   men-
tioned here only as probably having no first-rank significance. The literal dif-
ference is of course obvious: physical objects as against institutions and ideas."
But do they stand for something basically different ? Do they function with sig-
nificant difference in culture? The answer seems No. What counts is not the
physical ax or coat or wheat but the idea of them, the knowledge how to produce
and use them, their place in life. It is this knowledge, concept, and function that
get themselves handed down through the generations, or diffused into other
cultures, while the objects themselves are quickly worn out or                 consumed. It is
the ax itself that is effective in chopping, the idea of the ax that is effective in
getting axes made and available for use. In fact we can almost conceive of the ax
as an institution, as      we can certainly speak of lumbering and wearing clothes
and grain farming in a sense entirely parallel to the institutions of marriage or
churchgoing.
      The attempt to segregate material from nonmaterial traits of culture perhaps
derives from a white-collar distinction unfortunately long made in Germany be-
tween Naturwissenschaften and Geisteswissenschaf ten                 :   sciences   deaUng with
nature and sciences dealing with the human spirit. The latter corresponded to
what we call the humanities and the social sciences. But there is nothing gained
by implying that since humanistic and social studies have to do with the "spirit"
or "mind," whereas natural science deals with tangible objects, the latter is there-
fore of a different and lower order. Such a point of view smacks of old-fashioned
theology with its contrasting of body and soul. Genuine science is characterized
first of all b)- •*:s method, only secondarily by subject matter, except that this must

be in nature and must consist of phenomena. My having learned how to write

      ^ Material culture and content of culture partly overlap,    but are conceptually different.
Objects of material culture are part of culture content; but a lot of culture content is nor
material; monogamy, for instance, or mother-in-law avoidance, or belief in ghosts.
104                               THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                     § 1 26


or being a Christian are phenomena; and equally so are the alphabet and Chris-
tianity    and ax-using; and so are axes and clothes and chairs; and they are all
parts of culture. Accordingly we may forget about this distinction between ma-
terial and nonmaterial culture, except as a literal difference that it is               sometimes
of practical convenience to observe.



                               127.   THE IDEA OF PROGRESS
        One of the most widely held preconceptions is that culture is progressive.
"The progress of civilization" is a familiar phrase        —almost a        trite one. Simple or

primitive peoples are labeled "unprogressive." The implied picture is of a con-
tinuous moving forward and onward. Popularly, evolution                      is   almost synony-
mous with progress; and progress means advance to something better.
    Actually, the idea of progress is itself a culture phenomenon of some interest.
Strange as it may seem to us, most of humanity during most of its history was
not imbued at all with the idea. An essentially static world, a nearly static man-
kind, were most likely to be taken for granted. If there was any notion of altera-
tion, a deterioration  from the golden age of the beginnings was as frequently
believed in as an advance. A definite system of belief in progress began to acquire
strength only in eighteenth-century Europe. Reinforced by the French Revolu-
tion, it became a sort of article of liberal faith in the nineteenth century. It

entered into the philosophy of Comte and Spencer. The latter saw evolution as
a manifestation of progress. Darwin, who propounded a mechanism by which
                                            —
organic change might be explained a mechanism about which the man in the
street is mostly still a bit hazy       —
                                    was popularly acclaimed as having "proved
evolution"    —that   is,   progress. The Unitarian profession of faith is interesting in
this connection: "I believe in the        Fatherhood of God, the brotherhood of Man,
the leadership of Jesus, salvation by character, the progress of mankind, onward
and upward forever." There is a certain nobiUty about this sentiment of liberal-
ism; but it is as indubitably a sentiment and a dogma, and not a scientific con-
clusion, as are the Apostles' Creed and the Thirty-nine Articles. Progress has
largely taken the place of Jesus in this most denatured               branch of Christianity.
But the concept of progress is far from being limited to that. If a poll were
taken, devout Methodists           and other Trinitarians would undoubtedly favor
progress overwhelmingly and believe             it   to be enjoined    by   religion.    So wide-
spread is the modern attachment to the idea that even many strict fundamental-
ists   would be shocked if told not to believe in "progress," in spite of some re-
maining inclination to balk at "evolution" as non-Biblical.
        These instances are mentioned to show, first, that the concept of the progress
of     humanity is a special characteristic of contemporary Western civiUzation;
next, that within this civilization it generally has the force of an a-priori assump-
tion;    and finally that, like most a priori's, it is adhered to with considerable
§   127                         THE IDEA OF PROGRESS                                    IO5

fervor of emotion. All this docs not disprove progress; but           it   docs   show that
progress is something to be analyzed rather than taken for granted.
       Now in a grand, over-all sort of way, there has undoubtedly been progress
in human culture in the last quarter-million years.  We are undeniably "higher"
or "more advanced" culturally than the Acheulians, in much the same way that
a mammal is higher than an Ordovician sponge or brachiopod. The real ques-
tions in this connection are: In what does progress consist.'' and,        L p'-ogress con-
tinuous and inevitable.?
       Let us consider these interrelated questions.
       We have seen that, broadly speaking, the process of cultural development             is

an additive and therefore accumulative one, whereas the process of organic evo-
lution is primarily a substitutive one. When men acquire flight, they add              it   to
their former faculties; when birds acquired it, they converted a pair of legs into
wings. One might thus fairly enough suspect that              new culture tended to be
incremental and not replacing; and that therefore the total stock of culture of
any society, and of humanity as a whole, would show a normal inclination to
grow. All in all, the verdict of history confirms such a judgment. There may
have been occasional periods of stress for this or that society in which its total
inventory of cultural items diminished. There           is   nothing to show that such
hard times and shrinkages ever extended simultaneously to all the societies on
earth. While one particular form of civilization is undergoing atrophy or decay,
neighboring ones are usually coming into vigor. What Egyptian culture lost
                                                    —
from 800 to I B.C.— if it did lose in total bulk was more than made up for by
the successive inventions and acquisitions of the contemporary Mesopotamian,
Persian, Greek, and Roman cultures. The Dark Ages of western Europe, around
A.D,   450 to 750, denote a period of breakup of an old pattern system before the
patterns of a new system had been developed very far, with a resulting loss of
political stabiUty, intellectual and aesthetic achievements,      urban refinement, and
wealth; and in consequence very few superior men were able to realize them-
selves as "geniuses."    But the historians most conversant with the era would
probably find it difficult to say how much the total stock of western-European
culture contracted during the Dark Ages, or to be wholly sure that it did con-
tract seriously.   Knowledge of Plato and Aristotle certainly was both less and
rarer, and roads were not kept in as good repair; but useful and important             new
things like horseshoes and water mills (§ 183)
                                          became commoner. In any event,
while Europe was perhaps receding, China was inventing printing and other-
wise advancing.
       Recessions in civilization, in short, either are local and likely to be com-
pensated for elsewhere; or they primarily affect patterns or organization and the
values of their products   —cultural   qualities.

       And it does seem clear that in an over-all sort of way the sum total of
culture of mankind has pretty continuously grown in bulk through history. As
I06                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                § 12?


.lew artifacts and faculties are developed, the old ones tend to sink to a rela-
tively more limited or humbler sphere, but rarely become entirely lost.         Candles
survive in the age of electricity, horses alongside motorcars, the bow beside fire-
arms (§ 159) bronze has its special uses and virtues in the age of iron, and iron
                ;



in that of steel. We use stone in more ways in modern civilization than Old
Stone Age men did, although it was of primary significance to them but is only
subsidiary to us.
      Quantitatively, then, civilization advances because it tends in its nature to
be accumulative; and to this extent the modern a priori of progress is justified.
But will the admission of a mere swelling of bulk satisfy those who wish to
beUeve in progress ? Mostly, progress is taken to mean advance in higher quali-
ties or toward more ideal values.

      And there of course we get on subjective terrain. Is the philosophy of Plato
or St. Thomas or Kant the highest and most valuable? Answers are obviously
going to be colored by nationality and religion. A good Hindu might put all
three of them lower than Sankara. Everyone will appreciate the values his own
civilization has developed. Egocentricity in the       form of ethnocentricity is in-
evitably injected into the problem,         and makes the objective attack difficult. It
is pleasant   to believe in progress   —which makes my times and my ways superior
to all others   —                                      my nationality, my
                    as it is pleasant to believe in the superiority of
religion,   my race, my language—my town or county even, my family, and
myself.
      Let us try, however, despite this emotional cloud, to discover something
scientific or objective to justify a degree of acceptance of the progress idea. There

are three approaches that seem to yield at least a partial standard of what con-
stitutes "higher" or more advanced culture, apart from mere quantity of it.

      The first is the criterion of magic and "superstition." In proportion as a
culture disengages    itself from reliance on these, it may be said to have regis-

tered an advance. In proportion as it admits magic in its operations, it remains
primitive or retarded. This seemingly dogmatic judgment is based on the ob-
servation that beliefs in magic, such as are normal in            backward societies, do
recur in cultures that by profession have discarded magic, but chiefly           among
individuals  whose social fortune is backward or who are psychotic, mentally
deteriorated, or otherwise subnormal. When the sane and well in one culture
believe what only the most ignorant, warped, and insane believe in another,
there would seem to be some warrant for rating the first culture lower and the
second higher. Or are our discards, insane, and hypersuggestibles perhaps right
and the rest of us wrong ?
      For instance, a Lassik Indian woman in California lost and buried her baby.
The next afternoon she heard a child crying overhead and fell over in a faint.
She was revived, but she kept hearing the crying of the baby, and got progres-
sively more ill. She engaged a shaman doctor to cure her, who finally said "It is :
§   127                          THE IDEA OF PROGRESS                                 IO7

your own child's shadow (soul) coming back to urge you to accept him as a
spirit helper aiding you to become a shaman yourself." This woman did not

happen to want such supernatural power, and so she began to argue with her
baby's shadow when its voice reappeared to urge her. She remained firm and
told him to leave her alone, until finally he desisted, and she became well again.
     To be a shaman is an honored and respected status among most of the
Californian tribes, and many individuals accept such spirit offers. In this event
they gradually learn to tolerate association with the spirit, therewith recover their
own health, and then profess and try to cure other people with the assistance of
their invisible helper. It is clear that in these societies there is complete social and
cultural acceptance of spirits and their ability to talk and aid; acceptance also of
the power of the shaman who is so aided, and of the place of the shaman in the
community. But in our culture a person who falls sick, hears voices, communi-
cates with shadows, and acquires special abilities from them is inevitably classed
as deranged.
       Thousands     of similar cases   might be      cited.   They provide a   consistent
criterion of distinction between primitive or folk cultures and advanced or high
cultures, apart from the respective quantity of content.   The backward cultures
in their magic,      shamanism, animistic ritual, recognize as objectively effective
certain phenomena that the advanced cultures regard as objectively unreal and as
subjectively psychotic or deranged. The limits of relation of personality and
world are differently drawn in the two series of cultures. What higher cultures
stigmatize as personal, nonreal and nonsocial, abnormal and pathological, lower
cultures treat as objective, conducive to ability, and socially useful.
       It   will be seen that the difference   is   in terms of socialization as well as
reality.    Backward peoples assume as actual certain phenomena to which we
grant only a mental or subjective existence that is not real in the sense in which
tangible human bodies or animals or stones are real. Or perhaps it is more ac-
curate to say that retarded peoples are also aware of a distinction but invert the
emphasis. To them a child or a hawk or a stone seen or heard in a certain kind
of dream or trance is much more important than a physical child or hawk or
stone that one can touch and handle, because it is the possible source of much
more power. Certain things we cbssify as unreal the primitive considers super-
real   —with the result that his world often seems "surrealistically" fantastic to     us.
From this follows the difference in socialization. To us a person who hears the
dead speak, or who thinks that he can turn into a bear or a wolf, is socially sub-
normal, socially useless, and likely to be a burden and an upset to the com-
munity. But among primitives he is a personality of special, enhanced, and pro-
ductive powers, which he may indeed abuse in witchcraft, but which ordinarily
are believed to help the community to better health, surer food supply, victory
over enemies, and similar benefits. So the primitive weighs and favors the
magical where we reject and try to exclude it. Our values rather than our per-
I08                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               § 1 27

ceptions differ from his. He recognizes, standardizes, rewards certain psychotic
or neurotic experiences      —socially channels them—which we regard as well out-
side our socially approved channels.
      It   is   important for a clear grasp of the foregoing view to realize that it
has no reference to the supernatural as such. Belief in             God is not a sign of
backwardness. All that is contended is that the bestowal of social rewards for
the inability to distinguish subjective experiences            from objective phenomena,
or for the deliberate inversion of the two,            is   a presumable   mark of lack of
progress.
      In so far, then, as the mentally unwell in modern advanced cultures tend to
correspond to the well and the influential in ancient and retarded cultures, at
least in certain       situations,   we can accept objective progress as having taken
place.

                              128.    MORE ABOUT PROGRESS
    There is a second group of traits that characterize backward as against ad-
vanced cultures. These have to do with the obtrusion of physiological or ana-
tomical considerations into social situations, or with the related matter of the
taking of human life. Some of these practices are: blood or animal sacrifice; seg-
regation of women at parturition and menstruation as being contaminating to
others; contamination by death or corpses, often with segregation of mourners
until purified; puberty crisis rites, especially for girls at the onset of physiological
puberty; preoccupation with the dead body, including mummification, skull
preservation and skull cult, wearing of skull or jaw by widows, disinterment
and reburial, eating of bits of the body or of cremation ashes; ritual prostitution
and inversion; human sacrifice; retainer burial; head-hunting; cannibalism.
These practices almost invariably contain an element of the magical or the
supernatural, and so far as they do they are allied to the class of traits we have
just reviewed as being apparently characteristic of cultural retardation.         But they
contain also a second element, toward which cultures that have once abandoned
such practices react with aversion, disgust, revulsion, or the shame of bad taste.
This other element has as             its   common denominator what strikes us as the
gratuitous obtrusion into public recognition and the social order of physiological
happenings, including blood and death and decay, which we tend to regard as
matters best kept private and unemphasized, and their public obtrusion as un-
pleasant and useless. Deformation of the head by pressure, filing or knocking-
out of the teeth, pattern scarifications, distention of lips and ear lobes and other
anatomical mutilations, can perhaps be included here because they also have to
do with the human body and tend to arouse shock or disgust in us; though
mostly they affect anatomy rather than physiology and sometimes have little
or no magical motivation. At any rate, they constitute a set of folkways allied to
the class we are considering. It is true that our fashions have developed strange
§    128                             MORE ABOUT PROGRESS                                           IO9

coiffures, cosmetics, corsets,        and such, but they lack the clement of permanent
bodily defacement, of mutilation.'
       All in      all,   retarded cultures seem infantile both in their unabashed pre-
occupation with bodily functions and in their disregard of other human lives as
compared with the gratifications of the ego. In this sense, advanced cultures may
be described as psychologically more adult. Hence their unwillingness to interest
themselves in personal physiology, but their concern about humaneness.                             The
latter     is   manifest also in trends like those of opposition to slavery, torture as a
judicial procedure, beatings as legal punishment, execution with torture, slaugh-
ter of prisoners of war.

       While, apart from deformatory practices, the primitive folkways enumerated
almost always have ritual approval or supernaturalistic association, it is equally
significant that the          advanced "universal" or world reUgions, Buddhism and
Mohammedanism         well as Christianity, have consistently and positively
                             as
thrown their weight on the prohumane and anti-infantile side. In other words,
what primitive religion approves or enjoins in this field, civilized religion for-
bids. This suggests that the role of religion is secondary in these matters              :   it   tends
to fortify such standards of decency, humanity, cleanliness, and propriety as each

culture has attained or only partly attained. It sanctions the mores more than it
causes them. The present class of criteria of progress, then, consisting of adult
attitudes toward physiological function, in which the magical and supernatural
elements appear to be only indirectly contributory, accordingly differs from the
class discussed in the last section, in which the animistic and surrealistic element

is   basic and essential.
    Of course, we are dealing here with exceedingly broad trends or drifts,
which cannot be uniform in particulars. Retarded cultures form an enormous
class, advanced ones another, and there is bound to be a deal of variation in each.

For instance, the Eskimo, as nonliterate, nonmetallurgical hunters, are always
reckoned as primitives. In fact it was long fashionable to begin the scale of civi-
lization with Australians, Bushmen, Negritos, and Eskimo at the lower end. Yet
the Eskimo do not possess in very emphatic form any custom of the class now
being discussed, and lack some of them altogether. Judged by this criterion
alone,     Eskimo culture would have to be rated as more advanced than some
high civilizations        —possibly that of much of India. In short, what we are deal-
ing with is not a handy yardstick, but a probability tendency that holds good on
the whole or in the long run.
       Among the North American Indians, the Western ones were particularly
      ^ Chinese     foot-binding seems to be the only case of serious mutilation practiced in a
great recent civilization. Ear-piercing and circumcision are after all anatomically negligible.
Foot-binding is rather a special phenomenon. It is consciously erotic with a tingeing of the
perverse to the point of making overt discussion of its motivation taboo; and      its       disabling
effect limited the practice to certain    economic classes.
no                                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                § 128


obsessed by notions of contamination through birth, menstruation, and death.
The Eastern tribes took these fears more lightly, but, here and there at least,
went in for retainer burial and human sacrifice, ossuaries and reburial, and
scalping as perhaps a partial equivalent of head-hunting.
       But the total trend of development in the area and the era of the great re-
ligions   is unmistakable. The way in which the blood sacrifice of the ancient

Mediterranean peoples, and of South and East Asiatic ones,                              is   perpetuated
among marginal primitives is discussed in § 165, 192, and 238. The hecatombs
and libations and feasts of Achilles and Agamemnon survive as sacrifices and
feasts of water buffalo, chickens, and palm wine among the pagan Igorot of

the Philippines and in West African Dahomey. In China, ritual bloodshed and
funerary deposit of valuables have long since been replaced by offerings of sym-
bolic paper figures. In Japan, more distant                    from the advanced center, retainer
burial went on until the early centuries of our era, when it was replaced, on
avowed grounds of humanity, by pottery imitations of the living retainers.
Leviticus, one of the later books of the Old Testament in date, is still full of
blood sacrifice. "Whatsoever man of Israel that killeth an ox or lamb or goat                        .    .   .



and bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle, to offer an offering unto the
Lord     .  blood shall be imputed to that man ... he shall be cut off from
             .   .




among his people.          And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of
                                  .   .   .




the Lord         and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the Lord." * These prac-
                     .   .   .




tices were still in full blast when Titus destroyed Jerusalem in a.d. 70. They did

not differ, save in deity worshiped and place and detail of manner, from the
sacrifices that Titus and his pagan Romans made. Graeco-Roman paganism

died out; Judaism lived; but, after the obliteration of the Temple in Jerusalem,
sacrifices quietly               dropped off from Jewish cult: they were becoming contrary
to the spirit                and attitudes of the times. Since more than a thousand years ago
the most orthodox Jews no more think of slaughtering animals on the altars of
their synagogues than do Christians in their churches.                      A tacit dropping of this
part of their law was no doubt a condition of their being able to survive at all
within the pale of civilization.
       The first great religion to break resolutely with all the ancient ritual obses-
sion on physiology was Buddhism." One of its cardinal injunctions is against the
killing of animals, even for food. This was part of its fundamental revolt against
its   parent, Vedic Brahmanism, in which sacrifice and bodily purification were
basic. Five hundred years later, Jesus seems never to have sacrificed on the altar

nor to have mentioned such sacrifice; and therewith it was tacitly, but decisively,

      ^Leviticus 17:3-6. For more on blood and burnt offerings, see Leviticus, Chaps.                    1-9;

for defilement and purification from childbirth see Chap. 12; menstruation, Chap. 15; death,
Chap. 21.
      ^ Jainism did so equally, is coeval,         and still living; but it became an Indian sect iostead
of a world religion.
§   128                            MORE ABOUT PROGRESS                                           III

eliminated from Christianity.*" Six centuries later          still,    Mohammedanism fol-
lowed suit completely. Even the minor religions and hybrid sects of the period,
such as Manichaeism, discarded the practice. The one exception was Mithraism,
which stressed not only the sacrifice of a bull but baptism in its gushing blood.
Mithraism, an offshoot of Persian Mazdaism, began earlier than Christianity,
which is perhaps why it retained the blood feature. Up to the third century after
Christ, it still competed with Christianity, but it weakened, lost out, was sup-
pressed in the fourth century, and died without trace or survival: it was literally
too raw for its times in the civilized parts of the world.
       Illustrations could be multiplied, but these examples may suffice.
       Finally, there is a third way in which the idea of progress in culture can be
justified     by objective evidence. This is in technology, mechanics, and science,
whose accomplishments have            definitely   more cumulative        quality than other
civilizational activities. It is true that high scientific productivity appears to come
in bursts or pulses as definitely as art (§ 136).        But there is the difference that
each art, or for that matter each philosophy or religion, very largely has to begin
all   over again, whereas each of the intermittent periods of discovery in science
can begin, and generally does begin,           just   about where the        last   one   left   off.

Science, and in the main technology, are evidently accumulative by nature, while
philosophy, religion, art     —and empire and nationalism too—tend strongly to be
substitutive    :   a new product replaces an old one. Consequently, once technologi-
cal or scientific      achievements have been made, they are likely to be retained,
even through long sterile intervals, until there is a new flashing-up of inventions.
A pulley or a water wheel, geometry and the laws of the lever, do not usually
get themselves wholly forgotten or abandoned, even in times of                       wrack and
misery. There may be lost mechanical arts or lost branches of science; but they
are certainly neither       numerous nor important, as will appear in a following
chapter (§ 156-160).
     Here then is a third manner of progress of civilization. But with it we are
back largely among aspects that are quantitative           —
                                                        Hke growth in population,
growT;h in size of states and nations, growth sometimes in the number and com-
plexity of their political subdivisions. Similar perhaps also is growth in stocks of
          —
wealth more gold, diamonds, farmed acres, houses in the world: part at least
of the old are physically preserved, and new ones added. But we have already
seen that there is serious doubt whether magnification as such, mere quantitative
swelling-up, can be legitimately construed as progress. Size is easy to boast about,
but does it bring with it wiser living or greater happiness ? Only so far as it does
can quantitative increase of culture be considered as making for progress.

      ^^ The   only mentions of sacrifice or offering in the New Testament, other than refer-
ences to Jewish and pagan sacrifice, are symbolic: as when St. Paul says that Jesus "appeared
to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself"   (Hebrews 9: 26)   ;   or the "blood of the Lamb"
in Revelation.
112                              THE NATURE OF CULTURE                                 §   "8
        In summary, the quantitative expansion of the content of total human cul-
ture; the atrophy of magic based on psychopathology; the decline of infantile
obsession with the outstanding physiological events of              human life; and the
persistent tendency of technology and science to grow accumulatively            —these are
the ways in which progress    may legitimately be considered a property or an
attribute of culture. They are the residuum supported by fact when the emo-
tional and aprioristic idea of a continuous and inherent progress of civilization
is   subjected to analysis. More will be found on this in the discussion of cultural
losses already cited.       And of course the folk-sophisticate polarity considered in
§ 121     partly overlaps with the idea of progress.



                                      129.   FUNCTION
        Function has been increasingly dealt with in cultural anthropology, as in
other branches of study and science, in recent years.             The basic meaning of
"function" is activity or operation that is natural, proper, or characteristic, such
as "secretion of bile and storage of sugar are functions of the liver." From this
there is a shading into the popular meaning of purpose: such as the function of
a broom is to sweep. Between is a whole series of vague and elusive meanings;
consult any unabridged dictionary in confirmation.              Through most of these
meanings runs the idea of a relationship that is active but not causal.
      Linton has tried to clarify these variable concepts by distinguishing form,
meaning, use, and function in culture. The form of a culture trait or complex
is what can be perceived by the senses and objectively described.^^ The meaning

is its subjective associations in the culture, implicit and explicit. Its use is its rela-

tion to things outside the society and culture, as expressible in physical terms; its
function is its relation within the society and culture. For instance, the form of
an ax comprises the blade and the handle, the curve of the bit, the steel of which
it is   made. It is this sensory aspect of a trait or complex that obviously passes or
diffuses most readily from one culture to another. The use of an ax, according
to Linton, is to chop wood; its function, to keep members of the society warm

by providing fuel, and to make carpentry possible by providing logs. It is evi-
dent that if consideration of purpose has not already crept into the statement of
use and function here, it is not far distant. As to the meaning of an ax, while
Linton does not expatiate on this, it is evident that this is variable, not only
between different cultures, but according to context within one culture. An ax
is not only     a household and a vocational tool, but a weapon and the instrument

        ^^ Obviously,
                   "form" as used here is that aspect of the elements of culture which has
to do with their sensory appearance;   whereas in § 125 "form" means the organization of
the contents of a whole culture.  A more discriminating terminology will presumably come
into usage someday      —
                       perhaps "appearance" for Linton's "form," and "organization" for
the form that is contrasted with content. At present, the context will usually leave no doubt
as to which meaning is intended.
§    »29                                FUNCTION                                       113
of the executioner. In the primitive parts of southeastern Asia and the East
Indies,it has powerful meaning in connection with head-hunting. In ancient

Rome, in Fascist Italy, in Republican France, the lictor's ax, in conjunction with
the bundle of rods or fasces, is a well-known symbol of punishment, and there-
fore of governmental authority. In ancient Crete, the double-bitted ax or labrys
was a sign of divinity and a cult object. Axes of bronze, jade, and polished
stone have meant wealth or treasure to people emerging out of primitiveness, in
ancient Greece and elsewhere.
    The form of a ballot would comprise its material, size, shape, columns,
arrangement of offices and candidates. Its meaning might be said to be popular
freedom and sovereignty; its use, to elect officials; its functions, democratic and
representative.
        A song would have its form given by its melody and rhythm:           it is   a suc-
cession of particular notes. The meaning or association would be patriotic, senti-
mental, or religious according as the song was "The Star-spangled Banner," a
blues, or a hymn. The use would similarly vary from opening a patriotic meet-
ing, entertainment at a night club, or conduct of a       church service. In fact, the
national anthem has repeatedly been used to prevent incipient riots by compel-
ling everyone to stand still at attention. The function of songs is, as usual, the
vaguest aspect: to strengthen patriotism, make a drink more enjoyable, further
piety.

       The mother-in-law taboo of many nonliterate peoples is characterized as to
its   form   —                                  —
          or its substance too, if one will by silence, looking aside, moving
away. Its obvious use is to prevent contact between in-laws of opposite sex and
different generation. The meaning is, according to the usual testimony of those
who practice the custom, an expression of respect, or conversely of shame if the
respect were violated by familiarity. The function is usually believed to be
avoidance or easement of social strain. However, it is well to observe that this
functional relation is one-way: wherever the custom obtains, relief from strain
is    likely to be its function;   but where it is not customary, its practice would
immediately cause strain, of much the same kind and strength as would result
from nonobservance of the custom where it is mandatory. Opposites can there-
fore fulfill the same function in different cultures, or in different situations. So
can wholly diverse acts: making a gift, inviting to a meal, speaking politely or
flatteringly, or tabooing one's mother-in-law, all can ease social strain.

    A wreath may be defined as a ring of floral elements, either worn on the
head or hung. We use bridal, funeral, and Christmas wreaths, whose connota-
tions                 are certainly even more diverse than their materials or
           and meanings
colors.Not so long ago, in Europe, the bridal wreath was definitely a prized
symbol of virginity. The ancients wore chaplets or floral wreaths as a party dress,
and hung them on sacrificial victims. They also gave laurel wreaths as honors,
and called them crowns when they were imitated in gold. For wreaths, meaning
and use are evidently pretty much coextensive. And the function of wreaths.?
114                            THE NATURE OF CULTURE                              § 1 29


Can we say much more than that it is to express by a visible symbol an emotion
of joy or sorrow appropriate to a given situation ? But one might also wonder
whether such a statement means anything more than that wreaths, like a hun-
dred other kinds of things, serve as symbols of feelings.
      It is evident from   these examples that the function of a cultural act or trait
differs  from its form, use, and meaning in that these three all reside in the
culture, but the function is something we read into the culture. The "meaning"
of a trait may be literally "subjective," as that of a mourning wreath, or of "The
Star-spangled Banner"; but everybody in the culture          is   agreed on it, so that
the fact of the meaning can be ascertained objectively. Indeed many of us are
none too sure of the whole tune or words of the American national anthem
                                                        —
that is, we often do not securely control its "form" but no one doubts that its
significance is patriotic. Similarly, we all know what a black or white wreath
hung by the front door means, though many of us might be somewhat hazy as
to the material it was made of, or wonder whether the "use" might be to express

respect, to give warning that a corpse lay in the house, or to keep tradesmen and
solicitors   away. Still, everyone in the society is at least roughly informed as to
such points. By contrast, function is something that the student or analyst of
culture finds out about. Function   is an interpretation, something in his mind,

which he attributes to a culture; but the form, use, and meaning of artifacts
and institutions are actually part of the culture.
      This is not so different, in one way, from the role of physiology. A healthy
body functions without awareness. True perception of physiologic function is
the result of dissection, observation, test, experiment, and the laboratory. Even
some highly civilized peoples have been quite random in distinguishing nerves
and veins, let alone veins from arteries, and have variously associated emotions,
feelings, and thought with the bowels, the liver, the heart, or the brain. The

difference between physiological function and cultural function is that the physi-
ologist has his laboratory and can experiment, and ihe student of culture has not
this advantage.    In many cases he can only guess as to function      —as the Greek,
mediaeval, and Chinese physicians largely used to guess as to physiological
function.
      Professedly functional studies of culture accordingly tend to contain a maxi-
mum of theory, interpretation, or opinion, often based on a relatively narrow
selection of facts seen as significant. Their value as well as their weakness lies
in this point.

                             130.   PURPOSE AND NEED

      At bottom, much of the preoccupation of anthropologists with cultural
function seems to boil down to two things: concern with purpose, and concern
with integration. Integration has already been considered (§ 122). It remains to
consider purpose; or, as it is more fashionable to disguise it: need.
  13°                             PURPOSE AND NEED                                 II5

       Preoccupation with purpose appears for one thing to be due to the fact that
there are    many cultural beliefs and institutions which serve no visible utility,
or at least no utility that could not equally well be attained by other means, and
which are adhered to merely because they are customary and "right," like the
mother-in-law taboo just discussed; or which are destructive and unprofitable,
like   most war. Why are there exogamic groupings?          Why are these often to-
temic? Why is eating their totem often forbidden to members of a group, but
perhaps enjoined in special cases?    Why are uncles called fathers by many
peoples?     Why are adolescents initiated into the sacred mysteries of adults,
where they learn that apparent spirits or gods are only disguised fellow tribes-
men? Why does a Yurok not eat in a canoe while it floats on the ocean? To
all these questions there is no obvious answer of the sort of answer there is to

why an arrow is feathered or what use a fish net has. Moreover, the practices
cited are all limited to certain societies and do not occur in others, including our
own. Accordingly, the practices cannot correspond to any universal need, bodily,
emotional, or social; at any rate, not to any real or objective universal need. A
native may think his baby will die if he does not observe the couvade taboo
restrictions (§ 225). But since the babies of non-couvading peoples also hve and
these nations manage to multiply, the quite genuine problem remains for the
reflective student: What actual need is fulfilled, what good or purpose sub-

served, by people's believing in the necessity of the couvade ? Or for that matter,
in the necessity of clans, totems, initiations, taboos, and all the rest.
     The simplest and soundest answer is that the need, good, use, or purpose is
often imaginary; that a lot of culture is irrational, and that collectively human
                                                            —
minds are as full of aberrations as individual minds or fuller. But most of
these irrationalities are harmless, or at least not destructive. It may bore a man,
or be inconvenient to him, to      lie   around the house inactive for days after his
baby is born. But he has the compensating satisfaction of believing that he has
strengthened the child's life; and there will normally be brothers or friends

around to see that the needed household and living chores get done. What we
call the more primitive cultures are full of such extravagances, of strange, unpre-
