
dictable, exotic doings; variable, and suggestive of the habits of children, of neu-
rotics,   and even of psychopaths; sometimes highly charged with emotion, but
quite unreasonable; often vehemently backed by the mores or ethical sentiments
of society. Quite likely our civilization has its share of counterparts,   which we
cannot segregate of? from the more practical remainder of the business of living
because we are engulfed in this civilization of ours as         we are in the air we
breathe. Some centuries may be needed before the full recognition of our own
nonrational couvades and totems and taboos becomes possible.
       Obviously, it is going to /be very difficult to explain all these extravagances
and absurdities on the basis of any coherent system of specific needs that they
satisfy or purposes which they serve. The phenomena are too variable, the pre-

sumable motivations too diverse. Some nations follow the couvade, some do not;
Il6                          THE NATURE OF CULTURE                             § 130


some set up social groups to forbid intermarriage, some merely specify the for-
bidden kindred. Certain of the practices seem actuated by fear or lack of assur-
ance, others by hope of a positive gain or reward; still others may spring from
restlessness, from the pleasure and excitements of change (§ 166-167). Or they

may have originated from one of these motivations in a particular, transient
situation; but the situation having passed, the practice continues to be followed
without motivation, or with a new one. It is plain that any general explanation
of phenomena as variable as these is bound to be thin, commonplace, and trite;
it can be vivid and satisfying only as it is particular and special.
     For instance, let us consider one of the most widespread of these "aber-
rations," the belief in and practice of magic. No culture has been free of it; in no
two cultures has it been identical. An older view, that of Frazer, sees in magic
an impersonal counterpart of religion, a sort of appUed pseudo-science that deals
with cause-and-eflect relations; the supposed causal relations are untrue, but they
contain a logic, in that, like the cause and effect of our science, they recognize
and deal with similarities and with proximities or contacts. A later interpreta-
tion by Malinowski construes magic as a response to the human sense of help-
lessness in a world beyond control: we invent a control, however fictitious, to
reassure ourselves and make living more endurable. Incidentally, the two inter-
pretations are not contradictory; they differ in emphasis rather than in being
exclusive. Malinowski goes on to assert that where people feel competent in a
situation, they tend not to invoke magic. Pacific islanders fish inside the lagoon
without bothering with spells, charms, and amulets; these are reserved for fish-
ing beyond the reef, where boats can founder or be blown away, where sharks
bite, and the surf pounds, where the prizes as well as the risks are greater.

      This explanation may hold for some Pacific peoples but it is not a univer-
sally valid principle.   In that event the Eskimo, who have to contend with far
greater dangers from ice, currents, waves, drowning, freezing, and starving than
the Melanesians, ought to make much more use of magic than the Melanesians;
whereas, in point of fact, they use it less. They are far more practical, competent
with   tools,   and self-reHant. They may make magic for a whale; they do so
occasionally for seals if these leave them altogether in the lurch; perhaps never
for fish. One might pick up the point of self-reUance and say that it is precisely
there that the Eskimo broke loose from magic, relatively speaking: that their
subsistence problems   were so tough that no bolstering of their courage with
magic would have sufficed for their survival. They had to find techniques that
actually killed the seal and brought the hunter back alive, or perish; and with
such techniques, they became self-reliant, and discarded much of their magic.
But with this concession, the explanation by need is weakened. Magic is no
longer a regular response to an automatic human need for assurance (§250).
This need is itself a variable, dependent on degree of technological invention,
and perhaps on other factors as well. Contact with a new people may result in
the learning of new weapons, tools, or techniques, increased competence and
Si   >30                                    PURPOSE AND NEED                                       HJ
self-assurance, and a falling-away of the cumber of magic. Contact with a new
people is certainly among what we call the accidents of history; and if such ac-
cidents can influence the amount or kind of magic or animism practiced, it is
plain that the explanation of magic as a function of a constant and imperative
need, universally intrinsic to the human psyche, pretty much falls to pieces.
        Of similar import is the fact that, in the same Pacific Ocean, Polynesians are
on the whole less magic-ridden than Melanesians; and among Polynesians the
Samoans are described as taking their animism with comparative lightness
(§ 250), and the Hawaiians as having been bored with their religion to the point
of wanting to discard it (§ 168). Here we are within the range of almost iden-
tical environments and therefore presumably very similar needs and problems.

     Another irregularity is furnished by the Yurok and the Karok of native
California. These tribes lived in a climate of no rigors, on a river that gave them
abundance of salmon, in a land full of acorns that were their staple, and for
centuries no foreign foes nor even pestilences invaded them. Their food supply
was greater and their population denser than in most of California, yet they
had hedged themselves in with a thousand do's and don't's of magic. You didn't
drink river water because it might have been poisoned, nor drink in strange
places; you didn't eat in a boat on the ocean, nor on the river-mouth spit, nor
before going hunting or doing the day's heavy work. You did not eat deer and
whale meat at the same time, nor bear meat and salmon. After eating venison, it
was obligatory to wash your hands, but in a basket, not in a stream. You might
sleep with your wife in the brush or in a camp, but not in your house, else your
shell money took offense and left you. Your bow had to be made from that side

of a yew tree which faced away from the river. And so on ad infinitum. Yet
need cannot be invoked as cause, as we have already seen. The elaboration of
all this magic and taboo system of the Yurok and the Karok is due to an orienta-

tion of the culture that has nothing to do with any necessities or actual problems.
For some unknown reason the culture just had gone hypochondriac, and all
members of the society, whatever their congenital individual dispositions, had
fear and pessimism pounded into them from childhood on.^- They were taught
by all their elders that the world simply reeked with evils and dangers, against
which one sought protection by an endless series of preventive taboos and magi-
cal practices. (See also § 253.)
        We must conclude, accordingly, that there is no relation of simple function
between specific organic needs rooted in the body and the mind or in the en-
        ^^   One might also try to explain such pervasive timidity by frequency of social fears or
interpersonal strains. The Yurok had a good many person-to-person quarrels and enmities,
but few class or communal clashes. It is difficult to say whether they experienced more social
strain than tribes of courageous and optimistic oudook, such as the Dakota or the              Mohave.
Beyond this       —   is it   a tense, hypochondriac disposition that leads to clashes with people, or
is it   actual enmities which make a people hypochondriac even toward nature?             It   would be
hard to say. In most cases of this type, the causality tends to be circular: each effect tends
to become a reinforcing cause.
Il8                          THE NATURE OF CULTURE                               § 1 30


vironment of man on the one hand, and his cultural activities, such as magic,
on the other hand. Whether it be magic or art, mythology or elaboration of
social structure, or what not, cultural activities differ so    much, from people to
people and from period to period, in their strength and in the forms assumed,
that it is impossible to derive these activities from, or even to relate them rigor-
ously to, any intrinsic organic necessities, which must in their nature be far more
constant.   Of course, organic factors are always present and operative. But as
soon as we have culture at all, another set of factors also becomes operative:
ideas, beliefs,   and the practices and affects attached   to   them   —cultural mani-
festations such as no subhuman animal shows. And these factors being highly
variable, their expression in specific but unstable cultural traits     and complexes
must be variable and complex, with considerable play or give-and-take. The
most immediate functional relations of cultural phenomena are to cultural
variables and epiphenomena, not to organic constants such as physiological
necessities or psychobiological imperatives.
                            CHAPTER EIGHT

                                        Patterns


131.    THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN          I32.   SYSTEMIC PATTERNS    I33.   TOTAL-CULTURE PAT-
TERNS       134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE         I35.   PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS           I36.

CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                I37. STYLE PATTERNS      1 38.   BASIC PATTERN
AND STYLE VARIABILITY         1 39.   THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS               I40.   THE
MEANING OF SIMULTANEOUS INVENTIONS


PATTERNS are those arrangements or systems of internal relationship which
         give to any culture its coherence or plan, and keep it from being a mere
          accumulation of random bits. They are therefore of primary importance.
However, the concepts embraced under the term "pattern" are still a bit fluid;
the ideas involved have not yet crystallized into sharp meanings. It will therefore
be necessary to consider in order several kinds of patterns.              We may call these
provisionally the universal, the systemic, the societal or whole-culture, and the
style type of patterns.



                            131.   THE UNIVERSAL PATTERN
        The universal pattern was proposed by Wissler, with the alternative desig-
nation of "the culture scheme." It is a general outline that will            more or less
fit all   cultures. It is therefore fundamentally different       from the other kinds of
pattern, since these all apply either to particular cultures or only to parts of
cultures. The universal pattern consists of a series of nine heads                 under which
all the facts of any     culture may be comprehended. The nine heads are: Speech,
Material Traits, Art, Knowledge ("mythological" as well as "scientific"). Re-
ligion, Society, Property,      Government, and War. These subdivide further, as
desirable. Thus under Society, Wissler suggests marriage, kinship, inheritance,
control, and games;       under Material Traits, food, shelter, transport, dress, uten-
sils,   weapons, and industries; Government is divided into political forms and
legal procedures.
        It is   apparent at once that this universal pattern with its heads and sub-
heads is like a table of contents in a book. It guides us around within the volume
rather than giving us the essence or quality of it. Except for minor variations,
120                                            PATTERNS                                  §   131

the universal pattern is in fact identical with the table of contents of most books
descriptive of a culture, such as a standard ethnographic report on a tribe. The
main heads are conventional captions for those classes of facts which common
sense and common experience lead us to expect to be represented in every
culture. We know of no people without speech, food habits, artifacts, property,
religion, society, and so on. We can say therefore that these captions represent
a sort of common denominators found in all cultures, and that the universal
pattern consists merely of the series of these common denominators expectably
represented in any culture             —represented perhaps very variably but represented
somehow.
        It is evident that the greater the range of cultures considered,        and the more
diverse these are, the more will the universal elements or common denominators
shrink or become vague. The proportion of universal or common traits in the
total range becomes less and less as this total grows more diverse, while at the

same time the concepts corresponding to the captions have to be increasingly
stretched to accommodate the facts or traits. Thereby the most characteristic
features of each culture get blurred out. The Yurok, and again the Ifugao,
have a highly intricate legal system, but a minimum of political institutions
in fact it might be argued whether they properly have any. This is certainly an
interesting situation in that it differs so radically from our own culture, where
not only both law and government are highly developed but law is                     made to
depend on government or to derive from it. This characterizing distinction,
which is obviously significant for the understanding of Yurok or Ifugao cul-
ture,    and almost certainly significant also for understanding our own culture
better   — this and similar distinctions are lost in the degree that one does one's

describing in terms of the common denominators of the universal pattern.
        This universal pattern thus boils down to a rough plan of convenience for
a preliminary ordering of facts awaiting description or interpretation.               No one
seems to have developed the idea since it was set forth in 1923, or to have made
serious use of       it   toward deeper understanding. We will therefore pass on              to
other kinds of patterns.



                                     132.   SYSTEMIC PATTERNS

        A second kind of pattern consists of a system or complex of cultural ma-
terial that   has proved its utility as a system and therefore tends to cohere and
persisr as a unit;        it   is   modifiable superficially, but modifiable only with   diffi-

culty as to    its   underlying plan. Any one such systemic pattern is limited pri-
marily to one aspect of culture, such as subsistence, religion, or economics; but
it is   not limited areally, or to one particular culture;         it   can be diffused cross-
culturally,from one people to another. Examples are plow agriculture, mono-
theism, the alphabet, and, on a smaller scale, the \ula ring of economic exchange
among the Massim Melanesians. What distinguishes these systemic patterns of
§    '32                           SYSTEMIC PATTERNS                                      121

culture    —or wcll-pauerncd systems, as they might also be called—            is   a specific
interrelation    of   their   component   parts,   a   nexus that holds them together
strongly, and tends to preserve the basic plan. This is in distinction to the great
"loose" mass of material in every culture that           is   not   bound together by any
strong tie but adheres and again dissociates relatively freely. As a result of the
persistence of these systemic patterns, their significance becomes most evident on
a historical view.

       As we mentally roam over the world or down the centuries, what is im-
pressive about these systemic patterns       is    the point-for-point correspondence of
their parts, plus the fact that all variants of the pattern         can be traced back to a
single original form.
       The alphabet is an example. Its history and variations are set forth in § 206-
221. But we may anticipate here by pointing out that the alphabet was invented
only once, by a Semitic people in southwestern Asia previous to 1000 B.C.; that
itoperates on the principle of a letter symbol for each minimal acoustic ele-
ment of speech; that the letters for most sounds in any form of alphabet, no
matter how specialized, always resemble the letters in some other alphabet, and
through that, or still others, they resemble and are derived from the letters of
the original alphabet; and that for the most part the order and often the names
of the letters are the same, or where different, it is evident where and why they
were altered. Thus Hebrew aleph, beth, gimel, daleth, correspond in sound,
order, and name to Greek alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and to Roman and our
A, B, C, D.
       The pattern of plow agriculture comprises the plow itself; animals to draw
it;   domestication of these beasts; grains of the barley or wheat type sown by
broadcast scattering, without attention to the individual seed, seedling, or plant;
fields larger   than gardens and of some length; and fertilization with dung,
primarily from the draft animals. This system originated in the Neolithic period,
probably in western Asia or near it, and by a.d. 1500 had spread from Morocco
to North              —
           China since then to the Americas and Australia as well. There are
two other and parallel systems, both without plows originally: the rice and
maize types of agriculture. The former involves small fields flooded by nature
or irrigation, hand planting of seedlings and hand weeding; the associated
animals, pigs and buffalo, were not formerly utilized in the rice-growing, though
the buffalo is now put before the plow in some areas. This rice pattern began as.
a hoe-and-garden culture and still largely is such. Native American agriculture,
centering around maize, also did not attempt to use the available domestic
           —                        —
animals llamas in the Andes and therefore was also hoe farming, or even
digging-stick farming. The planting was done in hillocks. Irrigation and fer-
tilizing were practiced locally and seem to have been secondary additions. The

plants grown in addition to maize were, with the exception of cotton, wholly
unrepresented in the plow or rice patterns. The histories of the three systems
have remained essentially as separate as their origins, except for some relatively
122                                    PATTERNS                                  §   132

recent transfers of draft animals      and plows from the plow pattern into the
two others where these began to be drawn into modern international, metro-
politan civilization.
    The exclusive-monotheistic pattern is Hebrew-Christian-Mohammedan.
The three religions are outgrowths of one another and originated in a small
area of southwestern Asia. The pattern comprises a single deity, of illimitable
power, and exclusive of all others; so far as there are other spiritual beings, such
as angels or saints, they are derivativefrom him; the deity is proclaimed by a
particular human vessel inspired by the deity;   and worship according to this
revelation excludes and forbids any other worship. Cults and philosophies out-
side these three organized monotheisms have repeatedly attained to mono-
theism, or to a pantheism or a henotheism that would be hard to distinguish
logically from monotheism. And many religions, even of backward peoples, rec-

ognize a supreme deity. But all these others regularly lack some of the features
of the exclusive-monotheistic pattern, and their resemblances are thus only par-
tial convergences of an analogical type. This merely analogical similarity of

these "high-god" and miscellanously monotheistic religions goes hand in hand
with their diversity of origin they are not connected with the exclusive mono-
                               :




theisms, nor for the most part with one another. By contrast, the three exclusive
monotheisms are homologous         —structurally or part-for-part similar—and they
are connected in origin: Jesus was a Jew, and Mohammed took his ideas from
Jews and Christians.
      The systemic type of pattern accordingly not only partakes of the quality
of a system, but is a specific growth. It originates in one culture, is capable of
spread and transplantation to others, and tends strongly to persist once it           is

established. It recalls the basic patterns of structure common to groups of related
animals developed from a common origin, with the original pattern persisting
through all superficial modifications as they occur under evolution. For instance,
the basic vertebrate pattern includes a skull with lower jaw, vertebrate column,
and, above the level of the fishes, two pairs of limbs each ending in five digits.
Within the range of this pattern, there is endless variation. A snake has no
legs, whales and some reptiles and amphibians possess only one pair.        Birds have
converted the front pair into wings;         seals,   into  and moles, into
                                                             flippers;

"shovels." The digits carry claws in carnivores, hoofs in running mammals,
nails in ourselves. They number five in man as in the salamander, never more
than four in birds and in pigs, three in the emu, two in the ostrich and the
cow, one only in the horse   —not counting nonfunctioning vestiges. Not one of
the thousand of species of amphibians, reptiles, birds, or          mammals ever pos-
sesses   more than two pairs of limbs or more than five digits; any six-fingered
vertebrate is an individual malformation.
      By contrast there are the arthropods, among whom the higher crustaceans
have five pairs of legs (modifiable to claws or paddles), the spiders four, and
the insects three pairs of legs and two pairs of wings; but none of the hundreds
§   '32                           SYSTEMIC PATTERNS                                 I23

of thousands of species of arthropods ever show a five-digited limb. Such arc the
basic arthropod plans, which are endlessly modified according to order, family,
and species. Thus many butterflies have only two pairs of legs; bees have two
pairs of wings, but the related ants break theirs off after mating; flics have only
one pair; beetles have two pairs but fly mainly with one, the other having be-
come converted into a protective shell; worker ants, fleas, lice, and many others
have long since become wingless. We might add that all arthropods have defi-
nitely    segmented bodies, a skeleton on the outside, antennae, and pale bluish
blood containing copper-protein haemocyanin, as compared with the nonseg-
mentation, inner skeleton, lack of antennae, and blood reddened by the iron-
protein haemoglobin of all vertebrates.
      It is   true that these fundamental plans of structure of the subkingdoms of
life such as the arthropods and  the vertebrates, or of their classes like insects and
mammals, constitute something very much bigger than the system patterns of
culture. They are hundreds of millions of years old, expressed in thousands to
hundreds of thousands of species and in trillions upon trillions of individuals.
The culture patterns muster an age of only a few thousand years. Once estab-
lished, the great biological patterns predetermine, as it were, the main frames

within which evolution will operate. No arthropod can give rise to a vertebrate,
or vice versa; their patterns are separated by profound, unbridgeable            clefts.

Evolutionary change takes place in the domains between these chasms         —   strictly
speaking, between their subchasms. By contrast, cultural system patterns, such
as exclusive monotheism, plow agriculture, the alphabet, pass from     one race or
society, from     one major culture, to another, and rather freely. Each year men
who otherwise remain in their ancestral culture are for the first time learning
to plow, to read letters, to fixate on a single   God. Such a transfer of pattern to
new kinds of carriers is of course impossible in subhuman organisms, whose
forms are dominated by irreversible heredity. But the transfer is characteristic
of the very nature of culture,  which is plastic, reversible, and capable of un-
limited absorptions^ anastomosings,   and fusions. Hence the patterns within
cultures impress us as shifting and often transient. They are so, in comparison
with the grand patterns of organic life, just as everything cultural, being an
epiphenomenon, something superadded to life, is relatively unstable, modifiable,
and adaptable. What the present type of cultural pattern system shares with the
fundamental organic patterns is that they both embody a definable system, in
the repeated expressions of which, no matter how varied, there nevertheless is
traceable a part-for-part correspondence, which allows each form or expression
to be recognized as related to the others and derived from the plan as it originally
took shape.
     In fact, the peculiar interest of these systemic patterns is that, within the
endless kaleidoscope of human culture, they allow us to recognize things that
are actually related in origin as against things that appear similar but are not
connected in origin. The patterns differentiate homologies from analogies, the
124                                     PATTERNS                                         § 13-2


biologist would say.      Thus, the several examples of exclusive monotheism are
both homologous and historically interconnected through derivation of one
from the other. But the Chinese Heaven, the Indian Brahma, the Egyptian
Aten, "god" in the abstract of the Greek philosophers, the supreme deities of
many primitive religions, represent analogies or convergences. They are distinct,
separate developments which led to results that seem similar. And so, Egyptian
hieroglyphs, Mesopotamian cuneiform, Indus Valley, Mayan, and other ancient
ideographic or mixed systems of writing, and the surviving Chinese system
(§202-205) are like alphabets in that they function as more or less effective
methods of visible-speech communication. But they are like them only in that
                                                   —
functioning. All alphabets are genetically one derived from a single source; the
other methods of writing have separate sources, operate on different principles,
are built on different plans. They resemble alphabets as a              whale does a fish
both communicate or         swim  —but without genuine similarity of structure or
meaningful relationship. But alphabet resembles alphabet as whale and porpoise
and dolphin resemble one another.
      It is in   the working-out of these real relationships, structural       and genetic
relationships as against      mere functional   similarities,    that    the recognition of
culture patterns of the systemic type finds one of its chief uses.



                          133.   TOTAL-CULTURE PATTERNS
      Next, there are patterns that relate to whole cultures. There is an Italian,
a French, a British pattern or form of European civilization.              There is an Iro-
quoian, Algonkin, and Siouan aspect or facies of North American Indian
Woodland culture. This Woodland culture in turn has its own larger total
pattern, which, together with the Southeastern, Southwestern,                North Pacific
Coast, Mexican, and other patterns make up the still larger native North Ameri-
can pattern (§ 326). It is evident that we are here dealing with culture wholes,
not, as in the last section, with specific complexes or systems that form only part
of any one culture but can be grafted onto others.
      East is East and West is West, Kipling said in vivid allusiveness to the
different physiognomies or qualities of Occidental              and   Asiatic civilizations.
When he added that never the twain shall meet, he was technically overstating
things, in that civilizations do borrow and learn from each other, do assimilate
or "acculturate"    —which   fact he was perfectly aware of when he went on          :   "But
there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth, when two strong
men stand face to face." But the "never-meeting" is also a poetical way of say-
ing that civilizations are vast things like great ocean currents flowing past each
other, and perhaps of implying that the sets or trends of civilizations as wholes
vary profoundly, quite apart from the sum total of the items which                make up
their content. Civilizations differ in "configuration," in modern scientific jargon;
"spirit" would have been an earlier word, "genius" before that.
§     "33                     TOTAL-CULTURE PATTERNS                                     I25

    There is of course nothing new in the fact that civihzations are distinct.
Innumerable items can always be cited, either of differential or of likeness. To
engage a button, we cut a slit in the cloth; the Chinese sew on a loop; and so
on. But what do a hundred or a thousand or ten thousand such items mean.?
What do they add up to that is of wider import or deeper significance? If the
items just scatter with equal randomness in two or more cultures, their effect
will be equivalent, in spite of the endless variation of detail. Obviously, the
specific items    must concentrate in some peculiar way in each civilization, must
gather or weight themselves along certain          lines, if   they are to have a larger
meaning. And therewith we have a pattern or configuration.
        There remains a difficulty, however. Items like buttonholes are definite and
are readily ascertained or established, but their significance is limited. The pat-
tern or physiognomy or trend of a great civilization           is   certainly   an important
thing to know, but it is     difficult to   formulate accurately and reliably. Such a
pattern has in it breadth and complexity, depth and subtlety, universal features
but also uniqueness. In proportion as the expression of such a large pattern tends
to the abstract, it becomes arid and lifeless; in proportion as it remains attached
to concrete facts, it lacks generalization. Perhaps the most vivid and impressive
characterizations have been made by frank intuition deployed on a rich body of
knowledge and put into skillful words. Yet this does not constitute proof and is
at best at the fringe of the approved methods of science and scholarship. These

difficulties will   explain why the formulation of whole-culture patterns has not
progressed farther, though it is surely one of the most important problems that
anthropology and related researches face.
        A spirited depiction of the total pattern of any culture possesses much the
same appeal and interest as a portrait by a good painter. Some cultures, like
some faces, are more interesting than others, but all can be given an interest and
meaning by the hand of the skilled master. This gift of "seizing" character, with
its    suffusion by insight, admittedly partakes as      much of the faculties of the
artist as of those of the scientist.   Excellent delineations of culture patterns have
in fact been presented by nonanthropologists, by historians and travelers. More
than eighteen hundred years ago Tacitus gave to posterity one of the master-
pieces of this genre in his analysis of German        custom and character. So keen
was his penetration that many qualities of his subjects are still recognizable in
the Germans of today. Other notable examples are the mediaeval Persian
Al-Biruni writing in Arabic on Indian civilization; and in the nineteenth cen-
tury, Burckhardt's Renaissance, Doughty 's Arabia Deserta, Codrington's Mela-
nesians. The first was a historian, the second a crotchety Semitist, the third a
missionary bishop. At the risk of making invidious distinctions, Malinowski,
Benedict, Mead, Evans-Pritchard, might be cited among recent avowed anthro-
pologists.    Through the medium of fiction, Pierre Loti, Freuchen's Eskimo,
Maran's Batouala, and Mofolo's Chakjz have done something similar widi ex-
ceeding vividness.
126                                         PATTERNS                                     §   133

       A requisite for the recognition of the whole-culture type of pattern, besides
of course insight and articulateness, is willingness to see a culture in terms of
itself,     of its own structure, values, and style. There must be an interest in the
culture for its own sake. Without this, the depiction tends to degenerate into
a recital of oddments, or of those features in which the culture's standards differ
                        —
from our own to its own worsening, of course. The disengagement from the
biases and values of the describer's own culture should be complete, at least
for the time being. Such preconceptions should never block his sympathies for
the culture he is describing, where its qualities call for sympathy. Of course the
account must not be a laudation, but an appraisal of what the culture's own
standards and valuations are, and how far they are adhered to.
       This process is akin to recognition of style in art; to "appreciation" in the
stricter sense of that word, before it acquired its popular meaning of mere liking.

There too we do not judge Michelangelo by the standard of Rodin, or Mozart
by that of Shostakovich; nor, for that matter, Shostakovich by the values of
Mozart, though unconsciously that is what conservatives may tend to do. What
is   in question in such endeavors is the recognition of the art of a certain region
and period as expressed by its best exponents, the evaluation of how far it
achieved its aims, and the definition of what these aims and values were. At-
tempts to recognize and define whole-culture patterns are of the same kind, but
are larger in that they try to grasp the totality of styles           —the nexus of     social,

ethical, intellectual,        and economic as well as aesthetic styles or manners which
together constitute the master pattern of a culture.^



                            134.   EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE

        As so often, language, which is one specialized part of culture, can be
used advantageously here to illustrate the total cultural situation. An author's
style   —   literally   his "writing-rod" or pencil   —refers to his consistent ways or
habitual manners of expressing himself distinctively enough to be recognizable
from others. We have also superindividual styles, such as that of Elizabethan
and of eighteenth-century EngHsh as compared with that of contemporary Eng-
hsh. Going still farther, we may say there is a Latin style, an Anglo-Saxon style,
a Germanic style, in English; and beyond these, there are styles characteristic
of the Latin, English, and             German languages. These whole-language styles
consist of more than degrees of elaborateness of sentence structure, or the posi-

       ^   Kluckhohn proposes to distinguish patterns from configurations. Both refer to struc-
tural regularities of culture.  But to him patterns are objective and explicit ("overt"), or
readily brought into social consciousness, whereas configurations are implicit ("covert")
setsor trends akin to attitudes or motivations, and have to be dissected out by analysts of
the culture. In part, though only in part, Kluckhohn's "patterns" correspond to what are
here called systemic patterns (§ 132), his "configurations" to total<ulturc and style patterns
(S 133, 137)-
S   '34                      EXEMPLIFICATIONS IN LANGUAGE                                   I27

tion of the verb. By insensible degrees they involve the whole of what we ordi-
narily call the grammar of a language. Latin has six distinguishable cases, Ger-
man four, and English two. Latin conjugates its verb by a long scries of complex
suffixes,     whereas spoken English has only three living conjugating suffixes and
performs its main business of conjugation by the equally effective mechanism
of separate auxiliary words, as set forth in § 97, 109. What are such grammatical
                                                   The grammar of a language
peculiarities but crystallized stylistic idiosyncrasies?
may be viewed as its total specific style compared with the styles of other lan-
guages, or as its total pattern of structure.
      It is   true that what we ordinarily call "style" in language       is   more limited,
superficial,     optional,   and perhaps individual than what we ordinarily                 call

"grammar," and for many purposes it is desirable to observe the distinction. Bui
there is no absolute line between the two, and both are ways or manners or
patterns of expression. Just as the grammar of a language is its total pattern of
fixed forms, so we might conceivably refer to the total pattern of a culture as its
cultural grammar. That is not usage; but the comparison may help clarify what
we mean when we talk of total patterns. The trouble is that there is as yet no
word in English, or in any other language, to express this concept except vague
or metaphorical terms like "genius," "spirit," "style," "trend," "direction."
      Comparison with language may also help clarify the difference between
the systemic patterns (§ 132)and the total-culture patterns (§ 133). Much as
grammar corresponds to total pattern, so lexical content corresponds in one way
to system pattern and to miscellaneous unpatterned material. It                is   lexical con-

tents,    words, that are often borrowed by one language from another, as when
English takes over Gestalt from German or chic from French, or thousands and
thousands of earlier words from Latin or French or both        —   all   without the form
or grammar or pattern of English being appreciably changed. Similarly, in-
numerable items or traits of cultural substance, such as corn-planting or season-
ing with curry or voting on Australian ballots, can be taken over into a culture
without its basic pattern or "grammar" being affected in principle. Moreover,
we have seen cases of a system pattern such as the alphabet passing over into
culture after culture but its various forms there being recognizable as derived
from one common source by their part-for-part correspondence. Well, just as
in the alphabet aleph, beth, gimel, correspond to A, B, C, and help prove their
joint derivation, so in the relationship of language.      English nose, tongue, two,
three correspond to Spanish nariz, lengua, dos, tres, and to German nase, zunge,
zwei, drei, in sound as well as meaning; but none of               them correspond to
Japanese hana, hita, juta-tsu, mi-tsu in sound or form. Thereby these words
help prove that English and Spanish and German speech have a common origin
and relationship, which we call Indo-European, but that Japanese is outside the
Indo-European origin and relationship. It is the parts or content of a system
that can be used as evidence of this sort, and it is the parts or words or content
128                                      PATTERNS                               §   134

of a language that can be used in the same way. Both kinds of content are re-
ceivable into larger entities   —culture wholes or language wholes—without much
affecting the forms or major patterns or styles or "grammars" of these.
      On the contrary, resemblances in style pattern mean much less as regards
connective relationship. The Japanese language compounds nouns, piles up and
encapsulates subordinate clauses, and then finishes up its elaborate periodic sen-
tence with a verb, in much the way          German speech style does. English word
separateness and English syntax or word arrangement in the sentence are much
more like those of Chinese. It is evident from this example that these gram-
matical, styhstic, or pattern resemblances can grow up in languages quite in-
dependently of their historical connection. Of the four just mentioned, English
and German are the only two related. In fact they are closely and recently re-
lated in origin; but both tie up in certain features of their style pattern with
wholly unconnected languages at the far end of another continent.
     As a cultural counterpart one might mention the sharing by early Romans
and by Chinese of addiction to patriarchal authority in the gens or extended
family, the strong economic functioning of this group, the use of gentile or
family names, the cult of manes or ancestral spirits, the relative meagerness of
other ritual and mythology, the high premium on sobriety, piety, self-control,
and moderation. All these pattern resemblances of orientation or outlook or
physiognomy are certainly not due to any specific or direct historical connection
of Rome and China, which these two countries never had. The pattern re-
semblances are evidently convergent or parallelistic (§223). That is, the two
patterns originated independently, and therefore their similarity is secondary,
functional,   and analogous only. For instance, early       Roman culture put, and
Chinese does not put, strong emphasis on bravery, on military training and suc-
cess, and on a martial tribal god.

      Again, the late Roman Empire, in its Byzantine phase long after the capital
had been moved to Constantinople, shows interesting approximations to late
Chinese civilization, say of the Ming and Manchu dynasties, roughly 1400 to
1900. In both instances there are present: a sense of old and thorough saturation
in high civiHzation, leading to self-satisfaction    and disdain of the achievements
of other cultures; a competent and educated bureaucracy as the mainstay of the
state and civilization; fatigue as regards war, coupled with tried defensive skill;

a   flagging of originality in the arts, science, and philosophy, side by side with
real respect for learning   and    its   quantitative reproduction in encyclopaedias,
commentaries, and the like. Some of these shared trends may be the results of a
sort of civilizational senility. At any rate, they could hardly occur except in cul-

tures of some maturity. Nevertheless, whatever the causes at work, they do not
include imitation influence of the one civilization on the other. And we have
again a degree of physiognomic resemblance, of total-pattern similarity.        And
this is evidently analogous in kind to the patterning that makes the grammar of
 §   "35                           PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                               I29
 English— and not of Latin, or Greek, be it noted           — more like that of Chinese in
its   general character than      is   that of   any other European language.


       In summary, systemic patterns are blocks or pieces of culture or language
sharing a content that is of common origin and is arranged in a common pat-
tern persistent     enough   to be recognizable for a        long time, even after direct
historical record of the community of origin has been lost. (In the case of lan-
guage, the block may be so large as to comprise the majority of the vocabulary.)
Total-culture patterns are the over-all quality, set, cast, organization, or gram-
                                                       —
mar of the whole of a culture or language the direction in which it slopes,
so to speak. The total patterns of separate cultures sometimes are perceptibly
similar, even     though differing considerably in their content; and they can be-
come similar of themselves even though starting out independently and dif-
ferent. Or, conversely, they can begin            by being alike and then diverge increas-
ingly. Their value is thus low for tracing historical connections or proving rela-
tionships. Their significance lies in expressing the distinctive individuality and
quality pervading a whole culture or language.



                           135.    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS
      It   will be seen that the examples just cited of whole-culture patterns tend
somewhat toward the psychological; they have psychological implications. This
isinherent in physiognomic characterizations, whether these be of particular
men, of racial types, of historical periods, or of cultures. A face may express stern-
ness or majesty or raptness or serenity or benevolence or craftiness or intellec-
tualityor sensuousness, or combinations of such qualities. In much the same
way, in referring to a civilization or period or tribal culture or phase, we often
use terms of psychological appraisal, such as fatigue, self-satisfaction, bravery,
premium on sobriety, flagging of originality. Yet it is true that other character-
izing concepts, such as family names, ancestor worship, bureaucracy, encyclo-
paedias, manual arts, obviously refer to specific institutions or concrete cultural
phenomena. It would seem accordingly that formulations of the total pattern
of cultures contain both strictly cultural and psychological characterizations.        A
formulation begins with the former, with institutions or folkways; and as these
more and more weave themselves into a larger coherence, it gradually also be-
comes evident in what directions the culture is faced, what ends it looks toward,
which qualities it is occupied with and prizes most. In short, its characteristic
values and its characteristic attitudes or orientations become comprehensible. An
attitude, or for that matter an orientation, necessarily implies psychology. Atti-
tudes might be said to refer to the ways an organism sets or arranges or orients
itself, adjusts inwardly   and outwardly to its environment; anything in its merely
internal physiological operations would hardly come under attitude and orienta-
tion. Where the boundary lies           here between straight anthropology and straight
130                                    PATTERNS                                   ^   ^35

psychosomatics has not yet been determined.         We might     venture that   we are
still   within the jurisdiction or claims of anthropology      if   the   environment—
toward which human organisms react by an attitude or an orientation is a         —
cultural one, if it includes folkways or mores with societal pressure, or, in wholly
untechnical language, institutions. If however the environment is unmitigatedly
physical, like warm sunshine after exposure to cold, or the proximity of an angry
bear when one is in the woods unarmed, the reaction toward the environment
is primarily psychosomatic and outside the domain of anthropology.

        In recent years attempts have been made to characterize cultures definitely
in psychological terms. This does not mean that their cultural features were dis-
regarded.     On the contrary, their cultural traits were carefully studied for a
selection and an enumeration of all those customs and institutions which would
fit into a coherent pattern or plan expressible   in psychological terms. In short, the

procedure was to try to convert cultural phenomena into psychological formu-
lations through the medium of total-pattern recognitions. This is of course the
same procedure as we have been discussing, carried one step farther. Mead,
Gorer, and Fortune have described cultures more or less along these lines, but
the most comprehensive procedure has been that of Benedict. She began by con-
trasting two American Indian cultures, those of the Plains bison-hunters and
those of the southwestern Zuni and other Pueblo farmers, as being respectively
Dionysiac and ApoUinian. The Dionysiac temperament       —named after the god
of wine    — outgoing, addicted to rushes of strong feeling and their expression
             is

in activity; the self is asserted. The   ApoUinian type of personality is calm, re-
strained, "classic"; it dislikes surges of emotion, vehement action, and insistence
on the ego; this last should be muted in favor of group tranquillity. For example,
among the Dakota each man was free to seek his own "vision" or inspiration
from supernatural, who instructed him in his personal ritual and made him a
shaman. Among the Zuni, such personal experiences would be frowned upon,
and personal rituals were socially taboo. Ritual was in the hands of priests hold-
ing established offices, transmitting traditional tribal lore and cults, and teach-
ing younger priests to follow in their footsteps. The psychological formulation
of Zuni culture as ApoUinian is based on a large mass of cultural traits, such as
these customs differentiating shamans from priests.
        Later, Benedict   went farther and passed verdicts on cultures outside her
personal experiences: the Melanesians of      Dobu Island, described by Fortune,
and the Kwakiutl Indians of Vancouver Island, on whom elaborate reports by
Boas were available. The Dobuan culture she found to be paranoid in its in-
clinations; the Kwakiutl, megalomanic. Individual         temperaments tend to con-
form to the cultural set; they are molded by it. A Dobuan who may be sus-
picious and plotting by nature fits in with the trends of his society and becomes
a successful      member of it, a distinguished citizen. But one who has impulses
to be confiding and amiable, and cannot overcome these impulses, will be taken
advantage of by his tribesmen and be a social failure.
 i»   '35                       PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                                   13!

     There is no doubt that these four cultures actually di(Ter in the directions
described, and that other cultures difTer from one another in analogous ways.
Also, the characterizations tend to be in more or less psychiatric terms, or at
least clinical ones, partly because clinical psychology was the first recognized

branch of psychology that attempted to deal with whole human beings, as dis-
tinct from their intelligence or learning ability or other parts or special aspects

of the mind. Furthermore, terms like "paranoid" or "megalomanic" do not
imply downright insanity in psychology, as they frequently do in laymen's
speech. A man may have a definite megalomanic streak in him and yet be a
"normal" and useful member of society. Most of us in fact can think of an
acquaintance or two whom that cap just fits. Also, there are five or ten indi-
viduals with clinically recognizable paranoid or schizophrenic or manic-de-
pressive tendencies for every one that actually breaks into such a psychosis.          We
speak of such persons, quite properly, descriptively and without stigma, as being
for instance of manic-depressive temperament. Which is as much as to say that
if they     were to become insane, which they probably won't, their psychosis would
take such and such a form; just as one man will show a phthisic constitutional
type to a physician, and another an apoplectic one, and yet the betting is that
both will ultimately die of some other disease, respectively, than tuberculosis
and a stroke. So much then in validation of these translations of total-culture
patterns into psychological "diagnoses."
       However, there are limitations to this method. So far as it is valid, it ought
to    be applicable to any and all cultures beyond the four primitive ones cited.
Benedict herself seems to think that only some cultures can be described in this
way; the majority are not sufficiently "integrated" around a single psychological
trend, not oriented exclusively in    one direction. If that is true, then her Zuni,
Dobu, Kwakiutl cultures are abnormal cases, and are of significance chiefly
as showing to what degree of specialization culture orientations can be pushed.
But it seems much more likely that every culture is psychologically character-
izable; and that if only a few can be appropriately labeled, it is because our as-
sortment of labels is inadequate, or our interest flags beyond the gaudy ones.
Psychologists do not deny a personality to individuals         who are complex, bal-
anced, and well rounded, or allow it only to those who have warped themselves
around a single impulse or idea. The same must hold for the personalities of
cultures. Some will be more decisively one-sided than others. But all must have

a psychological      physiognomy of some kind corresponding           to   their   cultural
physiognomy.^ This is because culture is itself the product of psychosomatic
activity;    because in turn it conditions and molds psychology, as we have seen
(§ 123) ;    and because its operation is necessarily accompanied by psychological
functioning.

    - Subsequent well-rounded characterizations of East Asiatic cultures made by Benedict

during World War II (see § 245 for a Siamese example) avoid the single-label designation.
132                                  PATTERNS                                         § 135


      As a matter of fact all kinds of psychological emphases can be recognized
in cultures, even though it is but a rare culture all of whose manifestations can
be constellated around a single motif. For instance there are cultures, such as
the Yoruba and the     Dahomey in West Africa, that are marked by a passion
for method and relational organization; others, such as the Nupe, also in West
Africa, view the world matter-of-factly as consisting of an agglomeration of so
and so many discrete events which they feel no impulse to order (§251). Ac-
quisitiveness and retentiveness are certainly personality traits. Dobu culture is
acquisitive and retentive as well as sensitive and paranoid; Ifugao, in the Philip-
pines, is acquisitive but normally healthy in its outlook; Yurok, in native Cali-
fornia, is highly retentive of property but neurotically timorous; the Polynesian
and Australian cultures generally are not acquisitive,        still   less   retentive, but
geared to constant consumption. There is bound to be one pervasive psychology
in a culture that puts a social premium on co-operativeness, but a quite different
set of   mental reactions when a culture really prizes and rewards ruggedly in-
dividual competitiveness. Still other colorings are reviewed in Chapter Fifteen,
where this whole set of problems is examined more systematically.
    There are thus all kinds of psychological concepts against which cultures
can be graded, if not as yet by any system of measurements, at least by general
consent. The recognition of some such psychic qualities flows almost inevitably
out of recognition of total-culture patterns. Sound formulations are likely to in-
volve various sets of concepts. Thus it might be maintained that there was a
culture at one and the same time acquisitive, wasteful, competitive, intuitive, san-
guine, and uninterested in relations and abstractions. Which one.''            Contempo-
rary American civilization can be so appraised, perhaps without too much un-
fairness. At any rate it would be generally accepted that there are at least half a

dozen distinct psychological strands involved in our national make-up. Such
multiple-term characterizations as   this,   though   less incisive, will     in the long
run be applicable to far more cultures, and are likely to be fuller and truer de-
scriptions than the occasional instances in which a culture is so speciaUzed that
nearly everything in it can be disposed along one conceptual axis expressible in
a single word.
      There is a large field here waiting to be developed as more students of
anthropology learn to make psychological characterizations, or more psycholo-
gists learn to deal with culture. In both sciences, the tools of method have been

sharpened, for about the last two lifetimes, by pursuit of critical analysis. Apart
from psychiatry as a branch of medicine, clinical or whole-personality psychology
of    more than mere   introspective or   guesswork    caliber scarcely existed con-
sciously, even in germ, before about 1920, and is still in its infancy; and the same

is true of whole-culture or pattern anthropology.   When both have grown farther,
and interpenetrated each other more, the results        are hkely to be        immensely
interesting.
§    '35                                    PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS                                 I33

       From what has been said about the conditioning or molding of men by
their cultures,       it    is   evident that to every total pattern or orientation of culture
there      must correspond a type of personahty. In fact, strictly, all psychic action
lakes place not in the culture but in the people who participate in it, carry it, and
are shaped by         it.    The culture, which from one angle is a sort of set of rules
enabling a certain set of activities to go on, by its existence inevitably induces
certain habits in the members of its society;                  and these habits aggregate, in any
individual, into a particular kind of personality. This personality will tend to
be more or less alike in all members of a society, though varied by their purely
individual conditionings as well as by their individual heredities,                   which are
never wholly the same. The average or type or mode of these personalities pro-
duced in a society by its culture is, strictly, what the cultural psychologist tries
to recognize or describe; the culture that produces the personality type is, strictly,

the anthropologist's first concern.               A potlatch and a thousand-guest wedding are
cultural facts; but              if   a culture favors   and rewards them, certain psychological
attitudes,       such as those toward lavishness and personal ostentation, tend to be
set   up in most people living in that society under that culture. This idea, of a
type of personality always having to correspond to a type of culture, at least on
the average, is after all a quite simple one, as well as being seemingly unassail-
able. It    is   the basis of the relation of anthropology and psychology,               and the
reason why examination of whole-culture patterns or physiognomies inevitably
suggests psychological implications.
       This rather simple relation has sometimes been obscured by premature
attempts to explain the full causality of cultures or persons —which no one yet              is

in position to do      —and sometimes by technical jargon, such as "basic personality
structure." This phrase seems to mean nothing more than the personality type
corresponding to a particular culture                —the kind of person normal or average to
the culture, one might say. "Basic" is unfortunate, because to biologists "basic"
means what is hereditary and congenital, whereas this kind of personality is
induced by the culture, not primary. If "basic" refers merely to being typical
or average, it would better be called that. "Structure" appears to be just a yield-
ing to a word that has a perfectly good meaning but suddenly becomes fashion-
ably attractive for a decade or so                —like "streamlining"—and during      its   vogue
tends to be applied indiscriminately because of the pleasurable connotations of
its sound. Of course a typical personaUty can be viewed as having a structure.

But so can a physiology, any organism, all societies and all cultures, crystals,
machines     —
           in fact everything that is not wholly amorphous has a structure. So
what "structure" adds to the meaning of our phrase seems to be nothing, except
to    provoke a degree of pleasant puzzlement. Moreover, an impressive phrase
Uke this one tends                to   provoke an     somehow knowledge of life
                                                    illusion that
histories of typical personalities in a society will explain why the culture is as
it is; whereas in the main it is the culture that has made these personalities what
134                                       PATTERNS                                     5 135

they are (§ 123). However, apart from such putting of the cart before the horse,
and from the matter of technical verbiage, the idea of some certain kind of a
person or type of mentaHty corresponding to each particular culture               is   both
simple and important. It will be developed farther in Chapter Fifteen.


               136.    CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS

      If   we consider how cultures grow, by reviewing the course of those civi-
lizations we know best through their history or archaeology, we are soon struck
by a familiar phenomenon. Successful growth, which in retrospect is judged to
have been productive, tends to come intermittently, in pulses or irregular
rhythms. The word "cycles" is sometimes used, but it denotes a repetitive return,
and return is more than is really characteristic of the phenomena now in ques-
tion, or at least     more than is sure about them. The manifestations are more
Uke unpredictable swells or waves than            like    any wheel-of-fortune action in
which an idea of retribution is implicit, or of a fate that eventually levels all
things out. The "rise and fall of nations"         is   the familiar phrase that refers to
the phenomenon; but there is actually a good deal involved beyond the success
or failure of national fortunes.       There is included, it is true, politico-military
achievement: that is, success of the society in outright competition with other
societies. But, more or less associated, there are usually : a growth in      population
an increase in wealth; technological advances; and bursts of productivity in the
aesthetic    and intellectual fields, all the way from sculpture to literature, from
philosophy to science.     The peaks in these several activities may come simul-
taneously, or overlapping, or in close succession.           Sometimes the    total rise is
gradual, as was that of ancient Rome; sometimes it comes suddenly, or seems
abrupt, perhaps because the initial stages have not got into the preserved record
of history.
      An almost supertypical example is provided by the ancient Greeks:
      Military success: 500-250 B.C.
      Politics: progressively   democratic constitution building, 600-400
      Population: increasing to probably 300, decrease by 200
      Philosophy: 585-200; peak: Plato, Aristode, 400-320
      Science: 585-150; peak: Euclid, Archimedes, 320-220
      Medicine: 500-100; peak: Hippocrates, 420
      History: 500-200; peak: Thucydides, 420
      Tragedy: 500-400; peak: Sophocles, 450
      Comedy: 480-280; peak: Aristophanes, 420
      Poetry: 650-200; peak: Pindar, 450
      Oratory: 450-300; peak: Demosthenes, 340
      Sculpture: 550-100; peak: Phidias, 450
      Painting: 500-100; peak: Apelles, 330
      Architecture: 600-100; peak: Parthenon, 450
§    136                        CLIMAXES OF WHOLE-CULTURE PATTERNS                           I35

            It is   evident that for a few centuries Greek cultural activities were        much
heightened in the quality of their values achieved: the near-concurrence of dates
is    striking.
      The five centuries involved include everything the Greeks produced which
the world since their time has thought important, with the following few excep-
tions: Around 850-800 b.c, well before the main growth, there were the Homeric
epics. Under the               Roman Empire, two or more centuries after the great growth,
there occurred an aftermath of science, largely in the nature of codifications
(Ptolemaic astronomy. Galenic medicine,                    a.d.   100-150); a philosophic revival
(Neo-Platonism,                a.d.   250); and a "silver-age" prose literature (Plutarch,   a.d.

150). All the rest of the Greek contribution falls in the period 650-100 b.c; much
the most of it, in fact, is comprised in the three centuries 500-200, with practi-
cally all the          peaks or climaxes between 450 and 300. And this happened in a
quite small area, as well as in the quite brief time. To put it a little differently,
there was an enormous concentration of culture energy and innovation, of pro-
duction of high cultural values, and of flourishing of men of the first rank of
genius, in a very limited space  and period, in contrast with much less of the
same that the Greeks did before or after or elsewhere.
     Quite so intense a condensation was perhaps never again accomplished in
history. But the number of less extreme examples is indefinitely large. In Rome,

the "Augustan" age around the time of the birth of Christ corresponded to the
Greek "Periclean" age. All the most notable Roman achievements cluster around
this Augustan climax, within a century or two before and after it Cicero, Caesar, :




Lucretius, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Tacitus; the world's first truly realistic portrait
sculpture           fifty to   a   hundred years after Augustus; Trajan, the emperor who
brought the Empire to its greatest extent; and the culmination of Roman archi-
tecture, road-building, engineering, and probably population and wealth, in the

first       two Christian centuries.
    Sometimes such bursts come repetitively within one area and population, as
in China of the Chou, Han, and T'ang dynasties; ^ or in Egypt of the Pyramid

Age, the Middle Kingdom, and the New Empire, with an aftermath renascence.*
Sometimes successful activities string along spottily and successively, or some-
how fail to appear altogether. Thus England was musically productive until
1700, musically imitative or second-rate thereafter; but began painting success-
fully only after 1750;and never had a first-rank sculptor. Holland's great men
allcame in the i6oo's: Spinoza in philosophy, Rembrandt in painting, Huygens
in physics, Vondel in literature. This was also the century of successful Dutch
aggression against Spaniards and Portuguese, of the founding of their colonial
empire, and of an unusual accumulation of wealth. In a small country it seems
to be easier for everything to pile up simultaneously. The much more numerous

        ^   Most productive about 550-300 b.c, 200 b.c.-a.d. 200, a.d. 600-800.
        * At peak around 2600, 1900, 1400, 600 b.c, respccdvely.
136                                   PATTERNS                               § 136


adjacent Germans toward 1800 had in Kant, Goethe, Beethoven, the greatest
contemporary European philosopher, poet, and musician, respectively; but po-
litically they were mediaeval and disunited, and militarily Napoleon buffeted

them around. Their famous science was only just beginning to function success-
fully at the time. During the nineteenth century this science flourished, Germany
became politically organized and strong in war, population and wealth increased
faster than in                   —
                most of Europe but German philosophy, literature, and music
were progressively on the downgrade. Nevertheless, on the larger view the sig-
nificant dbing is the close time association of these somewhat separate German
culminations. Some merely happen to reach their peak a Uttle before the others
some during 1 750-1 825 and some during 1 825-1900.
     It will be seen that there are two related aspects to the type of phenomena

we are considering. One is the fact of the production of great men and great
cultural achievements; the other is their normal concentration in time, space,
and nationality.
      It   used to be customary to "explain" such happenings as these, especially
literary ones,   by referring them to the stimulating effect of great victories, or
other national events. It was said, for instance, that Shakespeare was somehow
helped to write great plays by the defeat of the Spanish Armada; Phidias,
Sophocles, and the other Athenians similarly were pushed forward to higher
achievement by Marathon and Salamis; Augustus at last ended civil war and
brought peace. But in many cases closer examination of the facts shows that the
literary or other burst had already begun before the poUtical event.   And even if
the burst is wholly subsequent, it is hard to see why and how better painting,
or a discovery like Harvey's of the circulation of the blood, should be "produced"
by a victorious war. The present-day view is that this kind of working from
specific cause to specific effect will mostly not hold water in these complex
matters of civilization.   Modern opinion sees correlations or functional inter-
relations between a group of historical    phenomena, rather than saying that A
"produces" B. The Armada, Shakespeare, the playwriters who preceded both,
the poet Spenser, Harvey with his circulation of the blood, Napier and his in-
vention of logarithms, the composers of madrigals, the freebooter Drake,
Raleigh and his colonial expansion, are all interconnected in making the Britain
of 1575-1615. Each of them represents or expresses part of a successful pattern;
and the group of patterns together constitutes the national culture-whole pattern
of England in its temporary "Elizabethan" phase.
      These national spurts of success and concentrations of cultural productivity
may accordingly be regarded as constituting a phenomenon that recurs through
history    —and presumably through prehistory—even though separate occurrences
never manifest wholly identical forms. The bursts have considerable significance
in illuminating the     dynamics of style patterns, the nature of genius, and the
causes of invention. Their bearing on these three matters will now be consid-
ered in turn.
§    '37                                      STYLE PATTERNS                                      I37


                                       137.    STYLE PATTERNS "

        The basic reason for the concentrations of productivity seems to be that for
things to be done well they must be done definitely, and definite results can be
achieved only through some specific method, technique, manner, or plan of
operations. Such a particular method or manner is called a style in all the arts,
as we have seen.           And "style" is perhaps the best available word that will cover
also the      corresponding methods or plans in other activities. We can speak of
styles of      governing, of waging war, of prosecuting industry or commerce, of
promoting           science,   even of speculative reasoning. For instance,             all   modern
Occidental business is carried on in a style that includes banking and credit.
But ancient and Byzantine and Islamic businessmen necessarily followed                              a
quite different style or pattern because they did not seriously employ credit, and
actual money had usually to be collected or moved for any and all transactions.
A style, then, may be said to be a way of achieving definiteness and effectiveness
in   human relations by choosing or evolving one line of procedure out of several
possibles ones, and sticking to it. That means, psychologically, that habits be-
come channeled, facility and skill are acquired, and that this skill can then be
extended to larger situations or to somewhat altered ones. This process may
mount for a while, the original skill itself being developed farther or giving rise
to subsidiary ones. Or it may mount through enlargement of the field to which

it is   being applied, and therewith the product achieved perhaps increases in quan-
tity as     well as improving in quahty. But the process cannot go on mounting
indefinitely, because          it   began with a limitation of choice, a selection among
possibilities.       Therefore every     style is necessarily prelimited: it is an essential

commitment to one manner, to the exclusion of others. Accordingly it cannot
encompass everything. The range of its channeled skills will extend so far; be-
yond, they fail. Then we say that the style has exhausted itself, its characteristic
pattern has broken down. Or the style may be able to maintain itself for a while,
but without any longer increasing the range of                     its   control or improving      its

achievements.          When this termination has been reached, accordingly, there is
either decline or a freezing.             The style either loses its skill of touch and its
products deteriorate; or it becomes frankly repetitive, which is usually equiva-
lent to a      slowed-up deterioration, interest and feeling having been                 lost   when
further change is eliminated.            A pickup in quality will normally be possible only
with a new start toward a new style. And the evolution of a new style is likely
to be easier to outsiders or novices than to the group which has been reared in
an old style. That is why nations replace one another in their achievements; or
if one does repeat, it is usually after a considerable interval.

     This course of development will be familiar to anyone who has ever fol-
lowed through the history of any art style, whether in literature, sculpture, paint-
        5 This is   the last of the four kinds of patterns listed in the introduction to this chapter
138                                      PATTERNS                                § 137


ing, architecture, or music. It is a commonplace that all aesthetic styles rise and
fall    and perish. All art has constantly to get itself reborn with a new set of
impulses, and then run a new course.        Why that is so is what has just been set
forth. But, as has also been just said, the arts are by no means something wholly
set apart  from the rest of civilization. The same principles of style or method,
and therefore of pulsation, tend to hold for most or all cultural activities except
the basic day-by-day and year-by-year repetitive ones like plowing and reaping,
making a living, cooking and eating, marrying and dying. And even in these
day-by-day activities, style patterns do intrude: we certainly have changing styles
              —                                              —
of cookery usually dignified as cuisines; of marrying early or late, for love
or convenience, and so on; of funerals and corpse disposals. However, let us con-
sider a cultural activity that is obviously neither of the repetitive kind nor
aesthetic, one that passes as cumulatively progressive science.
                                                         :




     We have seen that Greek science and mathematics came in a four-century
spurt and then stood still. The Greeks never did achieve much in simple arith-
                                                                          —
metic, probably partly because their method of writing quantities by letter
symbols denoting certain specific numbers instead of by position numerals
made ordinary computations of any size difficult. Even less was accomplished
                                                                  —
by them in algebra, of which the imperfect rudiments began or first appear to
            —
our view some four hundred years after Greek general mathematical progress
had stopped. The branch of mathematics the Greeks did wholly originate and
                         —
develop was geometry plane, solid, and spherical. Here they substantially "ex-
hausted the pattern," fulfilled its possibilities, and left nothing for others to dis-
                                                                   —
cover. Now geometry is a special way of doing mathematics with a compass
and rule and nothing more, the Greeks insisted. It visualizes properties and rela-
tions; it can be pictured, as algebra and arithmetic cannot be. Although already
truly abstract, geometry easily retains the most concrete aspect of all branches
of mathematics. This geometric approach was the Greek "style" in mathematics.
One part of the style was the Greek emphasis on proportion, which can also be
diagramed; and the Greek avoidance, where possible, of all but integral num-
bers, which can be handled like visible and tangible blocks; and the avoidance
also of negative quantities and irrational fractions, which cannot be handled
in this way. On the positive side again, the Greeks pushed on from their geom-
etry     into conic sections   —dealing with plane cuts across cones, resulting in
curves such as ellipses, parabolas, hyperbolas. This is a branch of mathematics
which we still call by the original name of "conic sections," although we mostly
express its concepts algebraically now. The further limitations of the mathe-
matical style of the Greeks are shown by their failure to develop anything at all
in the field of logarithms, analytical geometry, calculus, or the concept of func-
tion.    What they could do with their geometrical and whole-number manner or
style,    they achieved. Other mathematical possibilities, like these mentioned,
were simply left to be realized by other peoples and times       —chiefly by western
Europeans in the last three or four centuries.
§   '38                BASIC PATTERN     AND STYLE VARIABILITY                             139

        A Style of mathematics quite difTercnt from both the ancient Greek and
the     modern Occidental was briefly developed in China around 1300 but was
soon dropped, then taken up in Japan around 1600, and carried farther there
during the following two centuries. This was an algebraic approach, though
quite different in detail      from Western algebra and very            likely   unconnected
with it. This method was used ingeniously enough; but as neither China nor
Japan had ever discovered or learned geometry, their method or style of mathe-
matics was subject to limitations as great as was the Greek method, though
the limitations    were in many ways almost opposite. For instance, the native
Chinese-Japanese algebra handled negative quantities as freely as                 it   handled
positive ones, but    it   concerned itself very    little   with the properties of shapes,
such as triangles, cylinders, or tetrahedrons.
        In much the same way, the style of ancient Greek science as a whole and
the style of    European science are distinguishable. The Greeks observed, but
without instruments and without standard measures; and they did not ex-
periment. These aids to the prosecution of science were developed only after
A.D. 1500, as   part of the western-European         method of science. Galileo's trials
with bodies falling from the leaning towar of Pisa were made about 1590. The
telescope, invented in      Holland in 1608 (§ 140, 152), was used for astronomical
discovery by Galileo within        two or three years. The microscope was almost
simultaneous. Since understanding of the subtler forms of energy and of the
qualitative properties of matter seems to depend on systematic experimentation,
the basic discoveries in electromagnetism          and chemistry were made still later,
about 1750 to 1800, after the modern European pattern or style of science was
becoming mature.
        We can assume, then, that the higher values of human civilization tend to
be produced in bursts or spurts of growth. This is because their achievement is
dependent on the development of specific methods or styles somewhat similar in
kind to styles in art; and, like art styles, it is limited or exhaustible. Further
progress,    beyond the potentialities of a given style and pattern, normally              re-

quires a pause, followed by a fresh start with a new style or pattern                  —a new
approach to the problem, we might say. This principle seems to apply almost
equally to aesthetic activities, to intellectual ones, to politico-military or national
fortunes, and even to major economic achievements.               At any rate, such related
items as machine versus manual manufacture, mass production, and credit sug-
gest that industrial progress can also be      due to the fact that a "style pattern"
has been devised.



                138. BASIC      PATTERN AND STYLE VARIABILITY
        Dress obviously is heavily involved in the matters under discussion. The
    association of many women to "pattern" is likely to be the paper model
first

from which dresses are cut and shaped. Vulgarly, the word "style" refers to dress
140                                      PATTERNS                                 §   138

first   of all; and it is certainly plain that dress in general is heavily conditioned
by style. But beyond all this, dress excellently exemplifies even basic pattern and
its influence.

        For    instance,   Occidental civilization. Ancient Mediterranean, and East
Asiatic are each characterized by a distinctive, long-term basic pattern of cloth-
ing. In       comparison with our fitted clothing, Greek and Roman clothing was
draped on the body. While this statement is not wholly exact, it is true com-
paratively. Sleeves were little developed, trousers lacking, the waist of clothing
was not fitted in to follow the body, the general effect accentuated the fall of
drapery and the flowing line. The Roman toga was a wrap-around blanket. One
did not slip into it like a coat, one adjusted it to hang in proper folds.
    After prevailing for many centuries, this basic pattern of dress began to
crumble and become transformed toward the end of the Roman Empire, when
the old Hellenic-Latin religion had yielded to Christianity and the total Medi-
terranean civilization was disintegrating and at the point of gradually being
replaced by the beginnings of our Occidental one. Trousers, in spite of protests
and counterlegislation, were adopted from the barbarians. Sleeves came into gen-
eral use. During the Dark Ages, the transition was gradually accomplished.
The fitted clothes might be pretty well concealed under a long coat or cloak,
as in the sixth-century mosaics of the Eastern Emperor Justinian and the Em-
press Theodora; but they were there. By the Middle Ages, they were in the
open; and their pattern is still the fundamental pattern of our own clothing.
The characteristic of this, in contrast with ancient clothing, is that it is cut and
tailored, fitted to the figure. Our word "tailored" is from French tailleur, one
who cuts, carves, or trims; and taille still denotes both the figure as a whole
and the waist. The plan of Western clothing for men is that its parts follow the
limbs as well as the figure. For women, on the contrary, the legs are withdrawn
from sight in a skirt that during most centuries has been ample. From the hips
up, however, the pattern of Western women's wear makes up for the loose skirt
and has a bodice or an equivalent that follows waist, bosom, shoulders, and arms
fairly closely.

        How thoroughly this is our basic type of dress even today, underneath
all local or national variations     and fluctuations of period and fashion, is evident
when we compare Western dress as a whole for the past thousand years with
the East Asiatic in the same millennium. Chinese and Japanese dress is also cut
and tailored, but it is not fitted. It is cut loose, with ample sleeves, or kimono
style, to suggest a broad figure. Trousers are ample, so as to have      almost a skirt
effect.   The use of clothing to model or suggest women's bust, waist, and hip
contour is wholly outside the Far Eastern pattern. Witness the Japanese obi sash
and bow intended to conceal these features, while European women for four
centuries or more have worn corsets and girdles to accentuate them.
        Of course dress is notoriously subject to fashion change. But it is remarkable
how virtually all changes of fashion, alike in Classical, Western, and East
 ^   '38                      BASIC PAITERN   AND STYLE VARIABILITY                      I4I

 Asiatic costume, have consistently ojicratcd each within the basic dress pattern
of    its   own civilization. Fashion creates a thousand bi/.arrc forms and extrava-
gances; but it never has [produced,       among Occidentals, a man's type of dress
based on toga instead of trousers, nor a woman's with a Japanese silhouette.
The matter of fashion changes, which represent a minor sort of restless and
anonymous innovation or invention, is discussed elsewhere (§ 164), with em-
phasis on a concealed rhythm or regularity much greater than the participants
in a fashion are ordinarily          aware of. But there    is   another aspect of fashion
change— what may be called the intensity of its alteration, its momentary degree
of variability    —
               that both defines the basic pattern and helps to explain variation
from it. Variability is high when the fashion of one year differs considerably
from that of the year before; it is still more so when a series of particular dresses,
all   of the same year, differ considerably       from one another. Low variability of
course is marked by small differences of this sort. Such variabilities are easily
expressed statistically."
          The underlying fashion swings or trends change what might be called the
total silhouette of dress rather   than its details. These minor features may come
and go quite rapidly, and are what give the impression nearly everyone has
that dress fashions are highly unstable.          On the contrary, the total silhouette
shifts rather steadily for        perhaps fifty years toward one extreme of proportion,
such as a narrow skirt for women, and then for about fifty years toward the
opposite, giving a wavelength of close to a century for the periodicity,             which
seems to be adhered to with fair consistency in case after case.
       It   might be thought that the basic pattern       (for Occidental   women's dress
during the last hundred and fifty years) would lie somewhere between these
proportion extremes. Occasionally it does. But mostly the basic pattern proves
to coincide with one of the extremes. The other extreme then represents a sort
of opposition or aberration from the pattern. One might describe these aberrant
extremes as the proportions 'still just inside the pattern but as far away as pos-
sible from its center of gravity.       Or one might say the aberrant extreme is anti-
thetical    — almost perversely antithetical—to the ideal or saturation point of the
pattern, though still barely remaining within its range. Thus, as the permanent
Western pattern aims at amplitude from the hips down but slenderness above,
the silhouette-extremes conformable to the pattern would be: full or wide skirt,
long or low skirt, narrow waist, and therefore waistline just at the waist proper.
The antithetical extremes would be: narrow skirt, short skirt, wide or full
waist, and waistline moved from the anatomically narrowest part up toward
the broader breast or down toward the broader hips. In this last proportion

                                 —
position of the waistline pattern saturation evidently falls at the midpoint be-
tween extremes. In the three other proportions, pattern saturation coincides with
one of the extremes.
      ^   By the standard deviation or sigma, converted into a percentage of the mean as the
coefficient of variability.
142                                    PATTERNS                                    §   138

      A   glance at the silhouettes in the   upper row of Figure 19, showing char-
acteristic dress at   twenty-year intervals during the latter and larger part of the
nineteenth century, reveals what characterizes the pattern      —   its   consant stable
features    underneath temporary fluctuations.      The lower row gives two            sil-

houettes from the period of the French Revolution and Napoleon, and two
                                        —
from the period of the World Wars two eras of sociopolitical restlessness en-
closing the relative calm of Victorian times. Here skirts are in evidence that
are narrow or high or both, and waists that are thick or ultrahigh or ultralow
the aberrant extremes.


   VARIABILITY IN EUROPEAN WOMEn's DRESS SILHOUETTE DURING
        FOUR YEARS OF PATTERN CONFORMITY AND STABILITY
                              COMPARED WITH
               FOUR YEARS OF PATTERN STRAIN AND INSTABILITY
                                                               *
                       Stable Pattern Years: Low Variability
                              1859                                     1899




      1789                                      1916




                              1813                                      1935
         FIG. 19.         BASIC STYLE PATTERN IN WOMEN S CLOTHES
    Transient fashions conforming to basic pattern in upper stagger contrast with in-
trinsic departuresfrom pattern in the lower. Also, upper figures are accompanied by low
variability of fashion,and date from the calm Victorian era; lower figures show high
variability and date from Revolution, Napoleonic, and World War periods.
144                                            PATTERNS                                     § 138


the mode, whereas in times of calm they design them as aUke as they can make
them and       still    keep them from being          identical.   What evidently happens is
merely that in periods of general stress, when the foundations of society and
civilization  seem rocked, the pattern of dress is also infected and subject to
strain. It expresses this strain   by moving from stable saturation to aberration,
antithesis, restlessness, and instability.''
     This example may make more concrete the role of patterns both style            —
                                               —
patterns and total-culture patterns in cultural change and stability. Not that
patterns are the beginning and end of everything about civilization. But prac-
tically everything in culture occurs as part of one or more patterns. Hence

whatever happens in the way of accomplishment, alteration, succession, or per-
sistence in any culture is Hkely to happen through the mechanism of patterns.
We do not yet know too much about them, because awareness of patterns is
relatively recent in anthropology.             But it is already clear that understanding of
culture as something more than an endless series of haphazard items is going
to    be achieved largely through recognition of patterns and our ability to
analyze them.



                 139.     THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS
      We have seen that the higher values of civilizations, their greater accom-
plishments, tend to be achieved spasmodically, in intermittent bursts. Also, these
bursts can be associated with the growth and fulfillment of style-type patterns.
Yet there is something else equally associated with the bursts of cultural pro-
ductivity. This is frequency of genius, frequency of extraordinarily gifted
individuals.
      Personalities        of the    very highest ability    —whether in ruling, thinking,
imagining,       innovating,        warring,    or   religious   influencing—have long been
known to occur in concentrations of country and period. The list in § 136 is not
only a tabulation of when drama, sculpture, war, philosophy, and other activities
of culture flourished in ancient Greece; it is equally an enumeration of its great
men, its outstanding geniuses. The philosophy, for instance, is exemplified by
Plato and Aristotle, by their predecessors like Democritus and Socrates, by their
successors like Epicurus and Zeno the Stoic. Or we can equally well say that it is
these men who produced the philosophy. These are but two ways of describing
the   same phenomenon. Obviously, there is not going to be much important
philosophy without able philosophers around, nor able philosophers without
important philosophy to show for it.

      ^ Literally,   of course, it is the minds of designers of dresses that are affected and show
strain in their creations.     But since such individuals tend to be affected and to react more
or less alike, it is their common behavior, and the common drift of their products, that are
historically most significant. This significance in turn justifies the use of short-cut metaphors
like "patterns       being infected," "straining," "moving," "saturating," "freezing."
§    139               THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I45

         Of these two related aspects, the philosophy and the philosophers, the ac-
tivity      and product or the personalities, there is no doubt which        is   the easier
to grasp: the concrete persons. All sorts of Athenian contemporaries saw, heard,
and perhaps touched Socrates, and had quite definite reacticjns to him and judg-
                        —
ments of his merits Athenians who nevertheless knew little and understood
less of his thoughts. Through the accounts of Plato and Xenophon, Socrates re-

mains today a very living and real personality whom one can never quite forget
even if one's interest in philosophy be zero or negative. Hence ordinarily we
tend to think first of Socrates the man and secondarily of what new ideas he
produced. To put it on a lower level, a child cannot comprehend a philosophy,
but it can comprehend events like being married to Xantippe or drinking hem-
lock in prison. The first recognition of the two-faced type of phenomenon                we
are dealing with, accordingly, was in terms of great men and their near-simul-
taneity or clustering. This fact was already recognized by the later Greeks and
the      Romans. Velleius   Paterculus, a historian contemporary          with Augustus,
has quite a little passage on it. No one since appears to have doubted it.
         However, as long as the matter is viewed simply           as   one of persons,   it

remains rather meaningless      —curious but inexplicable.    It   came to be accepted
that there are golden ages thickly studded with great           men achieving unfor-
gettable products; silver ages with somewhat lesser men attaining smaller per-
formance; and ordinary times when men of ability or talent are still available
though the great lights of history just do not put in their appearance. But no
reason was manifest, through   many unstatistically minded centuries, for such
fluctuations,which glaringly violate the principle of random distribution or
accidental occurrence, and therefore suggest that there must be specific factors
at work to produce the      unevennesses.
         Biologically we know that hereditary races are constant to the degree that
if   a     thousand morons and one   man of genius are born per million in this
generation, the proportion is unlikely to be seriously different in the next gen-
eration or for a number of generations following. If Athens for a thousand years
had no great men, began to have a few in the sixth century, produced an aston-
ishing number of geniuses of absolutely first rank in the fifth and fourth cen-
                                then became sterile again and has remained so
turies, tapered off in the third,

until now, there is no known mechanism of heredity which can explain this
fluctuation of incidence of high ability; nor is it within the reasonable bounds
of mere statistical possibility. Galton, who still argued for a change to inherent
race superiority in the Athenians (§90), because Httle         was known before his
time about the heredity of intelligence and ability, already recognized that the
brief upcurve could not be a statistical accident, but that it must indicate some
factor at work. Nor is there any serious doubt now what that factor is, among
the ancient Athenians and in similar cases. It     is,   in general,    what is variously
called the milieu, the social environment, the cultural context, the condition of
civilization.    More specifically, the involved factor may be supposed to be the
146                                     PATTERNS                                    § 139

nature and degree of development of the value or style patterns of the Greeks,
and among them of the Athenians in particular, around 500 b.c. There was a
style of tragedy, for instance, in the     making then. Aeschylus developed this
tragic style farther in the grand manner, Sophocles freed it from the last traces
of archaism, Euripides introduced the final psychological finesses            and tender-
nesses   —and in this style of tragedy there was nothing essential or important
left to   be done. If there had been an unfinished remnant to be achieved, it is
expectable that this remnant would have been contributed. With the exhaustion
of the Greek tragic pattern, no very great Greek tragic poets could arise, it may
fairly be argued. There was nothing left for them to do in the Athenian pattern.

Nor could they, as children of their time and place, conceivably invent Eliza-
bethan or Japanese tragedy, not even in Attic Greek language dress.
      Now this explanation does not mean that the state of the dramatic pattern
in Athens around 400 b.c. prevented the birth of men endowed by nature with
high potential ability of expressing themselves in tragic poetry. Such a direct
reaction of a momentary condition of culture on organic heredity would be an
even more unreasonable belief than Galton's belief that the heredity turned
itself   on and off again within a dozen generations like a playful faucet. What
the situation does warrant us in inferring is that when general cultural condi-
tions and specific dramatic pattern conditions were at their optimum in Greece,
there would be an average of one individual of the poetic potentiality and caliber
of Sophocles or Euripides born      among so and so many thousand or million
Athenians; and also that these rare individuals would be able to realize or
express their gift by writing tragedies. When the general and specific pattern
conditions were not at optimum, there would continue to be just as many po-
tential poetic geniuses  born among the same number of Athenians, but they
would not become tragedians, or if they stubbornly tried to, they would find
that their say had already been said, and that instead of fame they were ac-
quiring mainly a repute for being somewhat dull repeaters. Conceivably, if
they had a somewhat different vein in them also, they might still become great
comic poets, since Athenian comedy ran a somewhat later course than tragedy.
Or if their gifts were not too narrowly specialized but <vere plastically adaptable,
these potential geniuses might have become actualized geniuses in oratory or
history-writing, or perhaps even in philosophy. Here we are at the border of
certainty of opinion, because no one yet knows how far the high capacities that
                                             —
we call genius are congenitally specialized say for poetry and not for prose or     —
                                                            —
on the contrary how far these capacities are general like articulateness of ex-
pression, for instance, or originality of ideas   —and   it is   a matter of conditioning
after birth that   determines whether the inherent genius is to become a writer
of tragedy, comedy, lyrics, or prose.
      In any event, within a very few hundred years there was no form of litera-
ture left active in Athens, and soon after that no form of cultural activity any-
where among Greeks,       in   which a congenital super-AAA genius could any
S    139                  THE CLUSTERING AND NATURE OF GENIUS                              I47

longer hope to attain supcr-AAA rating. This was hecause the possibihties of
Greek civilization were so used up, its pattern so exhausted, that no supcr-AAA
achievement was any longer possible in that civilization. The same one-in-four-
thousand or two-hundred-in-a-million births of top-flight                ability   presumably
continued to take place in Greek society in subsequent times as before.' But
these individuals simply no longer had any chance to become top-flighters. They
very likely became the leaders of their day; but posterity would rate them only
BBB instead of AAA, because what posterity can judge, or does judge, is accom-
plishment. What posterity cannot readily judge, of course, and ordinarily is too
busy to try to, is how much of any accompHshment is due to innate or heredi-
tary endowment and            how much due to favorable cultural and environmental
circumstance.
   What we have in this whole matter, in summary, is first the fact that great
men do constellate, or genius does cluster; and second, an explanation of that
fact in    terms of degree of development of patterns of the style type. A third
consideration may be added; namely, the reflection that only a fraction of all
the men congenitally equipped for genius ever actualize as such. Only a frac-
tion are ever found out, or allowed the rank,             by history. This fraction is the
same as the proportion that the number of generations recognized as fruitful and
genius-studded, in all lands, bears to the number of barren, geniusless genera-
tions. This proportion can hardly be reckoned as greater than               one in four, and
may be as Uttle as one in ten, if we take into account all the regions and eras
of the world in which it is customary not to recognize any geniuses as having
occurred.
       There is a point of impressive significance here. Human biological heredity
runs good enough to produce, once in every so many hundred thousand or
million births, an individual so highly gifted as to be capable of becoming one
of the lights of our species, a benefactor or a creator whose work will Uve in
history;    and yet the nature of our culture manages to neutralize or frustrate
from seventy-five to perhaps ninety out of every hundred such great geniuses,
or to depress them into mere second-rank talents or transient leaders of soon-
forgotten days. Ideally considered, this is a tremendous waste from the point
of view of those concerned with            human achievement. It certainly invites the
consideration of eugenicists, to whom it offers the pessimistic prospect that even
if   they should succeed in improving the heredity of our species, three-fourths
or more of the gain would be lost again by the shockingly wasteful way in which
civilization to date has operated.'

      * Gallon computed 248 in a million, or i in 4032, as born in Attica 530-430 B.C.

      " This over-all   wastage of 75 per cent or more of the finest congenital talents born in
the human species       may seem to constitute a blasting indictment of human culture. But
without culture, the waste would be a complete 100 per cent. Culture is admittedly still
an imperfect instrument.
148                                    PATTERNS                                      § 139


        Logically, of course, what we have in this situation about genius   is   a dis-
