culture or in all human culture, and to be lost more rapidly, than broad, varied
activities such as fishing or   animal husbandry, or than large systems such as a
religion or a method of writing. The counterpart is that the small trait generally
also gets accepted more readily than a big complex. This is logically obvious;
and the chief significance of the point perhaps is to help us guard against deal-
ing alike with noncomparables-—little things and big, isolated bits and ramified
networks.
      Replacements, modifications, and substitutions are, broadly speaking, more
characteristic of the changes of organic evolution; additive increments are more
typical of the changes of human culture (§ 5, 127). But this difference            is   prob-
ably most accentuated in artifacts, tools, and technologies, where a whole array
of devices serving similar but not quite identical purposes can easily exist side
by side with advantage and without conflict       —say tenons, pegs,        nails, screws,

rivets, lashings, which all   hold parts together. Religions, writings, or social sys-
tems may also coexist— witness the three "religions" of China and the two writ-
ings of Korea (§ 221); but between such there is likely to be strain or conflict,
and time is required for an adjustment, if one is worked out at all. And partic-
ular items are likely to be rejected or forced out where they are in conflict with
a  dominant socioreligious system: blood sacrifice in Christianity or Moham-
medanism, for instance, or cross-cousin marriage in our Western society. But it
is hard to imagine any socioreligious system so averse in principle to crank

handles or screws as to force their abandonment from its culture.
      The contrast of the organic process as substitutive, of the cultural as ad-
                                                              mean that organic
ditive, is broadly true, but it must not be forced so far as to

novelties occur only as substitutions     —that   is,   as   accompaniment of      losses

while cultural novelties are regularly incremental. It         is   true that   when birds
evolved out of reptiles they gave up a pair of running limbs to acquire a pair
of wings, whereas when men learned to fly in airplanes it was not by sacrificing
arms      —nor even wagons, railroads, and motorcars. From the point of view of the
history of birds themselves it is true enough that they acquired flight by a trans-
formative substitution. But from the angle of the evolution of life as a grand
total there was also an increment: running reptiles and flying birds where there

had been only running reptiles before. And much the same had happened mil-
lions of years before when some branch of the ancestral anthronods, having
developed air-breathing and come out of the water, somehow got two pairs of
190                                    CULTURE PROCESSES                               § 160


wings and soared away as insects. The natural tendency in dealing with animals
is   to consider what happens to a particular line of descent in        its   evolution, but
in dealing withman to view a cultural change as if it affected the totality of
human culture. And not without reason, since an innovation may and some-
times actually does spread to all cultures, whereas the wings developed by birds
remain confined to descendants of birds: they cannot possibly spread to non-
descendants. In short, the contrast of basic process of organic evolution and
cultural evolution     is   valid     and fundamental; only it must not be pushed to
exaggeration by comparison of a single line of organic development with the
whole breadth of cultural development. Culture also has its substitutions,
                                  —
and therewith its losses especially the single or particular culture as viewed
separately.



                161.   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES
      When we come finally to the question of cultural death, it is particularly
important to define the problem so as not to get enmeshed in what is really
a metaphor. There is presumably             no possibility of all human culture "dying";
that is, disappearing from internal causes. Of course, the cooling of the sun, the
loss of our atmosphere, a collision of the earth or its atomic explosion         —any such
event that extinguished the            human race — would automatically extinguish all
culture with it.   But that would not be an inherent or a spontaneous death. It
may be assumed that culture has sufficient survival value for our naked, unarmed
species so that if any branches of man, for whatever reason, got into the way of
somehow consecutively diminishing or destroying their own stock of culture,
they would inevitably be eliminated in competition with those branches which
advanced or even only maintained theirs.
      At the opposite end of the scale, as concerns culture traits or items      —customs,
techniques, beliefs   —   it is   obvious that these get changed, replaced, and lost, but
that there is no need of applying to these matter-of-fact happenings any               term
so metaphorical, so charged with emotional connotations, as "death."
      The situation in connection with which the phrase probably arose and has
a possible meaning is the passing away of particular national cultures. If there
really is a "decline and fall" of civilizations or peoples, there might well also be
a "death." What seems to be actually involved in such cases is the dissolution of
a particular assemblage of cultural content, configurated in a more or less unique
set of patterns belonging to a          nation or a group of nations. Such particular as-
semblages and constellations do unquestionably "die out"; that is, they dissolve
away, disappear, and are replaced by new ones. The elements of the content of
such cultures may have previously spread to other cultures and survive there.
Or their place may be taken at home by elements introduced from abroad. Or
they may survive, with or without modification, at home, in the different con-
figuration that gradually takes the place of the old one as a successor culture. All
 § l6l                   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES                            I9I

 thai goes out of existence or "dies" in such cases     is   a particular, characterized,
over-all configuration or pattern grouping.
    Thus there can be no question that the culture of ancient Egypt is "dead"
though a more precise formulation would be that its specific pattern assemblage
has long since ceased to function or exist anywhere.         We even know a good deal
of the circumstances of the dissolution. Toward 1400 B.C. there was a last great
flourishing of the Egyptian patterns. True, there had been a premonitory sympn
tom a few centuries before in the irruption of the Hyksos, the first conquerors
of Egypt, even though transient ones. But there had been recovery from this,
and on the rebound the greatest military might, expansion, wealth, excellence
of art, and development of thought were attained by the Egyptians.              The in-
herent patterns of their culture may be said to have been fully realized or to
have been saturated then. After that, with pattern potentialities exhausted, there
could be only diminished or devitalized repetition; unless the patterns can be
reformulated in the direction of a new set of values    —which would be equivalent
to recasting the civilization into a new one or into a thoroughly         new phase of
one. This latter did not happen in Egypt; so more and more sluggish, mechani-
cal repetition    within the realized but fully exhausted patterns became the uni-
versal vogue. After about 1200 b.c, general decline is evident. There were civil
wars and rival dynasties, failure of art, and evidently of wealth, with only tempo-
rary checks.      The last line of fairly successful rulers maintained themselves
through Greek and other foreign mercenaries, while foreign ideas seeped in.
From 700 B.C. on, Assyrian, Persian, Macedonian, and Roman conquests suc-
ceeded one another, with the upper classes increasingly Hellenized, and finally
all classes    Christianized.   By a.d. 600 the old civilization had disappeared sub-
stantially as completely as now.       No one worshiped Osiris or the hawk-headed
Horus, no one could read hieroglyphs, no one mummified his dead, no one was
Pharaoh. The Arab conquest and Islamization beginning a few decades later
merely superimposed one more stratum on the cultural layers under which the
old native civilization was already buried forever. The moment of "death" may
be impossible to specify, just because the process of "dying" went on so long and
is   so continuously evident.
    Egyptian culture as a unique nexus and entity thus went out of existence.
But the society to which it had been attached went on. The Hellenized Egyp-
tians of Cleopatra's time, the Hellenized Christian Egyptians of a.d. 500, the
Mohammedan Egyptians of a.d. iooo, and those of today are no doubt mainly
the bodily descendants of those Egyptians who first shaped their distinctive
civilization   around 3500-3000 B.C. Especially is this true as regards the mass of
the population, the rural fellahin. The stream of biological heredity rolled         on
through the millennia with only minor alterations; above it, civilizations grew,
dissolved, entered, and replaced one another.
   The components of the old Egyptian civilization did not perish equally.
Here and there bits of it persist into the thoroughly different culture aggregate
                                    CULTURE PROCESSES                                §   161
192

of present-day Egyptian culture: perhaps a water-bucket sweep,             an ass under
his load. Other elements, like the hieroglyphs        and burial pyramids, have long
since been abandoned everywhere in the world. Other content traits still exist in
one or another of the contemporary living cultures, including our own. If it is
difficult to name such, that is only because the expansive phase of Egyptian cul-

ture productivity took place so long ago     — ended more than a thousand years
                                                 it

before Western civilization began to germinate   —that transmitted elements have
reached us indirectly, at second and third hand, in much altered dress. Original
Egyptian traits perhaps first became Asiatic, then Minoan, Greek, finally Roman,
before they filtered into incipient Occidental culture, with reselection and re-
modeling all along the slow, devious route. But elements, ideas, or stimuli of
probable Egyptian origin are recognizable in our own calendar, writing, religion
(influences contributory to the concepts of monotheism, dying god, afterlife,
Madonna with child), architecture, plant and animal husbandry; and others re-
appear in modern native African cultures (§311).
      This picture seems typical of what ultimately happens to cultures. Their
content is partly superseded and replaced; partly it diffuses through space and
time, in ever new settings and with endless remodeUngs, selections, and recom-
binations. The ethnically or nationally individuated pattern aggregates of cul-
ture material     —what we ordinarily     call   civilizations   or culture wholes   —also
change, though slowly. But beyond a certain point it is no longer a matter of
wear and tear with them, of better or worse fortunes, but of either gradual
dissolution or gradual ossification of the nexuses which have held them into an
active integrated whole. Even before they have become mainly loose pieces or
skeleton, another and       younger civilization is usually ready to step into their
place; or,   if   there is none such in the vicinity, a   new civilization may slowly
integrate out of the debris of its indigenous predecessor.
      At any rate, such is, in outline, what history tells us of the aging and death
of past cultures. The corresponding societies, the culture-carrying groups, have
a way of going on; much of the cultural content continues to exist and function
somewhere, and may amplify; it is the particular set of patterned interweavings
of content characterizing a civilization that breaks down.
      The question that inevitably comes to our minds is whether such an end is
necessary, or whether our own civilization    may perhaps escape it. An honest
answer seems to be that available precedent is pretty soUdly one-way, but that
history is never a sure basis for prophecy, since conditions can never be exactly
repeated and precedents are therefore always only partial. For instance, there
might be a new influence of culture-planning. Of this we have so far had only
rudiments as by-products of contemporary social planning; for most social plan-
ning to date aims essentially to freeze most of the existing cultural values while
trying to distribute their benefits more satisfactorily among the members of the
society —or among       all societies.
§   l6l                   PROBLEM OF THE DEATH OF CULTURES                           193

      What is of interest in this connection is the contemporary trend of other
cuhures to assimilate themselves to Occidental civilization, of Turks, Arabs,
Indians, Chinese, and Japanese to "Westernize" in their ways of life and stand-
ards.     Mankind has never before been essentially unitary in culture. It is not
yet unitary; but at the moment it is traveling fast that way. A good many per-
sons, as diverse as ardent Christian missionaries. Communists, generalized ideal-
ists, until   1945 even Fascists and Nazis, look forward to the universality of civili-
zation    — implicitly their kind of civilization—as a goal and a boon. But there      is

this consideration:       Suppose we attain a single, essentially uniform, world-wide
civilization that has supplanted the many diverse ones of the past. And suppose
that in attaining this       one civilization we achieve   its   aims, realize the values
potential in     its       What then when the exhausted, repetitive stage is
                       patterns.
reached, and there is no new rival culture to take over responsibility and oppor-
tunity and start fresh with new values in a different set of patterns —what then ?
      There is no precedent, and no answer, optimistic or pessimistic, can be
proved for this future contingency. But the question is worth thinking about.
                              CHAPTER TEN

                             Culture Change


162.   TYPES 'tJF CULTURE      CHANGE     163.    SUBSISTENCE         AND POPULATION CHANGES
164. FASHION CHANGE        1 65.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREED-
ING     166. LABILE SOCIAL   STRUCTURES     167.   AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE               168. CUL-

TURAL fatigue: TABOO IN HAWAII             169.    CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION
170. CHANGE BY REVOLUTION            I7I. EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION                I72. RESISTANCE

TO DIFFUSION       173. MARGINAL CULTURES         174. MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS            175.
INTERNAL MARGINALITY          176.    ACCULTURATION           177.   ACCULTURATION WITH AND
WITHOUT DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                 1 78.   JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES
IN ASIA     179.   VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION                    180.    NATIVISM, RE-
VIVALS, AND MESSIAHS       181. ETHNIC REVIVALS            1 82.   ASSIMILATION AND UNIFORMITY



                         162. TYPES OF       CULTURE CHANGE
         FAR we have considered culture as if it constituted a kind of world of
SoBrahma,           Vishnu, and Siva representing creation, preservation, and de-
        struction: that being, in a sort of way,    what invention, persistence, and
loss might be called.     But in the actual physical world, as compared to a logical
one, there is a lot of change that ultimately is neither creation nor destruction,
but just change. In fact change is more frequent and more certain in the natural
world than either creation or destruction. Most physicists would deny both crea-
tion and destruction for energy as well as matter; but they would say that what
physics is concerned with is changes and redistributions of energy and matter.
So in culture too there are a great many happenings, such as the growth of swing
music, of informal manners and casual greeting, of sitting with legs crossed,
which are undoubted changes of recent decades and yet would be hard to fit with
sense into any rigid scheme of invention-persistence-loss. Nor are such changes
all trifling: drifts   toward or away from totalitarianism or democracy, or funda-
mentalism or liberalism, or industrialism or laissez faire, are of the same order
as these examples, in that they are gradual and growthUke instead of happening

in jumps or steps.
       We have accordingly to consider also cultural changes of the kind com-
parable to growths. For convenience of approach, we can separate off,                       among
 ^   '63                SUBSISTENCE AND POPULAllON CHANCES                               I95

 such changes, those which arc due mostly to internal factors and thus seem
 "spontaneous" in a culture, and those due chiefly to factors external to a culture
 and therefore induced in it.
        Among changes from inside we have, first of all, alterations on the sub-
 sistence-economic-technological level such as the Neolithic Revolution (§ 262),
 the Industrial Revolution of recent centuries, the increasing urbanization of con-
 temporary times, and many smaller shifts. These seem to be disunguished by
 what may be called a distinctive circular causality, about which more in a mo-
 ment. Another large group of changes can be attributed to the biological play
 impulse in its cultural expression. These include fashion fluctuations, but also
 many that are not ordinarily classed under fashion. Affective factors     —      restless-

 ness, strivings, boredom, repugnances, fatigue    —are often involved in this group
of phenomena. In fact, the emotional associations are sometimes quite dispropor-
tionate to the seriousness of the actual change, so that we are here skirting the
field of social   psychology. Finally, we have growth changes, leading gradually
to new religions, different idea systems, social reconstructions, basically altered
culture patterns. Revolutions, whether affecting one institution or a whole cul-
ture, form an extreme and special form of changes of this last class.

       Changes from the outside relate either to culture elements or           traits,   the
spread and introduction of which is usually called diffusion; or to the spread of
larger pattern systems or complexes, such as the alphabet or Islam; or to the
increasing contact of culture wholes, with attrition, penetration, and adjustments
of these. This last type of externally caused culture change can be subsumed as
acculturation, that word being construed as having outgrown its originally nar-
rower meaning of assimilation     —as will appear in the   final sections of this chapter.

       In the technical literature of anthropology certain similar features occurring
in cultures of different periods, or of widely separated areas, are attributed to
processes called independent parallel development and convergence; but other
similarities are attributed to contact, dissemination, diffusion, or dispersal (§ 108,

109, 223). Parallels and convergences are due to internal or "spontaneous" growth
factors; diffusions, as just stated, represent influences    on a given culture from
others outside it.



                163. SUBSISTENCE       AND POPULATION CHANGES
    There is a group of basic factors that can have deep influence on the fortunes
of societies and may affect the whole of their cultures. These factors include
serious alterations in the environment, sufficiently heavy growth of population
within a given territory, and fundamental changes in subsistence technique. It
is   evident that these factors are, strictly, subcultural, except for subsistence; and
this, of course, not only is basal in culture, but in the case of farming and stock-

raising the subsistence provision amounts to the creation of an artificial or man
controlled floral and faunal environment.
196                               CULTURE CHANGE                                §   163

       An environment may alter with climate; or a people may abandon an old
habitat, or be driven from it. If their new home is environmentally different
enough to enforce a change in methods of subsistence, the rest of their old cul-
ture may alter profoundly. It does not follow that the new situation is inferior;
it   may be better or worse.
       Changes in culture due to natural changes in environment undoubtedly
occur.   But this explanation for cultural change has probably been propounded
ten times for ever/ actual case of such change, especially in the long subarid belt
from North China to southern and western Africa. Here there has been a mania
or a fashion to posit pluvial periods followed by dry ones, with change from
fertile lands to steppe and from steppe to desert, and with populations swarm-

ing out in consequence, or shrinking and impoverishing. If we go back far
enough, there is no doubt that such climatic alterations have occurred. Yet it
should always be recollected that ten thousand years is only a minimal unit in
geology but an enormously long time in human history. Consequently, the two
kinds of evidence barely meet; and it is where the evidential contact is poorest
that the sparks of imaginative theory fly thickest. The explanation has certainly
been worked hard, all the way from the Old Stone Age in Kenya to Jenghis
Khan coming out of Mongolia, and there are very few scholars who really have
enough control of all the data to separate the valid from the invalid guesses.
There does seem to be general agreement that North Africa was moister about
ten thousand years ago than it is now. But it is difficult to be sure of the extent
of this change, or its precise effects on culture, which is infinitely more plastic
and capable of rapid change than slow-moving climate is.
     The transition from PalaeoHthic to Mesolithic culture in northern Europe
is now generally associated with the cUmatic change at the end of the last glacial

period, which allowed forests to grow where there had been tundra, steppe, or
grassland before (§ 276). The change in vegetation and fauna at the time seems
well attested. That it was also the cause of the cultural change is plausible, but,
in the nature of things, less certain history is full of new culture phases without
                                      :




environment being involved.
      More localized changes are sometimes well established. About 1425 the
herring suddenly shifted their run and began to do their main spawning in the
North Sea instead of the Baltic. The Holland fishermen profited economically,
the Hanseatic Germans were the losers; and after about 1500, the Dutch, who
till then had always trailed the Belgians in the Low Countries in prosperity and

therewith in cultural productivity, began to draw abreast of them, and finally
to forge ahead.
       The general effect of increased population on culture has already been dis-
cussed in § 118 and 121. This is an expectable influence, a sort of reasonable a
priori. It is validated at least partially   by the fact that we find no very rich or
advanced cultures among small populations.
§    163                    SUBSISTENCE AND POPULATION CHANCES                                   1^7

    That man-made new environment, the utilitarian domestication of animals
and plants, which in prehistory is sometimes called the Neolithic Revolution
(§281, 282), certainly provided a subsistence that for the long pull was more
dependable than gathering and hunting had been, and it seems to have been
followed by an increase of population. This new turn of culture became notice-
able first in the Near East, the general region of southwestern Asia, and was
followed there within a millennium or two by town life, building in brick, per-
manent structures for worship, metallurgy; and, in another millennium, by
                               records (§ 286). We are now, around 3000 B.C.,
cities, rulers, states, writing, and

at    the beginning of history, in the narrowest sense of that word, as well as of
higher civilization, in the Near East; but Europe of the time was only beginning
to enter upon its first acquaintance with farming and the Neolithic. The regional
difference is almost certainly due to the fact that ancestral grains and animals
native to western Asia were first domesticated there. Here, accordingly, it was
that the population gradually             grew denser and that an advanced and partly
urbanized type of civilization developed, while the diffusion of farming outward
from this center was only commencing.
       It is characteristic     of this kind of culture change which advantageously af-
fects subsistence that its causality tends to be circular,^ or self-reinforcing, at least

for a time. More and surer subsistence leads both to population increase and to
specialization of skills and occupation. The specialization again makes for more
stock of wealth, more varied and larger consumer demands, more concentrated
productivity, and the chance for further population growth (see § 118).
       Circular causalities similar to that of the ancient Near East seem to have
been set going also in India and China and, more slowly, in Europe. Fairly
soon after agriculture reached these areas, it was followed by metallurgical and
other crafts, towns and states, and a population increase. In native America,
again, massed populations, cities, conquest empires, and metallurgy characterize
the areas between           Mexico and Peru where farming was probably oldest and
certainly most intensive. All these cases also are findings based on archaeological
evidence.
       However, these growth developments              —except the American one—were              all

interconnected in some measure, as the identity of                   some domesticated plants
and animals shows. They must therefore be construed as at least partly derived
one from another. Consequently they cannot in fairness be counted                         as inde-

pendent instances each reconfirming a law or generalization.
       In fact, it appears to be the surety of ample food supply that is the primary
factor in these circular situations, rather than             farming as such. This is shown
by the population of indigenous northern America, for which                        fairly specific

estimates are available. These are easily highest for ancient nuclear Mexico widi
its   intensive tillage: 7 to 8 people per square mile, or over 700 per unit of a him-

       ^ It   might well be called spiral in many cases, but the technical term is "circular."
198                                  CULTURE CHANGE                            § 1 63


dred square miles. North of the Mexican high-density center, the figures drop to
26 souls per hundred square miles in the farming areas, and still further to only
about 10 in the nonf arming areas as a total. So far we have corroboration. But
from the nonfarming tracts there can be segregated out a narrow strip along the
Pacific coast from Alaska to California, where the density was 65 per hundred
square miles, as against less than 6 in the rest of the hunting-gathering areas. In
this Pacific-coast strip the dependence was on sea and river fishing in the north,

on gathering of acorns and seeds in the south. Neither procedure is likely to cut
seriously into reproductive supply, whereas steady hunting on land does quickly
exhaust game, as soon as the number of hunters becomes considerable. So popu-
lation density was able to mount among the fortunate fishing and gathering
tribes along the Pacific coast until it was two and a half times greater than the

over-all among the farming tribes north of the Rio Grande. To be sure, most of
the eastern groups were not too assiduous in their farming, leaving it mainly to
their women, while the men hunted or warred. Also, farming had come to them
out of the tropics probably not very many centuries before, and it was still
unaccompanied by the cities, states, metallurgy, and calendars which had de-
veloped in Mexico along with, or soon after, agriculture. The relation of the
farming Indians of the eastern United States of a.d. 1492 to those of Mexico
was evidently quite like that of the Neolithic people of Europe around 2500
B.C. —                                                        —
      when population was certainly not yet dense there in comparison to the
populous and hterate kingdoms of contemporary Egypt and Mesopotamia. Left
undisturbed for another thousand or two thousand years, these eastern and cen-
tral United States farming Indians might have caught up; but when discovery

overtook them, they were clearly less populous than the Pacific-coast fishermen,
and probably not quite as far along toward a rich and diversified culture.
    There is no doubt that, given time enough, and on the average, farming
will lead to very    much heavier concentrations of population than are possible
under gathering, fishing, or hunting. Compare, again on the basis of loo-square-
mile units: native Australia, gathering, 5 inhabitants; but Italy 39,000, Japan
50,000,    Belgium 75,000 Kiangsi province 87,000, Java 90,000. In all of history
there has never been a genuine city in a nonfarming culture. All that the fore-
going citation on the northern Pacific-coast Indians proves is that the relation
is   not wholly automatic in favor of food-producers as against food-gatherers.
Nonfarming at its optimum may be accompanied by heavier population than
farming that is newly learned, indifferent, or inefficient.


                              164.    FASHION CHANGE

        A series of cultural activities seems ultimately rooted in the organic play
impulses, which are most developed in the young of mammals especially   —
among the carnivores and the primates (§ 15), These cultural activities include,
first   of all of course, organized games and sports of all kinds; in addition, such
§    164                              lASHION CHANGE                                         I99

expressions of play and relaxation and humor as may be more loosely standard-
ized in the folkways. Definitely to be included, as nourished at least partly from
the same organic root, are science and the arts and fashion        — the sciences and arts
perhaps more so in proportion as they are less colored by utilitarian purposes.
Obviously, this is not saying that the fine arts and pure science are just play: they
are serious endeavors and mostly hard work. Yet in their primary nature they
are neither individually nor socially utilitarian, but are ends in themselves, and
in a way pleasures in themselves, and in this respect they resemble play; just as
the impulses toward, say, curiosity, or rhythm, which go into science or music,
are also found in play. Science        and art may be conceived as cultural sublima-
tions, on the adult level, of hereditary physiological    impulses whose manifesta-
tions in childhood we unhesitatingly class as play.^
       Even more directly than science and art does the realm of fashion, with its
constant seeking for something new, exemplify cultural play activity.      While
fashion change may be sought with considerable eagerness,                 it   is   generally re-
garded with a certain lightness— we might literally say with a playful attitude.
Also like play, fashion is followed most actively when there is a surplus of food,
                        —
energy, and leisure wealth, in cultural terms. In connection with fashion we
think first of variability in dress styles (§ 138) ; but it is evident that there are
changing fashions in houses, furnishings, gardens, and automobiles. In fact, it is
not difficult to recognize some degree of changeable fashions in political and
religious beliefs and in institutions. The sciences, especially the newer ones, are
subject to waves of fashion. The layman, standing respectfully outside, is likely
to be unaware of this: the latest "edict" of science is to him the latest truth. Run-

of-the-mill scientists may share this opinion: they are like the dressmaker who
believes that this year's mode is at last the complete combination of beauty, com-
fort, and serviceability    —forgetting that   if it were, next year's   fashion would have

nothing left but to undo the ideal. The scholar with perspective of his subject
is   aware that ideas and methods come into vogue and pass out, in his field as in
others,    and that part of his business is to distinguish the evanescent fad from
permanent progress. In short, there is hardly a field of culture that is not subject
to some fashion variation.

       It is difficult to say   where fashion ends and where custom, or style in art,
begins, becausecustom and style also change. A possible differential criterion
would construe fashion as change for the sake of change, while style and custom
alter respectively under the pressure of inner developments or of outer                  circum-
stance. But the concepts are continuous, and sure distinction can be made only
at the ends of the scale.

      Not that any of these adult manifestations can be directly reduced to genetic and
       2

physiological causes.They always have cultural antecedents and their immediate determi-
nants are sociocultural behavior. It is only their ultimate basis that is organic and com
parable to play.
200                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                S   164

      When some detail of dress is given a new cut this year, and already begins
to be crowded out by a new cut or trimming next year, there is no         doubt that
we are wholly within the domain of fashion, in fact in its very froth. If, how-
ever, in the second year the new cut or color or embellishment comes back into
stronger favor and is more accentuated, and for the next three or five or ten years
it   becomes increasingly emphasized or exaggerated, and only then begins to be
soft-pedaled, until   it   fades away after another three or five or ten years   —have
we here a fashion growth or style growth? As a matter of fact, in § 137-138 we
have seen that there are features of dress fashion, such as proportions of sil-
houette or figure, which trend in one direction for fifty or more years, and are
as long in   moving back. Underneath the inconsistent year-to-year fluctuations,
or those of a few brief years, women's skirts, for instance, do steadily become
increasingly fuller or increasingly shorter for a half-century at a time.         Such
drifts in   duration are somewhat Hke the economist's "secular trends" which
underlie the fluctuations of the few-year business cycle.
       Such long-term fashion swings are also comparable to growth in art styles.
In painting, neoclassicism, romanticism, impressionism, expressionism, cubism,
have each lasted no longer, or less long, than some of these trends in Western
dress; and the degree of change effected by them is no greater. The total form
and effect of Occidental clothing in 1815, 1865, and 1915 seem about as different
as canvases painted in the classic manner in 1790 are different from the romantic
ones of 1840 and these from the impressionisms of 1890 and surrealisms of 1940.
The main difference is that we like to think of picture-painting and art exhibi-
tions as serious and dignified, and of clothes and fashion shows as frivolous. But
the behavior manifestations of the two sets of phenomena are         much alike, so
                                                     work are similar. One
that we are justified in assuming that the processes at
might even suspect the genuineness of the greater formal or avowed respect
accorded the painter's activity. Presumably for every ten people in our civiliza-
tion really exercised about a change in the manner of paintings there are a thou-
sand who participate personally in changes of dress style, and who would be
intensely perturbed if poverty or a sumptuary        law prohibited them from con-
forming.
      Landscape design or gardening is in an intermediate situation, as regards
the attitude of our culture. It possesses a certain dignity because it is an expres-
sion of luxury and requires at least a measure of prosperity as a threshold. The
tenement dweller contents himself with two or three geraniums in tin cans on
               The reasonably well-to-do, when the city is not too crowded,
the fire escape.
have a garden. The wealthy go in for landscaping a park. The same changes
however occur. In one century gardens are formal in the Italian or the French
manner. In another they are informal or rustic on the English model. Yet even
a small garden cannot conveniently be entirely made over each year like a dress,
so   annual fashions are lacking. But there are fluctuations that are measurable
in relatively brief periods. Rock gardens have a  vogue for a decade or so, and
§    165    VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL HREEDING                           201

then people become tired and pull them up. Pampas grass had                  its   day, but   is

now scarcely any longer to be found except on neglected or avowedly old-
fashioned properties.
       Dress-designing being an art, even though not a very highbrow one, has
style as well as fleeting fashions. It   is   distinctive in that everyone in the society

is   affected by it, and in that its products     wear out and must soon be replaced.
It is perhaps for   these reasons that there is in it a greater element of rapid minor
change than in the other arts, and that we are attuned to being highly aware
of these superficial changes. The processes at work in dress styles presumably
are not very different     from those in other art styles. A dress fashion is in its
nature datable from its appearance. But so are sculptures and paintings datable
to art historians   —within a century    if ancient, usually   within a decade if modern.
This of course not only implies change, but that the change                 is   more or less
regular in the sense of being steady.
       Why it should be in the intrinsic nature of style to change, ordinarily, is
a complex problem, which is still largely unsolved,            though at least part of the
answer lies in the domains of cultural pattern and its control or achievement by
virtuosity.   At any rate, the essential instability of styles strengthens the indica-
tion of the genetic relationship of the arts to physiological play impulses. Pure
fashion of course is an even more immediate manifestation.



    165.   VARIABLE PATTERNS OF MOTIVATION FOR ANIMAL BREEDING

     Akin to fashion changes in dress and art are certain striking variations in
the purposes for which animals were presumably first domesticated and for
which they are still often bred by nonliterate or retarded societies. The range of
this variability from people to people through space is similar to the range of

fashion changes among one people in time. Also, many of the manifestations of
this variability    resemble fashion in being dependent on nonutilitarian moti-
vation.
       We look upon stock-raising as part of farming, as an industry or a useful
business. That it is such among ourselves is of course no proof that it began as
such, that the original motivation in the keeping of animals                was utilitarian.
There are in fact grave doubts that it could have begun that way. Too many
cultures disregard too many of the potential utiUties. All of southeastern Asia
uses no milk, butter, or cheese; also no wool, except for whole sheepskins in the
fleece.    In most of their early distribution horses were not ridden until long
after they    were driven. The pig was an unclean animal and was not eaten in
ancient Egypt, by the Hebrews, or in Islam. Practically             all   Negro tribes keep
      wherever the climate and the tsetse fly permit; but none make cheese,
cattle,

some churn butter for body ointment instead of consumption, and the majority
are so eager to build up their herds that they rarely eat beef.
202                                CULTURE CHANGE                                   § 165


        All in all, the utilization of domesticated animals in ways that seem rational
to us was so incomplete in ancient times, and is so incomplete today among back-
ward peoples, that Galton, Hahn, Laufcr, and others have stressed nonrational
          —
factors affective or sentimental considerations     —as dominant in early stages of
this activity. The motivations range from desire for pets, companionship, or

play to the needs of ritual and magic on the one hand and wealth symbolism
and prestige satisfaction on the other.
     Among the South American forest Indians, monkeys, parrots, and almost
all and any kinds of small animals were freely kept as pets, though there were

no species domesticated for utility, and in parts of Brazil even dogs were lacking.
In some parts of native California dogs were valued for deer-hunting; in others,
they were kept chiefly to be eaten; in still others, they were merely tolerated and
allowed to fend for themselves. In another California region, we have already
seen (§ 159) that dogs were rare, imported as articles of luxury, pampered, and
watched over. This regional Californian diversity illustrates neatly the vagaries
of which primitive culture is capable    —
                                      the workings in it of fashion and fad by
locale instead of by period, we might say    —and how motives of      utility,   of affec-
tion or display, or of indifference, can replace each other.
        Negro kings have been known to keep whole packs or menageries of the
greater    game animals. The Romans imported them largely for slaughter in
their circus games. The wild elephant has long been tamed in India and Farther
India for work and transport, but still more for war and royal show. In Burma
and Siam albino specimens had almost sacred status as embodiments of supreme
kingship. Farther India, by the way, is another area in which pets are in favor
monkeys and young gibbons. On the contrary, in this its presumptive original
home, the common fowl is little esteemed for its eggs, which are few, or for its
meat, which is tough; but since two thousand years ago its thighbones have been
in demand for divination. Bristles are stuck into the blood-vessel foramina of
these bones and the directions of protrusion throw light on the issue in question.
In the pagan parts of Indonesia, chickens are in primary demand for ritual sacri-
fice,   including divination from their bile sacs; in the Islamic and Christian
areas, the pitting of the cocks in fights overshadows other uses. Indonesia and the

adjacent southeast corner of Asia, so far as it is still pagan, perhaps contain the
principal contemporary survivals of the once much more widespread identifica-
tion of ritual sacrifice to the gods with meat-eating by the worshipers     —an asso-
ciation once in force as far west as the Mediterranean (§ 128, 192). It would be
too much to assert that people first bred cattle and pigs in order that they might
sacrifice them. Nevertheless, over a large part of the domesticating area an early

double custom grew up of eating ordinarily only such tame flesh as had been
dedicated to the gods, and of consuming every offering so dedicated. The civi-
lized nations of today might still be following this custom if it had not been dis-
placed by Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism.
   1   66                             LABILE SOCIAL STRUCTURES                               2O3

            It is perhaps the fact that kept animals    muhiply which has led to their being
prized as reserves of              weahh   — not only among pastorals who own       little   else,

but among settled farmers, as among the Greeks and Romans. The word "pe-
cuniary" is from the Latin pecus, cattle, just as "monetary," "money," derives
from Moneta, an epithet of Juno, in whose temple the Romans happened to
mint their coinage; the two terms illustrate the passage from a livestock to a
money economy. Negro East and South Africa has not yet effected this transi-
tion. In favor of cattle as wealth is the fact that they are visible and conspicuous

and lend themselves to prestige display and gifts. Thus it is that their social val-
uation           is   definitely greater than their actual subsistence utility,   among many
Negroes.
            With the Ruwala of Arabia, mares have acquired a similar prestige posi-
tion, while the camel and its milk   what these Beduin (§ 120) live by. Except
                                               is

                                                             and would perish
for occasional raiding, horses are quite useless in the desert,
if turned loose. But they are carried along with bnrley that has to be bought

from alien farmers and which they ihare with the household. In dry times, water
for them has to be carried in by camels. Their pedigrees are kept. They are an
untold worry and trouble; yet a single mare is valued at perhaps twenty riding
dromedaries, and many a man owns only a fractional share in one. Once more,
this Ruwala situation is obviously an excrescence of development, rather than

a condition typical of the origin of stock-raising.            But with the attached a£fects
and motivations so varied now, they are unlikely to have been solidly and uni-
formly utihtarian in the beginning.
        Thus it is clear that men do not live by meat and bread only. They breed
animals for their flesh and milk and hide and wool and traction, but they also
breed them for religion and sport and social climbing and companionship and
show. And from people to people, and from time to time, these ends intertwine
and replace one another in almost endless recombinations: the changes are lit-
erally the play of culture.            We can understand even the most alien of the atti-
tudes, but we cannot explain               more than a part of them from utilitarian need.
The livelihood and profit motives have no doubt mainly sustained the con-
tinuity of stockbreeding through history. But its many other associations and
motivations lend the greater interest to the changeable activity, as we view it
in world-wide retrospect.^



                                166. LABILE SOCIAL       STRUCTURES

        When we pass from dress and animals and arts to institutions, we en-
counter a flood of impermanences and variabilities which suggest that we may
still       be   at times    within the sphere of the play-derived, though unconscious,

      And of course many of the innovations and shifts in respect to domestic animals can
        *

also be included among the play inventions of § 1^8.
204                               CULTURE CHANGE                               S 1 66


activity of culture.   Among primitives, such kbility or instability is most often
extreme in social structure; among lettered peoples, in political forms.
       Consider for instance the situation among the several Brazilian tribes of
the Ge family. Among the Canella or Ramkokamekra there are four separate
and crosscutting moiety organizations    —a moiety being a half of a society    for-
mally set off against the other half for whatever reason or purpose. This is very
much as if among ourselves there were a compulsory segregation of the popu-
lation into first   Democrats and Republicans;    next, Catholics   and Protestants;
third, people  born in odd-numbered and even-numbered years; and finally,
partisans of the American and National baseball leagues, with distribution so
regulated that Democrats and Republicans would be about equally distributed
between Catholics and Protestants, and similarly all down the line, so that the
membership of one complementary pair of moieties would never coincide with
the membership of another pair, but would crosscut all the other moieties as
much as possible. The first pair of Canella moieties is matriUneal and matri-
local   —follows the mother in descent and residence—and regulates marriage
exogamously. The second pair of moieties is concerned with racing and hunting
during the rainy season. It is not concerned with marriage but is totemic     —that
is,   certain animals or natural objects are symbolically representative of each
moiety. And membership in the moiety is determined by names given by older
individuals, theoretically the cross-uncle or mother's brother for boys, the cross-
aunt or father's sister for girls. The totemism of this second pair of moieties is
conceptually extended over all nature. The third set of moieties consists of two
pairs of age classes, each age class comprising all males jointly initiated within
a given period of years. This third pair of moieties also functions in competitive
sports, but in the dry instead of the rainy season. The fourth set of moieties has
membership again based on bestowed names, but the names this time are the
property not of uncles or aunts, but of three groups or subdivisions within each
of the moieties, and of two clubs or four societies. The groups       own assembly
houses that occupy prescribed situations in the circle in which the village        is

built; and they and the clubs function ceremonially in connection with men's
initiations. So far the Canella tribe.

     Among the linguistically related Apinaye, there is only one set of moieties,
matrihneal and matrilocal, whose houses are locaUzed in the village circle, but
who are not at all concerned with marriage. They compete in sports and are
concerned with ceremonial, and are characterized by possession of a series of
personal names bestowed by uncles and aunts. Marriage is separately regulated
by four unlocahzed f{iye or "sides," where A marries B, B with C, C with D,
D  with A, for men; but for women, the rule is the reverse, or really, comple-
mentarily the same,    A marrying D, and so on. These "sides" are not clans, be-
cause clan descent is the same for boys and girls but boys belong to the "side"
of their father, girls to that of their mother. Moreover, the four "sides" group
into two implicit or unavowed intermarrying moieties, one consisting of      A and
§    l66                        LABILE SOCIAL STRUCTURES                           2O5

C, the other of B and D; for A and C both marry with B and D, but never with
each other.
       Still   another   Ge tribe, the Shcrcnte, have exogamous moieties that are
patrilineal and patrilocal and are divided into six clans localized in the village
circle, which seem to correspond partly, but only partly, to the six subdivisions

of the Canella ceremonial moieties.
       Still   another tribe, the Kaingang, associate with their exogamous moieties
the totemic division of nature that the Canella associate with their nonexoga-
mous rainy-season moieties.
       It is   evident that a long array of social forms have been luxuriantly devel-
oped by these Ge tribes: the moiety, moiety subdivisions, their localization within
the circular village, their seasonal functioning, totemism, exogamy, unilateral
descent (both patrilineal and matrilineal, or even both simultaneously accord-
ing to the sex of children), group ownership of names, bestowal of names by
individuals of the uncle or aunt relation, competitive sports, ceremonial asso-
ciations, and      grouping of initiates into age classes. Underlying all these forms
is   the principle of grouping of persons, whether dual or multiple. However, the
very luxuriance of kinds of groups has led to a variety of ways of combining
them, and probably to the constant devising of new kinds of groups, which
made possible still further combinations, or transfer of functions from one set
of groups to another. It is difficult to review the structures of these Brazilian
tribal societies    without a strong impression of their instability: of remodeling,
innovation, and experimentation having been active.
       Inasmuch as the four tribes speak varieties of the same Ge language, they
must be connected in their histories. The diversity of their modern social organi-
zation must accordingly represent changes after a period when they were more
alike. They still share conspicuous remnants of an indubitably         common original
pattern, but each has enormously altered or rearranged this. Evidently, once the
interests of a culture      become weighted in the direction of social structure, the
culture may make the most unexpected combinations and even inventions of
social forms.

       In scattered parts of native America there was practiced the custom of the
ant ordeal. This was a ritual discipline or       test of fortitude,   and consisted of
laying the victim or novice on a hill of biting ants. The act itself was uniform;
its   setting, context, and motivations were quite diverse. Thus, the South Ameri-

can Rucuyenne applied the ordeal to boys undergoing their ceremonial initia-
tion. So did some of the Tupi tribes south of the      Amazon— as did the far-away
Luiseno in California. But back in South America, the Saliva administered the
ant ordeal to their new chiefs on assuming office. The Arawak of Guiana used
it    in mourning; other Guiana tribes, in hunting ritual. It is evident that a dis-
tinctive and rather invariable unit of practice, the ant ordeal itself,      must have
a history of quite varied associations     — has been bandied about from one
                                             it                                     re-
206                                     CULTURE CHANGE                                    § 1 66


ligious       ceremony to another almost like a shuttlecock. Again we see lability
prevalent: looseness of organization rather than stability, fixity, or permanence.
      However, elaborate forms need not appear simply because a                     society      is

primitive. The Eskimo, the Great Basin Shoshoneans, and many other societies
are instances of simple structures free from formal organizational features. The
factors at work in producing these relatively unstructured societies may be con-
nected with subsistence difficulties; they need not be. Extremely interesting is
the discovery among the same clanless Shoshone of the custom of pseudo-cross-
cousin marriage,* in semblance of the cross-cousin marriage favored by so many
other peoples: the favored Shoshone mates are stepcousins, no blood kin at all.
This was certainly a strange practice              to   think up. Relatives continue to be
avoided, but imitation relatives are sought as mates.             Who could deny inven-
                             °
tiveness to primitives ?
      In fact, the ingenuity and imaginativeness of the social structure of much
of primitive life is the essential moral of such facts. Many of the institutions are
true luxury products. They almost certainly serve some function; but it may be
a minor one, while major ends are left formally unprovided for.                  A great deal
of the picture suggests the play of earnest children, or the inventive vagaries
of fashion. This in turn strongly suggests the high instability of many of these
social constructs.      This     instability   cannot ordinarily be absolutely proved, be-
cause our historical knowledge of primitives rarely has much depth; but it is
indicated by the totality of the data.
      PoUtical organization, on the contrary, is something that primitives have in
general not achieved to any notable degree.                 When unlettered peoples have
achieved it, as in Africa and Peru, we tend to exclude them from our concept
of what is primitive. By complement, high civilizations have throughout history
regularly been accompanied by considerable degrees of political organization.
The causes of the difference are probably complex. But weakness of techno-
logical controls and therefore of economic resources among primitives may be
suspected as an important factor. If so, a generic nexus of technological develop-
ment through economics with political organization can be inferred. Primitives
being weak in the former, they remained weak in the latter. Instead, they threw
their cultural interests         and energies into the forms of social structure, into the
institutions concerned with the nearer interpersonal relations.
      In the grand vista of cultural growth, accordingly, technological and politi-
cal developments, which characterize the successfully more complex civilizations,

      * Cross-cousins are the children of brother and sister —whose   sex differs or "crosses"
as contrasted     with parallel cousins, who are the children of two brothers or two      sisters.

We do not make this disdncdon in our culture, either in law, inheritance, or reckoning
of kin    —
        in fact are usually unaware that it can be made. But among many nonliterates, and
even in India and China, the distinction is important. Cross-cousins are often favored as
spouses where parallel cousins are forbidden.
      ^   Some African cases of luxuriation are mendoned in § 312: coexistence of patrilineal
and matrilineal reckoning.
^   '67                          AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANCE                             207
are secondaryand late products reared upon social forms or devices centering
immcmorially around kinship. Some measure of these kinship forms persists
into higher civilization because kinship       is   biologically inescapable   and perhaps
equally inescapable psychologically. But the kinship structures of complex civili-
zations are often reduced, almost always divested of excrescences and luxuriances
of pattern; they have        become humble, simple, subserving real ends.          We no
longer practice pseudo-cross-cousin marriage nor descend from our mothers into
moieties in which we receive names from our uncles. Instead, we buy automo-
biles on the installment plan       and elect officials to police and tax us. The inven-
tiveness and instability so evident in the social        forms of primitive societies arc
largely transferred in higher civihzation to the technological, economic,             and
political fields.



                          167.   AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE
      Is   it   right for a man to marry his stepdaughter?     Here again there is great
variabihty between cultures and at times considerable change within cultures.
Christian countries in which established religion strongly influences the law of
the land have generally barred the practice. Sometimes the prohibition has per-
                                                For the forty-eight American
sisted after disestablishment of the state church.

states the situation in 1940 isshown in the diagrammatic map. Figure 21. A
century or so ago probably all American communities ruled such marriage irre-




            PERMITTED
        PROHIBITED
     S) QUALIFIED
                   LEGALITY OF MARRIAGE WITH A STEPDAUGHTER IN THE
                                    48 UNITED STATES
208                                  CULTURE CHANCE                                     S 1 67


ligious, immoral, and illegal. Most of the older and relatively conservative East-
ern and Southern states still forbid it. But times have changed and twenty-six
of the forty-eight states        no longer prohibit the       practice   —which means   it   is

legally tolerated.Yet two of these salve an uneasy social conscience by going
out of their way to specify extramarital relations with a stepdaughter as punish-
able.

      Of 167 tribal and subtribal groups of Indians investigated between Van-
couver Island and the Rio Grande, three-fourths definitely frowned upon step-
daughter marriage and presumably prevented it. Some 10 per cent disapproved,
but without attempting to do anything about occasional violations. About an-
other 10 per cent of the tribes disliked but tolerated the idea; in other words,
were two-minded about it. Finally, perhaps 5 or 6 per cent of the groups ad-
mitted stepdaughter marriage as a recognized form; that is, gave it institutional
sanction.    The custom is perhaps most common among the matrilineal and
matrilocal Navaho. If a man marries a separated or widowed woman who has
a small daughter,     he often, with her mother's consent, adds the girl as wife
when she grows up. Each woman has less work, and yet the output of the
menage is greater. The total tribal distribution of the custom, shown in Figure
22, is almost randomly scattering, with only slight tendencies toward areal segre-
gation. Highly random local distributions of this scattered type can usually be
interpreted as the result of conflicting influences,  and hence as indicating in-
stability. While   some tribes consistently banned the practice, others backed and
filled and kept changing their rules.

      Why this variability and change       ?   It seems to   spring from a conviction that
isone of very few major premises common to all cultures: that one does not
marry close kin. But variation begins with the definition of who are close kin.
Some peoples bar even third cousins as wives; others permit aunts and half-
sisters.   Some consider all clan mates kin, whether they are or not. Others not
only allow but favor the marriage of first cross-cousins, or again squeamishly
think they should be second cousins. Some religions, like the Greek Orthodox
Christianity,   and until recently the Church of England, class affinals by mar-
riage   —such as sisters-in-law—as kindred, though they are not blood relatives
at all. This is reasonable       enough because of the normally close association and
bonds with near affinal relatives; but it is scarcely logical, if incest has anything
to do with blood. It is of a kind with the Roman Catholic prohibition of mar-

riage with a goddaughter,     toward whom the relation is not even affinal, but
spiritual only.   On the other hand, if the incest prohibition refers to blood kin-
ship, permissibility of stepdaughter         marriage    is   logical   enough. Nevertheless,
many societies consider it unfit and shocking. Even where the practice is tol-
erated, there is often considerable individual repugnance to it; whereas in a few
polygynous groups      it   is   institutionalized.   The issue is evidently the sort of
problem one can argue and counterargue forever. In the end, it is settled by
some feeling or afTect that one has or does not have. This feeling may be quite
U67                           AFFECT IN CULTURE CHANGE                              209
Strong, or it may be ambivalent. Being a feeling about ideas, it gets involved in
logic. Nevertheless, the ultimate determination of the issue is aflectivc, not intel-

lectually realistic; and the motivation of affects is notoriously capricious. Culture

features of this type are therefore likely to remain open problems, to which the
answer keeps varying. Only when the point gets caught up              in   some   larger
organized system of feelings and ideas with big momentum is a consistent long-
term answer expectable.
       It is   not to be assumed that strong affect necessarily produces stability and
persistence.      One can feel vigorously and yet have his feelings change. This is




riG.     12..     STEPDAUGHTER MARRIAGE IN WESTERN INDIAN TRIBES
210                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                  § 167

true also of cultures. Disposal of the dead is a case in point.        Human cultures
have devised a great variety of methods      :   burial, cremation, water burial, setting

away in vaults or canoes or houses, scaffold burial, exposure or simple abandon-
ment, cremation with eating or drinking of the ashes by the relatives, temporary
                                                                      —
inhumation with either reburial or preservation of the bones not to mention
previous mummification, dismemberment, and other related practices. Now
while some societies have adhered for long periods to one basic method of dis-
posing of their dead   —ancient Egypt to mummification and mediaeval Europe
to                                 —others have been changeable. We are our-
     churchyard burial, for instance
selves in the midst of a drift      toward cremation. This may die out again, or
cremation may come to replace burial. Many primitives have apparently changed
often, to judge from the variety of practices found in adjacent groups
                                                                                —"scatter
distributions" again   —   in, say, Africa, or almost   any other continent.
      Here again affect seems to be involved. Death obviously releases immensely
powerful emotions; and a funeral, as the final act of a group toward an indi-
vidual,   comes to participate in this emotion. Once a method has become                a
preference or a custom, there is likely to be a strong affect attached to it. Witness
the vehement feeling of many people among ourselves in regard to cremation
versus burial, even while a progressive change is going on in the community as
a whole. Evidently the affect can attach to something new and remain as strong
as before.   There are also always likely to be parts of the population who are
two-minded, and others who are indifferent on that particular point            —^perhaps
precisely because they feel more strongly about other matters.
      In short, that people feel strongly in connection with a custom does not
per se mean either that they will adhere to it with persistence or that they are
about ready to abandon it. That a cultural practice is invested with emotion is
an important thing about it, but is not decisive for its stability or lability. What
decides between continuance or change seems to be whether or not a practice has
become involved in an organized system of ideas and sentiments how much it:




is interwoven   with other items of culture into a larger pattern. If it is thus con-
nected, even though the rooting be secondary and late, it has good expectations
of persisting, since large systems tend to endure. But a trait that is only loosely
connected and essentially free-floating can be superseded very quickly         — in which
case its affect may simply pass on to the new custom. Mediaeval Christianity
                                                                          —
was such a large, well-integrated system of ideas and sentiments with it both
stepdaughter marriage and cremation would have conflicted. Neither innova-
tion is therefore likely to make much headway in cultures in which Catholicism
remains the controlling force. Calvinism and Puritanism would also certainly
have felt both practices to be out of fit with their systems or points of view, and
would have condemned them. In consciously secularized countries, on the con-
trary, and in many primitive cultures, there is no organized sentiment system

with which these innovations would conflict. In such societies, accordingly, the
practices may easily become established, only to be easily superseded again.
S   l68                  CULTURAL fatigue: taboo in HAWAII                      211


               1   68.   CULTURAL fatigue: taboo in HAWAII
      In 1819 the Polynesians of Hawaii at one stroke abolished their rchgion.
This was five months before the first missionary landed on the islands, and was
therefore a voluntary act. To be sure, Captain Cook had discovered the islands
some forty years before and had been followed by a number of explorers, traders,
and whalers. Through these the Hawaiians had learned of the existence of
Christian beliefs. But it is unlikely that they understood them at all well. They
                                                                         —
had however seen Europeans repeatedly violate religious prohibitions taboos
without being even punished by the native gods, and that must have shaken
Hawaiian faith. Among the natives, this taboo system had grown very power-
ful and no doubt was sometimes felt as onerous. Women might not eat certain

foods, such as bananas and coconuts. It was absolutely irreligious and shocking
for men and   women to eat together. The king let himself be carried over private
lands because contact with his divine body would make the land taboo and un-
touchable by its owner. There were religious festivals that the population cele-
brated by remaining inactive indoors, so as not to break the taboo. The system
was heavily loaded in favor of royalty,      aristocracy,   and priesthood, but ap-
parently was coming to be felt as irritatingly restrictive by these classes also.
      Some years after Cook's discovery, an able chief began to rise to power and
finally fought his way to undisputed rule over the entire island group. This was

the famous Kamehameha I. He died without having departed             from the faith
                                                  Kamehameha II, was a
of his fathers or altered its regulations. His successor,
voung and easy-going man. The group that surrounded and swayed him now
decided to do away with the taboo system. This group included his chief formal
adviser or prime minister; his mother;      and another widow of the preceding
king, named Kaahumanu. The latter was a bold and ambitious person and per-
haps the chief mover in the conspiracy. As a woman she unquestionably had
much to gain by abolition of the taboo. Strangely enough, however, the high
priest of the islands was also active in the coterie, and in fact subsequently took
the lead in extending the      movement from mere abolition of the taboo to the
overthrow of the gods whose representative he was. This man seemingly had
everything to lose by the change, and it is difficult to imagine what he could have
had to gain. It is known that he did not profess to be a convert to the Christian-
ity which was in the offing. He evidently represented, therefore, an element in

the population that was psychologically ready for a breach with established re-
ligion, from internal reasons. Whether such a frame of mind could have devel-

oped before any Caucasian contacts, among Hawaiians who were beneficiaries
of the existing system, seems doubtful. The old Hawaiians, knowing of no re-
ligion but their own, would presumably have found it difficult to imagine or
invent any radically different form of worship. Nevertheless it is also hard to un-
derstand the high priest's motivation, unless he, presumably with many others,
212                              CULTURE CHANGE                               § i68


was tired of the established religious order to a degree that made him ready even
for a switch to something unknown. In addition, the whites enjoyed prestige for
their guns, steel tools, and big ships; and, by extension, their only vaguely known
religion was probably accounted superior.
     It was finally arranged by the conspiring royal entourage that the taboo

should be publicly broken at a great festival. This would amount to a religious
revolution from the throne. As the hour neared, the young king became increas-
ingly uneasy; but he was coaxed and steered to the final act. After the royal
ladies had first eaten forbidden foods in sight of the gathering, the king came
over and ate with them. At first incredulous, the multitude finally reahzed what
                                                                     —
had happened. Shouts went up, and were carried over the island "The taboo
is broken!" The high priest himself mutilated the images of the gods and set

fire to the temple. This action was imitated everywhere in a sort of frenzy. It is

difficult to say now what the real reaction of the population at large was. They

were certainly shocked and excited. Many of them must have been pleased. Some
surely felt outraged, and others were more stirred than participant. The king
was himself divine, so that the act must have resembled a sudden voluntary
abdication by the gods themselves. However, the king's power was also absolute,
and it is therefore likely that the mass of commoners received the event with
some docihty.
     The only overt opposition came from high quarters. Kekuaokalani, a
nephew of the late great king and next in hne of succession to the high priest-
hood, when he could believe his senses rescued one of the god figures and strode
with it from the assembly. He rallied a following of the pious and raised a
revolt. His adherents were numerous and determined. It is evident that the

innovation was not unanimously approved of by the population. Before long it
came to battle. Kekuaokalani was defeated, his following scattered, and the con-
servative protest came to an end. However, the fight is said to have been de-
cided by the Christian-made firearms which the king's side was able to muster.
A few months later the first missionaries landed, were received with open arms
and royal favor, and Hawaii as a whole rapidly became Christian.
     There can be Uttle doubt that we have here, in part, a culture change due
to new contacts. It is also evident that at least some of the reformers were
actuated by motives of personal advantage or convenience, though this does not
apply to all of them. But the main factor seems to have been a kind of social
staleness; the   Hawaiians had become disillusioned, and tired of their religion.
To this extent the incident is illustrative of what may be called cultural fatigue.
It is no doubt an extreme case of such an attitude. But it is probably not wholly

aberrant, and reactions of similar though milder type may be occasional factors
in cultural change.    French defeatism in 1940 was perhaps an example. Nor
would it be difficult to make out a case for social fatigue or staleness having been
operative in bringing on the French Revolution, in addition to exasperation over
abuses and cultural lag and the ferment of new ideologies. The attitude of the
5   169                  CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION                                   213
American people toward the depression of 1929 after it became profound sug-
gests the presence of a considerable factor of the sort, with the New Deal as a
reaction to it. Once an attitude of the kind develops sufficient strength, novelty
as such may come to seem a virtue and a boon.

      One    other consideration       is   worth mentioning. The overthrow of the
Hawaiian religion could not have been effected so rapidly and thoroughly if the
impetus had not come from a strong and respected government. Without this,
there would presumably have been prolonged civil war, and only a gradual
giving-way of the old order to the new. The Japanese Emperor's sudden and
successful renunciation of divinity in 1945 is a somewhat parallel case. In this
respect both events resemble those alterations or reforms of calendrical, writing,
and other pattern systems produced either by grand revolutions or by complete
autocracies, usually in their first flush of power, as discussed in § 170 below.



                 169.    CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION
    Organized religion has a way of being influential in the overturn and the
reconstruction of major civilizations. It works first toward cultural change and
then for conservation. Especially is this true of religions which set out to over-
run the world because they alone are "true" and all other faiths and cults false
and likely to taint even secular activities with which they have become asso-
ciated.   Most primitive and national religions have also started out, naturally
enough, with the assumption of their own verity and importance; but alongside
this they have had naive tolerance of other faiths as being also more or less true,

though of course not quite as good and true, or at any rate not as appropriate for
their own nationals.
      If one were    asked to specify the most important single characteristic distin-
guishing Ancient Mediterranean or Classical from our own Occidental civiliza-
tion—the culture of the Greeks and Romans from that of mediaeval and modern
                     —
Western nations it would almost certainly be Christianity. Our civilization is
patently derived, in large measure even descended, from the Graeco-Roman; but
it contains   very few specific carry-overs from the preceding pagan cults or faiths.
When the fourth-century Roman emperors, like Constantine and Theodosius,
turned Christian, the end of the old order, of the former world view, was in
sight. Within a century we have Rome "falling," and the continuous stream of

history is renamed "mediaeval" instead of "ancient," as a symbol of the trans-
formation.® The mythology and worship of the Greeks had of course been all
intertwined with their literature, art, philosophy, learning, and even manners.
Consequently Christianity in its three centuries of uphill fight tended to become
hostile, suspicious,     grudging, or at best indifferent toward Greek and Roman
      ^ In fact, until not so very long ago, historical convention   had "ancient" history ending
not in A.D. 476 but in 325 with Constantine, the founding of Constantinople, and the Church
Council of Nicaea.
214                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                    S 1^9


achievements in these activities. So it was natural for the Dark Ages to follow
the final supremacy of Christianity; and it was nearly a thousand years before
Christian Europe could even begin to rival the pagan Mediterranean world in
urbanity, knowledge, intellectual penetration, aesthetic performance,              and the
graces of life   —including bodily cleanliness. This      is   not saying that Christianity
was responsible for the long recession. These big historical situations are not ad-
judicated so simply as that. Just as soundly could one contend that Classical
civilization had exhausted    its patterns, was dying away within an empty shell,

and that Christianity moved in to fill the void, but required time to grow a
whole new civilization. However, this is sure: Irrespective of whether it was
more largely cause or effect, Christianity was the pre-eminent point of crystal-
lization for the civilization that superseded the Graeco-Roman one.
     A very similar influence in change of civilization could be made out for
Buddhism and Mohammedanism, the two chief competitors of Christianity as
"world religions." The three share the following characteristics
      1.   They are world religions not because they have encompassed the earth,
but because they aim to encompass it, to be world-wide and supernational, in
distinction from ethnic or tribal religions.
      2.Each is attached to a transcending personality, from whom the name for
the faith  is taken. The usual view is that these personalities as individuals

founded and made their religions. It is however also possible to see the founders
more largely as symbols necessary to this type of religion. Certainly more of the
total content of Christianity     —
                                as distinct from its "essence," which is in its very
                                   —
nature attached to his person was evolved or contributed by his followers and
successors more than by Jesus himself. St. Paul alone is sometimes said to have
added as much as Jesus did. The same is unquestionably true of Buddhism, and
quite possibly of Mohammedanism. Moreover, the fact that all three religions
originated in southwestern Asia within little more than a thousand years, and
followed outwardly parallel courses, suggests a pattern, and that something Hke
them was "in the air"     —that   is, that   the cultural set of the region and times was
pointing that way.
      3.   AU three religions are exclusive, in holding their truth to be incompatible
with any other, so that cobelief and coworship in another faith are impossible
(§ 132).    This doctrine seems to have been first worked out in human history
by the Jews as a gradual and hard-won attainment during that part of their his-
tory represented by the Old Testament, between 800 and 400 b.c. From Judaism
the attitude worked over into Christianity and Islam.             Buddhism has been the
least intransigeant of the three in this respect. It coexists in China with the state

religion or Confucianism,      and in Japan it even worked out certain accommo-
dations with the native Shinto.
      4.   All three religions, and speaking broadly only these three, have been
actively missionizing.
S 169                         CHANGE THROUGH ORGANIZED RELIGION                               215
       Each of the three world religions developed an ecclesiastical organization
          5.

or church, which has been a potent factor in maintaining the religion and its
gains. Culturally, the ideologies have probably had a much more profound effect
than the churches; but the influence of the latter toward a firm anchorage
through temporal fluctuations, and even within the developments of the mun-
dane aspects of civilization, cannot be overestimated. Ethnic or national religions
often had temples, but generally no church as a unifying organization.
       6.      Side by side with the features of world-wide aim, exclusiveness, and an
authoritative church, there developed                 what may be called universal or world
languages. In these were expressed the sacred texts of each faith; and each tongue
became also the approved and classical medium of thought, learning, and often
literature in a self-sufficient and largely self-contained sphere or "world" (§ 102).
These languages are Greek for Eastern and Latin for Western Christianity
when northwestern Europe revolted against Catholicism in the Reformation,
one of its most significant acts was the immediate substitution of vernaculars
for Latin; Arabic          — rigidly adhered to in ritual—for Mohammedanism; Sanskrit
for the more numerous northern branch or Greater Vehicle of Buddhism, with
Pali for the southern or Lesser Vehicle of Farther India. With each of these is
associated also a distinctive alphabet.               The only other language that functions
today in its larger sphere in a way reminiscent of these "world" languages is
Chinese, whose writing is nonalphabetic.
       The foregoing is a summary formulation of an enormously large situation,
whose exactly authentic description would require endless qualifications and
requalifications. In particular, consideration would have to be given to certain
crucial border-line cases, especially in the Iranian and Chinese religions; ^ since
with enough transitions, the "world" type of religion just depicted would tend
to dissolve away. Provisionally, however, the type seems to stand. And so far as

it   does, the influence of religion on total culture, in the direction of both forma-
tive change and fixation, is evident. The world of Islam has always been recog-

nized as a separate sphere of cultural influence. European civilization, as we have
seen, breaks primarily into a pre-Christian                and a Christian phase. The culture
of India changes similarly  from the pre-Buddhist to the Buddhist to the post-
Buddhist period. Even in China and Japan, where old native elements have
persisted with unusual continuity and force, the greatest alteration perhaps is
that between the early, purely native form of the culture and the later one with

      "
          Iran had Zoroaster, probably a     little   earlier   than Buddha; and China, Confucius,
Buddha's contemporary. Zoroastrianism, also called Mazdaism or the Avestan or Parsi re-
ligion, differs from the big three in being nearly extinct, and in having never effectively
established      its                                    some of its minor and later off-
                       supernational church and language. But
shoots or divergences, like Manichaeism, and perhaps Mithraism, have tried to compete
with the great religions by rivaling them in organization and missionary activity. Con-
fucianism has a minimum of religious content and is a state cult instead of an ecclesiastical
church; else it too might have grown into a world religion.
2l6                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                       § 169


its   Buddhistic absorptions. It is in the fundamental reorientation of civilization,
in redirective change, that the great religions are outstandingly influential.



                          170.    CHANGE BY REVOLUTION
        Change by revolution may be construed as change suddenly precipitated,
with more or less violence, affecting a considerable total portion of a culture,
and due to an accumulation of arrears, or lag, in progressive change. Generally,
it isone or two fields or departments of culture that do the lagging. Thus the
lag was primarily economic in the French Revolution, in religion in the Refor-
mation and Cromwellian civil wars, in politics and religion in England of 1688,
and was due to war distress on top of economic disintegration in Russia of 191 8.
Once the revolution breaks through, however, other and neutral areas of the
culture are flooded too, sometimes with most inconsistent results, both intrinsi-
cally and as regards permanence       :   the metric system is instituted, religion abol-
ished, Lavoisier executed.       This extension of area of overturn was practically
lacking in the American Revolution, which is thereby characterized as atypical
of revolutions. In fact its main immediate achievement was the formal and com-
pleteacknowledgment of a political independence that had been partial but
unacknowledged before. This in turn was followed by the union of the colonies,
and the "invention" of a written federal constitution (§153). But these latter
were constructive rather than revolutionary acts.
        Several other features are characteristic of revolutions. One is that change
tends to be excessive, and is then partly given up again in early reaction. After
the revolution the French kept their metric system, but gave up their irrelevant
new calendar and the Goddess of Reason. These represented zeal for change in
the abstract, but there was no real call for them and they provoked resistance
and made for inconvenience. One of the first resolves of the Russian Revolution
was to abolish the death penalty! Then three letters of the alphabet were
dropped. This reform was not in the Bolshevik program, but it was a simplifi-
cation    and it has stuck. It is familiar history how the pure socialist doctrine
began to be increasingly modified in Russia after about 1935 with property own-
ership, differential salaries,    piecework premiums,      fees for schooling,        and the
like creeping back.    Free divorce and legal abortion were instituted early, but
were discontinued after the peak of change was passed. At first there was a
strong sense that all the older national literature, music, and         art,       except that
produced by avowed revolutionaries, must be capitalistically tainted the revolu-
                                                                               :




tion would therefore produce its own proletarian higher culture. This attitude
tended to persist while Bolshevik Russia felt itself an outlaw among nations and
none too sure of internal solidarity. But once the revolution seemed a perma-
nent success, and especially after the Germans had been stopped in their tracks
and it had real allies among the Great Powers, Russian nationalism rearose
§    170                         CHANGE BY REVOLUTION                            1VJ
Stronger than ever, and great Czarist poets, novelists, and composers      were pro-
claimed great once more. All these are type phenomena of what may be called
the ovcrswing and backswing of revolutionary change.
       It is   necessary to distinguish between the cultural and the social change of
revolutions,      though these tend to come intertwined. In every successful revo-
lution there is not only an improved reformulation of rules, but in addition cer-
tain people get property, power, or privilege that others   had before. This last
is what causes most of the heartburnings. It whets the appetite of many a
changer, and makes prospective changees bitterly resist reforms that they might
accept as fair and desirable if they could be made other than out of their pockets
and status. Protestantism arose as a religious revolution from the ranks, with an
ideology of return to primitive Christianity, substitution of conscience and
Biblical text for hierarchical authority, and the like. However, most of the con-
verted rulers, in and out of Germany, were surely influenced also by the op-
portunity to confiscate extensive church properties and to strengthen royal
power. And no less the peasants in Germany: the Reformation's change of ec-
clesiastical authority suggested to them the hope of politicoeconomic changes in

their favor. They rose and were put down with bloody massacres       —not as Protes-
                                   At least one group of Anabaptist sectarians
tants but as social revolutionaries.
extended their renewed primitive Christianity to include communization of
property and redistribution of wives. It need hardly be added that this move-
ment was premature and its leaders short-lived. Here we have both forces at
work: personal advantage of new classes of individuals, and revolution spread-
ing to additional aspects or sides of the culture.
       There is a class of changes tending to be regarded as desirable in themselves
by everyone but nevertheless difficult to effectuate except by revolutionary or
totalitarian     power. These are reforms in systems, such as calendar, spelling,
measurements, or law. With the passage of absolute time, or change in speech,
science,   and customs, such systems get to be increasingly differentiated from
the actual conditions to  which they relate, and therewith increasingly inade-
quate, patched over, and complicated. Nevertheless, a change is upsetting and
inconvenient, objectively as well as sentimentally, and therefore is deferred and
redeferred until made by force, usually when long overdue. Everyone is agreed
that the gulf between living English speech and English writing is so great that
a    reform which would make spelling coincide with pronunciation would save
millions of hours     —and probably even of weeks and months—of education an-
nually. What blocks such a reform is the immediate cost. Grownups would have
to learn reading and writing all over again     —
                                              which many could not afford and
few would want to do. The young would be cut off from everything now in
print until it had been reprinted new-style. Newspapers and magazines would
probably have to print everything two ways for a number of years          —and run
half as much matter. The crux of the difficulty would be that the acutest incon-
venience would fall on us, now, for the first ten years; the clear benefit would all
2l8                                     CULTURE CHANGE                                     § 170


be reaped by future generations. People in the mass don't come as altruistic as
that  —and perhaps      it is   just as well.

    But a Czar, a Pope, a revolution, a despot floated into control by a revo-
lutionary period, can and sometimes do jam such reforms through. Thus there
is   the Julian calendar reform effected by Caesar in 46 b.c, the Gregorian by
Pope Gregory XIII in 1582. Incidentally, since this latter correction came from
the head of the Roman Catholic Church, Protestant and Greek Orthodox coun-
tries tended to hold off from it; England accepted the Gregorian calendar only

in 1752, Russia in 1918.
       Somewhat analogous is British and American                     resistance to   the metric
system, which in the abstract is undoubtedly superior to the irregular national
systems, as shown by the fact that physical science, which is supernational, has
never wavered from it. Continental Europe, and then Latin America and most
of the world, soon accepted the system. The Anglo-Saxon nations, self-sufficient
through being in the lead technologically and industrially, have not yet done so.
To "go metric" would make for international uniformity and universal future
convenience; but it would also entail a double standard and some confusion
for a generation, or some years, in daily life and business in the United States
and the British Commonwealth.
       An ancient reform of spelling, if that term can be applied to a partly ideo-
graphic system, was supported around 1370                 b.c.   in    Egypt by the Pharaoh
Ikhnaton and      his    anticlerical    coterie of the   intelligentsia.    They introduced
monotheism, realistic sculpture, and "truthful" writing. Only the last stuck. As
regards motivation, it may be added that the priesthood of the sun god Amen-
Ra had become wealthy and powerful, and blocked the king and his reformist
friends as hard as these fought the priesthood.
       In most ancient and in most Oriental cultures, revolutions from above had
much the better chance of succeeding. Apart from some cases in Greek and
Roman history, successful and important revolutions from below seem to be a
specialty of recent Occidental civilization. The great and effective Meiji mod-
ernization of Japan beginning in 1868    was engineered wholly by elements in
the upper classes surrounding the     young emperor. The Chinese revolution
dating from 191 1 did not emanate so clearly from those in power and has
brought perhaps as much confusion as progress. The Bolshevik revolution was
a symptom of Russia's having been drawn increasingly into the Occidental
orbit, as its Marxian ideology was a direct import from western Europe. By

contrast, Peter the Great, two centuries earlier, was Westernizing his subjects
by force, like any good Eastern autocrat. He produced less profound changes
than the Soviets, but also much less upset and clash. A revolution from below
in Peter's day would have been foredoomed to fail.
     One of the most drastic revolutions was that which Kemal Atatiirk poured
on the Ottoman Turks after Wo/ld War I. Once the spearhead of the last
Mohammedan penetration into Christian Europe, the Turks had for several
§   I?*                      EXTERNAL CHANCE: DIFFUSION                                 219
centuries tried to remain stationary with Islam while Western nations changed
and strengthened. Atatiirk took over at the end of two and a half centuries of
recession, with the last provinces of the Turkish Empire gone, his people de-
feated and reduced to their homeland. He deliberately led them out of the
Islamic camp of culture into the Christian, in everything but formal religion.
Western government, law, dress, calendar, were adopted more wholesale and
more rapidly even than in Meiji Japan. Perhaps his most unparalleled overnight
change was from the Arabic to the Roman alphabet. This happened also to be
an immense improvement in its much better fit to spoken Turkish. But above
all itmarked a clear-cut break with Koranic law and attitude, and symbolized
the transfer of Turkish allegiance from the defensive culture sphere of Islam
to the expanding Occidental and international one. Like any capital operation,

such a major set of changes had to be carried out decisively and swiftly, if at all.
      Theoretically, revolutions, as redistributions of cultural structure and social
rewards within a society, are due to internal strains accumulating until a sudden
shift or tipover occurs.     However, the cases just considered show in increasing
measure external      infltiences   behind the internal    strains, until, in the last in-

stance, all the build-up of pressure is from outside and only the final climax of
conversion is interior.
      Therewith we can conveniently pass over to our second main group of
changes, those from without.



                      171.   EXTERNAL CHANGE! DIFFUSION
      When something new has been evolved in a culture, whether a tool or an
idea or a custom, there is a tendency for it to be passed on to the culture of other
societies. This is   much like the passing on of culture to the younger generation
within the evolving society, except for being foreign-directed instead of do-
mestic. In other words,       new culture is transmitted geographically as well as
chronologically, in space as well as in time, by contagion as well as by repetition.
The spread in area is generally called diffusion, as the internal handing on
through time is called tradition.
      When an invention passes from the inventor to other individuals, we call
that its successful cultural acceptance. Diffusion may be viewed as an extension
of the process, on a much larger scale, by which an invention or innovation       —or
sometimes even an older culture          trait   —spreads from the society in which       it

originated to new societies and becomes established in their cultures.
      Conceptually, the simplest form of cultural transmission is tradition       :   trans-
mission within a society through education by the elders and imitation and
learning by the young. Normally, education and imitation are not in conflict,
and therefore reinforce each other. Also, neither education nor imitation in
itself involves any element of innovation or change, both being aimed primarily

at perpetuation of the culture.
220                                CULTURE CHANGE                                §171

      In the case of areal transmission or spread of culture, the fact that the dif-
fusion takes place between different societies somewhat alters the processes at
work. Imitation or learning of course is still operative, but education mostly
drops out. Missionizing may take its place, but the impulse to missionize occurs
only in some societies. Moreover, it can scarcely hope to be as effective as educa-
tion.    Indeed it is chiefly when the missionary succeeds in controlling secular
education of the young that he becomes really influential.
      Even more important is the fact that, diffusion being cross-societal, new
elements of culture are involved    —new    at least to the receiving or learning cul-

ture. This novel culture material may meet with anything from eager acceptance
to bitter hostility.   But since it does represent innovation and change, the traits
that are being introduced will expectably encounter some resistance. After         all,

they are foreign to the pattern of the culture on which they are impinging; and
while some of the imported traits will happen to fit into the native pattern, or be
neutral, others will violate or upset it. Or their acceptance may have unforeseen
consequences that prove to be upsetting. It will accordingly be evident that intra-
society transmission of culture in time     must normally tend toward persistence,
but intersocietal transmission in space tend toward change.
        This difference can also be viewed from the angle of total human civiliza-
tion.    When cannon and, later on, steam engines were invented, they represented
a new increment in the whole of human culture as well as in European culture.
When subsequently cannon and steam engines were introduced into Japan, both
devices represented as much of an innovating increment there as they           had in
Europe, and their effects on war and industry were about as great. Yet from the
angle of human development as a whole, there was no invention or addition
whatever involved in the transmission to Japan, only a spread of things already
in existence. In short, from the point of view of the world as a whole, diffusions
can also be seen as continuations or persistences plus spread.
        Similarly, though invention and diffusion certainly are distinct concepts, yet
the resistance which an institutional invention or innovation often encounters at
home, both as to being made and as to social acceptance, may be identical with
the resistance set up against a diffusion from abroad.
     These illustrations will serve to show how processes that as logical or ab-
stract concepts are wholly distinct tend to appear intertwined and intergraded in

the actual phenomena of civilization as history unrolls them. The very same
cultural act or event can be construed equally as a continuance or an innovation,
according as it is viewed from the angle of the trait itself or that of the receiving
culture.
        However, whatever else diffusion does or does not involve, it does always
involve change for the receiving culture.
        The total part played by diffusion in human culture is almost incredibly
great. This is a corollary of what has been said before, in § 113, to the effect that
all   cultures are largely hybrid composites of material that once entered      them
§    '7^                   EXTERNAL CHANGE: DIFFUSION                                      221

from outside. Naively, human beings do not realize this to any great extent. It is
of no advantage to a society, ordinarily, to have its members aware of the for-
eign source of most of their culture; nor is it a satisfaction to most individuals
to be reminded of this debt to aliens. So the facts tend to be forgotten, perhaps

more rapidly even than most events of history.
       In addition, there is a precritical impulse in us to look upon foreign customs
as things that flow spontaneously out of foreign peoples: Chinese "naturally"
worship their ancestors and defer to their fathers, just as they "naturally" talk
in singsong and naturally grow long black hair. This goes with the normal naive
assumptions on "race" differences and             inferiorities   (§80-81). So totems      and
couvade and bows and arrows and shell money and sympathetic magic were
long construed as more or less "automatic" emanations of the "natural" human
mind in its more "childlike" manifestations.
       This older view, or rather assumption, has had             to   be largely abandoned
under analysis. If our own civilization is due mainly to elements introduced into
itfrom without, there is no reason to believe that backward peoples would be
more spontaneously creative, especially since they obviously also incline to repeat
one another in certain grooves. Above all, more accurate study of the forms of
culture traits, of their related variants, and of their territorial distributions has
yielded so many instances of proved or highly probable diffusion of things like
totems and couvade and shell money that the explanation of spontaneous emana-
tion is rarely invoked any longer.
       In short, the usual intersocietal functioning of culture            is   somewhat like
most interpersonal relations. We more often learn from others than devise orig-
inal things ourselves. Therefore, when record has been lost of how culture traits
were acquired, a      specific,   part-for-part    resemblance between culture           traits,

coupled with evidence of sufficient other relations between the                  societies that

possess them, is now mostly accepted as presumptive indication of their spread
by diffusion, rather than of their wholly independent reinvention.
       Like anything else, this working rule or hypothesis can be carried too far.
On the average, it proves to be the soundest inference to make, in the present
state of   knowledge. Yet some diflusionists have gone so far as to deny alto-
gether, or practically, the possibility of separate reinventions; all likenesses are
claimed by them as due to diffusion. This stand seems arbitrary and unreason-
able. It is perhaps motivated by an      urge for rigor and simplification of process,
comparable to the simplicity of the precritical "spontaneity" explanation. How-
ever, this ultradiffusionist view has also been pretty well abandoned.
       Nearly all of the inventions discussed in § 147-149 and 183-187 also have a
history of diffusion. Most modern technological inventions tend to show a rapid
world-wide spread. New institutional devices, such as the referendum and the
Australian ballot of § 153, often are not accepted the world over: these particular
ones, for instance, obviously require democracy as a precondition. But so far as
institutions do have a history of widespread success, this is             one mainly of dif-
222                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                 § 17^


fusion with adaptive modifications. The same is true of philosophies, reUgions,
ideologies. In proportion as these are influential they tend to win an international
following, at least for a time. Democracy,         communism, fascism, are familiar
examples.
        To these illustrations from the full light of recent history, there can be added
endless cases of more ancient traits or systems: Christianity or Mohammedanism,
for instance, or printing. In the case of older technological inventions, the pre-
cisecircumstances of the first origin have often become somewhat misty, al-
though much of the spread is usually well attested. Such are the arch, gun-
powder, tea-drinking, bells in towers, Arabic numerals, chess, the 360° circle,
spectacles, water mills, clocks, and dozens of others. With these can be included

a series of plants first domesticated in the Americas, such as maize, potatoes,
sweet potatoes, tomatoes, Lima beans, and tobacco (§ 193), the cultivation and
use of some of which spread rapidly to certain parts of the Eastern Hemisphere.
The result is that we often speak of potatoes as Irish, and that whole archi-
pelagoes in the East Indies have come to eat more maize or sweet potatoes than
rice,   and so on. Double diffusion is indicated by our name for the turkey: the
domestication of the bird was native American, but it was carried first to Spain
and the Mediterranean, and from there reached England and then its colonies.
In consequence. North Americans mistakenly call an American bird after an
East Mediterranean country. The histories of wheat, millet, and sugar cane, of
chickens and horses, of pottery, of bronze, iron, and steel (§ 282, 284, 296, 298)
are also clearer as regards diffusion than as regards origin.
        Finally we come to elements of culture the beginnings of which may remain
forever hazy to us but the coherent distribution of which argues strongly for a
spread from one center of origin. Thus, none of the American Indian nations
possessed any authentic record of how or when they had learned to plant maize,
but it was found being grown all the way from central Chile to North Dakota
and Quebec, by perhaps 500 distinct tribes. It would be intrinsically absurd to
consider the possibility of each of these 500 tribes having made the domestication
as an original invention of its own. Even if the notion were abstractly tenable, it
would be refuted by the unusual "artificiality" of the cultivated maize plant, its
inability to propagate and maintain itself in nature, our ignorance of a direct
wild ancestor. But if most of the 500 tribes learned rather than invented maize-
growing, economy of explanation inevitably carries us not only to 300 or 400
who learned it, but probably to 499. Invention in one tribe or region, then a
spread to the rest, seems much the most economical and reasonable interpreta-
tion. This conclusion is fortified by a botanical consideration : Genetic mutations

and hybridization, one or both of which are believed to have been needed to
transform unknown wild ancestors into maize, are definitely rare in plant his-
        —
tory more likely to occur now and then only than over and over again.
        The case for diffusion, rather than independent invention, of native Ameri-
can pottery, whose distribution is slightly wider than than of maize, though
§    172                                RESISTANCE TO DIFFUSION                                      223
roughly correspondent,             is   similar,   though not quite     as firm. Theoretically        it

would be quite conceivable                  that there   had been two or three or       fcjur    inde-
pendent inventions of the pottery art in America, each with its own history of
growth and spread, until several diffusions coalesced and came to look on the
map like a single bicontincntal one. At any rate, there is no known physico-
chemical reason, corresponding to the genetic-botanical one for maize, to weigh
against such a view of multiple origin. Yet even if there had been four or five
                                        New World, the ratio of tribal diffusions
or six separate origins of pottery in the
to inventions  would still have been about a hundred to one.
       Even at the beginnings of all human record, from the early Palaeolithic
well back in the Pleistocene, the discovered distributions strongly suggest dif-
fusions of wide sweep. In western Europe, North and East Africa, Arabia and
India, the earliest cultures we can define with thorough assurance are "core cul-
tures"      (§ 273)        using massive, trimmed-down         flints   of bifacial "hand-ax" or
"Chellean-pick" type. Contemporaneously, central and eastern Europe, and pre-
sumably northern Asia               also,    harbored "flake cultures," with tools of edged
chips struck off from flint nodules. The indication is chat the two technologies
were devised separately, and that each had its own history of spread, though
both spread intercontinentally. By the time of the last or Wiirm Glaciation, the
two diffusions had met and overlapped in western Europe.
    Similarly, toward the end of the Palaeolithic, the chipping of minute deli-
cate blades of flint was evolved in North Africa during the Capsian period,
spread to Spain, and in the following Mesolithic became characteristic of north-
western Europe from France to Scandinavia (§ 275-276).
       As regards patterned systems of traits, the world-wide dispersal of several
of these     — the week, the alphabet, the zodiac—             is   outlined below in    § 196-197,

206-221, 229.

                                172. RESISTANCE          TO DIFFUSION

       We can assume from the foregoing that any feature of culture once estab-
lished will automatically tend to spread to the cultures of other societies, just as
it   will tend to persist in its own. The principle is empirical, but so great is the
mass of experience, both contemporary and historical, on which it is based that
it   has the force of an axiom. However, the principle affirms not that there must
be diffusion, only that there will be some impulse for it to take place. Roughly,
we can assume that culture traits will spread unless there are specific factors to
prevent spread, much as we assume that things once in a culture will continue
in    it   until displaced or modified             by some positive impingement. This           is   be-
cause, from the angle of the culture trait, spread is after all only a form of per-
sistence     :   it is   continuation in a new geography.
    However, from the point of view of societies and their total cultures, the
contrary is true, and is important enough to repeat: Diffusion is like invention in
that it results in an innovation. When an invention is accepted, place                     is   made
224                                  CULTURE CHANGE                                §    l?^

for something that has just originated in the same society.      When a diffused trait
is   accepted, a place is similarly made in a culture for something that previously
originated in another society and culture. In both cases there normally are ob-
stacles or resistance to acceptance.      These may occasionally be actually greater
for an invention or a home innovation, if this seems to threaten established eco-
nomic interests or an ideology with active sanctions behind           it,   or even only
bodily habits that have firm hold. But on the whole the edge           is   probably the
other way, since the farther it travels, the greater the risk that the diffusing ele-
ment will encounter wholly new settings which may contain something defi-
nitely antagonistic to it. Nevertheless, any difference between the resistances en-
countered respectively by invention innovations and diffusion innovations                is

more of degree than of kind, and, on the average, likely to be not very great
in degree.
       Of prime importance to the fate of either kind of innovation are the pat-
terns it encounters in the culture at whose door it is knocking. There are going
to be obvious difficulties about inducing Christians and Mohammedans to wor-
ship, say, river gods, or     persuading Mohammedans and Jews to eat pork sau-
sage   —about equally so whether the prophet or the inventor of the idea be a
native renegade or a missionary from another faith. This class of situations has
been touched upon under invention            (§ 151),   and further instances are men-
tioned in § 185, 199, 221.
       Sometimes the resistances are selective, as when the Japanese gradually took
over most of Chinese civilization but resolutely refused to accept rhymed tonal
poetry, civil-service examinations, foot-binding, and a number of other particular
Chinese features. The reason for the first resistance is simple and in a way extra-
cultural   :   The character of the Japanese language is such as to make a rhymed
and tone-observing poetry almost impossible, whereas in Chinese, prose and
poetry would be difficult to distinguish except by rhyme and tone. Civil-service
examinations        as the basis   for officeholding, power,   and wealth began    to    be
developed in China when the aristocracy was crushed in the great national
unification      more than twenty-one hundred years ago. In Japan, however, aris-
tocracy of descent always maintained itself, in fact has pretty consistently been
the dominant power in the country, and never submitted to bowing to the yoke
of a merit system of tests. In China, the        emperor was the Regent of Heaven;
but a dynasty that became wicked was thought no longer to represent Heaven
and could justifiably be overthrown. The Japanese eagerly took over the idea of
the Chinese emperor's absolute authority,       which was much greater than that
of their       own early rulers. But with the native rulers claiming to be gods de-
scended from the sun goddess, it would not do to admit that their line could
become corrupt or that they might legitimately be deposed. So the dynasty has
remained nominally unbroken, though most emperors have had little real power,
and many have been edged into abdication.
 §   '7^                          RESISTANCE TO DIFFUSION                             225
        Foot -binding is of interest because it seems to have clashed with an uncon-
scious Japanese pattern to which anything like mutilation was repugnant. Thus
eunuchism, which persisted at the Chinese court until this century, never got a
 foothold in Japan; and the Japanese avoidance of all body jewelry is perhaps re-
lated psychologically. In this       way the Japanese nonacceptances of Chinese civi-
lization seem quite spotty, and yet are characteristically Japanese. After 1931         it

gradually became evident that the Japanese had been equally selective in taking
over Occidental civilization. But        we of the West had felt so pleased at being
imitated since 1868, and thought so well of the Japanese for imitating us, that
we were overlooking how much of Western culture they were also firmly
rejecting.
        Items of culture that are isolated, not much woven into a pattern, and there-
fore relatively neutral in their social functioning, and yet of an indubitable prac-
tical      value, are least likely to encounter resistances to their diflfusion: matches,
for instance, or potatoes. In fact, the flint-and-steel strike-a-light has maintained
itself, if at all,   chiefly   among very remote or very poor groups who could not
secure matches regularly. And why not.? Matches conflict with nothing institu-
tional. Here       and there a priest might insist that ritual fire continue to be made
in the old way, or even by driUing;         but such exceptions would not in the least
impair the spread of matches for ordinary secular use, where the main motiva-
tion inevitably      is   the pragmatic one of getting a light as quickly, surely,    and
easily as possible.

        Tobacco, as a relatively harmless indulgence, habit-forming but not leading
to incapacity,      and reasonably economical at that, has had a rapid, world-wide
diffusion (§ 193). It is also essentially neutral toward the ideology or value pat-
tern of most of the cultures it entered. In native America         it   did often have re-
ligious associations; but these promptly got lost when its travels began.
        Now and then an autocrat or a religion attempts to freeze a culture as of a
given moment. In the main, the endeavor is of course foredoomed. But it may
cause some strange, spotty retardations of diffusions.        Mohammedanism is the
most striking example. It forbade images, wine, usury, and gambling; and the
Koran, or the custom law it accepted or implied, was to be the basic civil law
of Islam for all time. Among the consequences one is that the Arabs, who had
had no previous representative sculpture or painting, never developed any,
though the Mohammedanized Iranians, who had had these arts, managed in
time to revive them. Playing cards diffused from China; they struck quick roots
in Europe, but seem to have passed Islam by.         Insurance has been difficult to in-
troduce in Mohammedan countries.            The pious conservatives could claim that
it   partook of both usury and gambling. Even coffee-drinking was in jeopardy
for a while because it is not mentioned in the Koran; though Mohammedans at
large soon became coffee-lovers.        Tobacco has also at times been forbidden by
the very strict. Printing was under graver and longer suspicion (§ 199). It is not
sanctioned in the Koran; it would expectably be applied to the text of the Koran,
226                                CULTURE CHANGE                             § l?^


which Mohammed had dictated for writing down by hand; and it was an
invention of Chinese and Christian unbeUevers. The first attempt to print in
                       —
Mohammedan lands a history of Egypt in 1729, nearly three hundred years
after Gutenberg   —
                 led to riots and prohibiton. It was not until 1825 that a Mo-
hammedan Arabic press was established in Cairo, though Christians had printed
in Arabic type in Italy as early as 1512. Printing of the Koran in Islam was
specifically forbidden in 1727.

      These several Mohammedan blockings of diffusions are perhaps most in-
teresting for the common resistance they encountered in spite of being inherently
disconnected. There    is   neither logical nor intrinsic nexus between sculpture,
insurance, coffee, cards, and book-printing. What made these so dissimilar in-
troductions meet resistance     was a psychological attitude: a timorous legalism
or puritanism (§ 248) that tried to protect the accidents of a system or code
adopted by the culture. Obviously useful novelties that were indifferent toward
the spirit or the letter of Islam, like the compass, cannon, matches,    and auto-
mobiles, met no such resistance. Like Christianity, Mohammedanism has gen-
erally been   imbued with a characteristic feeling of superiority and has tended
to manifest aggressiveness.    But a counterpart of this quality has been an in-
feriority sense and self-protectiveness whenever the culture was unsuccessful
as it mostly has been, in competition with Christianity, since about a.d. hoc,
except for the interlude of the Ottoman Turks.
     The resulting defensive attitude of Islam is somewhat akin to that which
led China, Tibet, Korea, and Japan to try for two or three hundred years to shut
out all Occidental contacts. The Far Eastern societies had been unaggressive, and
now tried to isolate themselves and their cultures altogether. Islam could not
make the identical endeavor, both because of being unusually far-flung and ex-
posed in geography, and because of its fundamental militancy. But it could and
did try here and there to effect a protective exclusion of culture features that
were tending to enter. This might be construed as a sort of seclusion in spots.


                            173.   MARGINAL CULTURES
      The important concept that cultures are retarded because of their peripheral
or marginal position in geography rests largely upon the idea that diffusion is
a more or less continuous process. It also assumes that it is in the higher centers
of civilization that the most numerous inventions and the most generally
adoptable advances will be made, on the whole. As these new increments tend
to spread, they will   however spread most slowly to those societies which are
most remote or most diflicult to reach. Further, the innovations and additions
that do reach the edges and peripheries may fail of acceptance by the cultures
there, because they involve requirements the receiving culture cannot fulfill.
Thus a marginal culture might be quite eager to use metal tools, and advanced
enough in manual skills to learn metallurgical processes, and yet be forced to
§   173                           MARGINAL CULTURES                                 227

pass by the opportunity of acquiring them because            it   lacked, say, the gross
tools, or the habits of industrial perseverance, necessary for mining ores.

       In this way a growing gap may be created, theoretically and often actually,
between the culturally productive center and the cultural margin. This gap
tends to increase as the center piles up additional increments and the margin
receives or accepts only a fraction of them. In theory, accordingly, peripheral
cultures would tend to drop farther          and farther behind. Finally some center,
besides enriching    its   culture,   may also extend it geographically until part of
its   society is transported to the marginal lands, comes in contact with the      mar-
ginal cultures there,and proceeds to extinguish these, absorb them, or brush
them aside. This is what has been progressively happening to most primitive
cultures since 1500 at the hands of the increasingly expansive Occidental civili-
zation.
       But there is no necessary sequence in these matters. The high centers may
recede or shift, or new ones may come up       —
                                             finally even at the edges     —
                                                                       until what
was peripheral has become focal, and perhaps vice versa. In 3000 B.C., for in-
stance, all of Europe was certainly marginally retarded as compared with nearer
Asia and Egypt. In 500 b.c, Greece was within the center, but Italy still lagging,
and western and northern Europe even more so. By a.d. 100, Rome looked like
                                                                   —
the focus, and certainly was part of it. At some later period just when is de-
batable, but certainly by a.d. 1650     —the nucleus of highest productivity in Euro-
pean culture had shifted across the Alps. During the past three centuries Eng-
land has surely been among the small group of northwestern-European nations
that constitute the central hearth of Occidental civiUzation. But previous to 1550,
England was, equally obviously, retarded and marginal to western continental
Europe, and the more so the farther back we go in history: in 1000 b.c, or 3000
B.C., England was no more than a feather edge of high culture, a margin of a

margin.
       Similarly with the radiation of culture out of the great Far Eastern center
that began to glow and spark in North China three to four thousand years ago.
This culture expanded, diffused over South China and Annam, also eastward
into Korea, and from there to Japan. Of two peoples in Japan about the open-
ing of the Christian era, the Yamato or ancestral Japanese held the parts of the
islands nearest Korea, from about Kyoto southwest; the Ainu held Tokyo and
die northeast beyond. The archaeological remains suggest no great difference of
cultural level between the two races. But for century after century elements of
the long-established civilization of China dribbled into southwestern Japan, cul-
minating, around a.d. 400-700, in a rush of import of writing, learning, Bud-
dhism, political organization, and hundreds of other things. Yamato Japanese
culture now became fundamentally Sinitic. At the same time it was so placed as
to cut off the Ainu from all immediate contacts with the higher Chinese civiliza-
tion. The Ainu thus remained barbarian, the Japanese did not. They were grad-

ually conquered, absorbed, or pushed by the Japanese to the extreme northeast
228                                CULTURE CHANGE                                §   173

of the archipelago, where some thousands still survive as an interesting racial
relict, in   a cultural and ethnic status recaUing that of reservation Indians in the
United States (§ 65). It was their geographical position of being marginal to the
marginal Japanese that no doubt mainly accounts for the Ainu retardation until
the present. But just so, and to about an equal degree, was Japan retarded fifteen
hundred years ago as against China. And for the same reason. China on the
mainland, in more or less contact with the rest of Asia and Europe, was profiting
by this contact; but Japan lay beyond the farthest edge of the continent, in a
little island world of its own, virtually beyond contacts in an age of limited

and difficult navigation. Japan off the east of Asia and Britain off the west of
Europe thus were in corresponding situations, and remained retarded for cor-
respondingly long periods.
      As for the Japanese, they sought for Chinese civilization at various times,
and absorbed and assimilated it with skill, yet always managed to give the bor-
rowed product a distinctive national individuality, until now and then it would
have been difficult to assert that the teacher still remained more advanced than
the pupil. Nevertheless, the flow of diffusion continued one-way. Whether it was
coining money or drinking tea or printing books or a different Buddhist sect
or a new style of painting landscapes, it was always China that originated, Japan
that followed (§ 303). The lag might be one century or two centuries or six, but
it was always Japan that was behind. The Japanese did exercise option about

their acceptance, and simply rejected a good-sized series of Chinese traits, as we
have just seen (§172). Where they had something of their own, however, as
in the native Shinto cult, or where they gave something of Chinese origin a new
twist or value, as in fine swordmaking, these originaUties of theirs never passed
out of Japan back into China. This does not mean that Japanese products and
devisings were invariably inferior. They could hardly all have been so, and as-
suredly were not. Essentially       it   was Chinese self-sufficience, quiet arrogance
about the superiority of their own culture, that prevented important return dif-
fusion. Here, then, it was an attitude which was effective as a block; whereas
the long retardation of Japan, like that of Britain at the opposite end of the great
Eurasiatic land mass, was due primarily to its extreme marginal position. The
historical relation of Chinese to Japanese culture may well be described as one
of dominance, similar to that of parent on child, or between          most persons in
habitual relation to each other, or even, according to the psychologists, between
most primate individuals.
      Until 1500, the prevailing contacts of the whole Far Eastern or China-
dominated center with the rest of the world were overland. Then came the
ship-borne Portuguese, followed by Spaniards, Dutch, English, and French.
After some unpleasant and disturbing contacts, both China and Japan in fact  —
                                    —
Korea, Annam, and Tibet also tried to shut these contacts out by policies of
seclusion.     During the nineteenth century these policies proved manifestly in-
adequate, were given up, and Western influences were once         more admitted.
§    174                          MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS                               229
Here a difTcrcncc developed: The Japanese now sought cultural imports from the
West, the Chinese accepted them much more slowly, often reluctantly. Over
the seaways, Japan now was no longer more remote from the new center of the
Occident. In fact, as an island nation Japan was more accessible to successful
diffusions, and more quickly permeated by them, than China with its hundreds
of millions living mostly in the interior of a great land mass. So now, when
advance for a while had largely become equated to Westernization, Japan at
last took the lead, and before long not only defeated China in war but attempted

to guide and instruct it. The roles of the two peoples reversed when the condi-
tions changed, although the same processes continued at work.
     This whole Chinese-Japanese relationship can also be seen, just as legiti-
mately, as an example of acculturation. But acculturation is a more complex
thing, from which diffusion must always be analyzed out as one of the elemental
processes at work, as will be seen below, in § 176-179.
     Marginal backwardness is manifest in total culture rather than in particular
traits:     it is   essentially a cumulative matter. It is occasionally traceable in specific
complexes, as when the Asiatic composite or three-ply bow of horn-wood-sinew
appears in northwestern America as the simplified "sinew-backed" bow of horn
and sinew or wood and sinew; and the associated thumb ring of Asia for re-              —
                              —
leasing the bowstring is also lacking in America. Similarly, resist dyeing (§ 235),
supposed to have originated in India and still flourishing in three forms in Indo-
nesia      —pattern, knot, and fiber dyeing—        is   represented as far out in the Pacific
as    Melanesian Santa Cruz Island by merely the last of these three processes.
In general, however, retardation is obviously going to show in the total culture
accumulated, rather than in special traits.


                           174.   MARGINAL BIOTAS AS PARALLELS
       Biologists long ago observed that the large backward or relict biotas—^both
faunas and floras          —were those of the Southern Hemisphere. Africa south of
the Sahara harbors a Pleistocene-like association of animals that                 is   extinct in
Europe. South America was never reached by many important groups of mam-
mals; but as if to make up for this, it evolved a specialized fauna, such as the
platyrrhine monkeys, and the noncompetitive sloths, armadillos,                        and other
edentates of the Patagonian extremity. Australia of course                 is   much the most
retarded of continents biologically, its native mammals being virtually all of the
primitive marsupial type.            As compared with these three southern continents,
Europe, North Africa, Asia, and North America form a virtually continuous
land mass,® "Holarctica," within which species could migrate without                        much
hindrance; and any new successful forms were Hkely to spread over the whole

      ® Continuous       except for shallow Bering Strait, and this was repeatedly a land bridge
in the past;        whereas the existing Panama land bridge was more often a barrier strait in
geological time.
230                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                §   174

great area. By contrast, the three southern continents are like three Wind alleys
running off from the much greater Holarctica, which stretches east and west
four-fifths of the way around the globe. Newly evolved forms of life got into
these three southern projections late, or not at   all; old forms found shelter

there,    were preserved, or even underwent further local development. The net
result has been that the three      marginal southern continents     —marginal to cen-
tral   Holarctica   —have been evolutionistically retarded.
       The cultural parallel is interesting. No very high civilization has ever de-
veloped independently south of the equator. The most advanced was that of
ancient Peru.       The native Australians are often cited as culturally the most
primitive large block of mankind. Ultramarginal to the margin that the Aus-
tralians constituted were the still more backward Tasmanians. The tip of South
America was occupied by primitive Yahgan, Alakaluf, Ona, Tehuelche. In the
far south of Africa were the Bushmen; scattered south of the equator, the
Pygmy tribes; and Bushmen and Pygmies constitute the only two ethnic groups
in Africa that still live wholly by hunting-and-gathering. The cultural retarda-
tion in the three southern continental extremities certainly seems similar to the
faunal one.
       At its northeastern end,      the great Eurasiatic continent pinches into a
nearly waste, unfavorable, Arctic tip, beyond which lies Bering Strait, and then
nearly equally arduous Alaska, before the temperate   and desirable parts of
North America are reached. Here then is a bottleneck between the Old World
and New World halves of Holarctica, between Palearctica and Nearctica. In the
millions of years available for their dispersal since the Eocene,      many species
of mammals passed through this bottleneck at times            when Bering Strait was
dry land and the climate perhaps less raw than now.           Among such were ele-
                                                             many others.
phants, horses, bisons, camels, tapirs, wolves, bears, beavers, and
Some spread eastward, some westward; a few probably even flowed back. But
other groups never did effect the crossing. Lions, tigers, hippopotami, rhi-
noceroses, true cattle and water buffalos, the whole group of true antelopes and
gazelles, did not get into America, which can therefore be construed as faunally
submarginal to Europe- Africa-Asia: semiperipheral to          it,   but not wholly de-
pendent.
       It is   interesting as showing the influence of basic geography that for thou-
sands of years America was submarginal in culture also. When this condition
began to change after 1492, it was through the expansion of European societies
across the Atlantic, not through enlargement or easing of the Bering Strait
bottleneck. But pre-1492 America was culturally only semimarginal, not defi-
nitely peripheral like Australia. There was a demonstrable flow of culture from
Asia into the nearer parts      —about half—of North America.This diffusion           in-

cluded traits such as the sinew-backed bow just mentioned (§ 173), slat armor,
snowshoes, the toboggan, bark boats, bark dishes and pots, basketry hats, the
tepee or conical tent of skin or bark, scapulimancy, bear ceremonialism, the
§    175                         INTERNAL MARGINALITY                            23I

"magic flight" story     (§ 227),   and some others. But in the main, the more ad-
vanced and complex cuhurcs of native America as a whole, both North and
South, seem to have been independently evolved in the hemisphere rather than
received by diffusion. This was perhaps the result of the opportunities offered
by the large favorable areas well away from the Bering bottleneck, areas where
agriculture was developed, population multiplied, and the arts of life increased.
Most students of native American history believe that this development, which
culminated in the stretch between Mexico and Peru, was essentially autono-
mous. It attained to cities, kingdoms, most metallurgical arts, some astronomy
and calendry, and extraordinarily complex rituals. It did not achieve ironwork-
ing, writing, or a "world" type of religion (§ 169). It was thus retarded in type
or level, by perhaps two or three thousand years, behind the highest centers
in the Old World. But the retardation was through a separate and delayed start.
Slowness and incompleteness of interhemispheric diffusions constituted only a
remoter factor underlying the lateness of the beginnings of American Indian
higher developments.
       The Greeks had a name for the central area of higher civilization: oi\umene.
Literally, this meant "the inhabited world"; but     it   had also the connotation of
"civilized world," or civilization as a whole; much as an oecumenical council of
the Church still means a council of the whole of Christianity. This oi/^umene
of the Greeks, which stretched from Gibraltar to India and dimly known China,
was the region in which people lived in cities in organized states, plowed their
fields     and raised cattle, worked iron, and knew letters. What was beyond this
civilization the Greeks were hazy about; they considered it either wasteland or
land occupied only by unstable savages: for they much underestimated the size
of the southern parts of Africa and the north
                                           and east of Asia, and of course
Australia andAmerica were wholly outside their ken. This concept of the
oikumene of the immediate pre-Christian and post-Christian centuries has a
modern utility as a convenient designation of the total area reached by traceable
diffusion influences from the main higher centers of Eurasia at which most
new culture had up to then been produced.


                          175.   INTERNAL MARGINALITY
      It is important to remember that all this discussion of diffusion from centers

to   margins refers to prevalent directions of drift, and not to any rigorous or
one-way determinism. To conceive the diffusion of culture as radiating out in
concentric circles, like sound waves from a bell, is schematic; actual history is
almost never so simple. In fact, even physical nature is likely to have winds and
obstructions and conflicting noises interfering with the regularity of its waves.
In culture, one of these complexities is manifest in societies that remain retarded
although they are situated within the sphere of higher centers. Such cultures
have been called "internally marginal." This phrase is literally appropriate when
232                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                     § 1 75


the habitat is a desert or a mountainous or undesirable tract inside a generally
favorable region. In other cases the phrase is just a telescoped way of saying that
the culture in question is backward, like cultures whose geography is marginal;
that it is an incomplete form of some richer culture elsewhere and perhaps not
far away. Often both conditions apply: The culture is retarded and is also
crowded back into undesirable terrain that may shelter it from active diffusions
almost as effectively as would distant remoteness.
      Asia is particularly rich in tribal societies with "internally marginal" cul-
tures. Examples are: the very primitive Veddas of Ceylon; the Todas and other
nonliterate tribes of the Nilgiri hills in southern India; ® most of the Munda tribes
farther north in India; Palaung, Kachin, Moi, Semang, Sakai, and many others
in the states of Farther India and Malaya; Lolo, Yao, Man, and so on in South
China. None of these nationalities is situated on an actual outer edge of the
continent. All of them constitute enclaves within a larger area and population
of civilized people. Most often these latter, whether Hindus, Chinese, Burmese,
Annamese, or Malays, have taken up the fertile plains and valleys. The primi-
tives may now and then have pushed in to where they are, but more often they

are an obvious remnant,         now contracted to the hills, ridges, plateaus, higher
mountain valleys, jungle, or "bush." This whole culture type is equally interest-
ing from the angle of acculturation, which will be touched upon in the next
section.^"
      In the East Indian archipelagoes, above              all   among the larger Philippine
Islands, migration, travel, commerce, and enlightenment have moved easily by
sea lanes, while land penetration        is   difficult,   on account of both terrain and
vegetation. The remote and backward places regularly are the interiors of the
islands; the accessible     and advanced tracts are their physical edges, the shore-
lands     —as in post-Perry Japan. So we find, for instance, in Luzon the Negritos
of simplest culture in the mountains most difficult to reach; next to them the
pagan brown Filipinos in at least two distinguishable levels of culture and re-
moteness, exemplified respectively by, say, the Ilongot and the Tinggian; and
then the lowlanders like the Tagalog and the Pampanga, long ago influenced
by Hindu and then by Mohammedan and finally by Christian civilization.
      It is   evident that this Indonesian condition inverts the space relation of
"center" and "periphery" with which we started. Culturally, centers are spots of
high productivity; margins, spots of prevailing receptivity and retardation. Cul-
tural centers may be geographically central also, or on geographical margins.

      8   They are sometimes misnamed "pre-Dravidian" in order to shunt the contamination
of primitive affiliation away from the civilized Dravidian nations. Actually the Toda, Kota,
and so on are fully Dravidian in speech, and their cultures seem to be somewhat specialized
and retarded tribal or caste facets of general Dravidian or southern Hindu culture.
    ^^ Internal marginaUty is recognized also in the Smithsonian Insdtution's Handboo\ of

South American Indians, and in the ethnographic dassificadon of that condnent developed
below in § 319, 331.
§   «76                                   ACCULTURATION                                      233
Geography always enters into consideration in the matter, because it is difTusion
that is at work and diffusion is geographical spread; but it is culture that is
spread, or which fails to be spread and leaves certain societies retarded. Such
retarded cultures are often spoken of as peripheral whether their situation be on
the edges or in the interiors of land masses.



                                   176.    ACCULTURATION
       Acculturation comprises those changes produced in a culture by the                    in-

fluence of another culture         which result in an increased similarity of the two.
The influencing may be reciprocal or overwhelmingly one-way. The resultant
assimilation may proceed so far as the extinction of one culture by absorption
in the other; or other factors may intervene to counterbalance the assimilation
and keep the cultures separate. The process of acculturation tends to be gradual
rather than abrupt.
                 It is perhaps always gradual and long-range enough for

           phenomena to fall within the scope of history, even if the phe-
acculturation
nomena examined be contemporary ones. In fact, in so far as history is more
than the story of particular events and particular individuals and deals with
     and cultural changes, a large part of all history the world over, possibly
social

more than half of it, deals ultimately with the results of intercultural influencing
—that      is,   acculturation. This is clear as soon as we consider the findings of that
part of history in which the role of particular events and persons is of necessity
reduced to a minimum; namely, archaeology. Practically                 all   the diffusion   we
have been considering either contributes to acculturation or can be viewed as an
aspect of acculturation; and conversely, all acculturation is full of diffusion. The
two are thoroughly interwoven in the phenomena: the distinction is a concep-
tual one of approach and emphasis of interest.           When we follow the fortunes of
a particular culture trait or complex or institution through its wanderings from
culture to culture, we call        it   a study of diffusion.   When we consider two cul-
tures bombarding each other with hundreds or thousands of diffusing traits, and
appraise the results of such interaction, we more commonly call it acculturation.
Diffusion is a matter of what happens to elements or parts of culture; accultura-
tion, of what happens to cultures.

       In 1935, Redfield, Herskovits, and Linton, as a committee of the American
Anthropological Association, formulated the following definition: "Accultura-
tion      comprehends those phenomena which result when groups of individuals
having different cultures come into continuous first hand contact, with subse-
quent changes in the original culture patterns of either or both groups." They
went on to distinguish acculturation from culture change, of which it is only one
aspect; from assimilation, which at times is one of the results of acculturation;
and from diffusion, which constitutes only one aspect of acculturation, but yet
is always present when there is acculturation and sometimes when there is not.
234                               CULTURE CHANGE                                        § 1 76


      In a concrete science like anthropology there        is   little   gained by pushing
conceptual distinctions very far, and some risk of sterility, because phenomena
intergrade endlessly, especially in so highly plastic a thing as culture.           A broad
definition, centering on the core of the meaning involved rather than aiming at
hairline logical definition of its edges, is therefore ordinarily the most useful.         A
definition of this kind for acculturation might be    :   the effect on cultures of con-
tact with other cultures. In this would also be included the effect on the societies

that carried the cultures. Viewed in this way, it is evident that acculturation takes
in a lot of meaning. It has no doubt been operative since there have been separate
human cultures. Ninety-nine per cent of all acculturation must lie in the past;
and it involves the nature, the processes, and the patterns of culture as well as
its changes.

      If any modification of one culture by   another culture is acculturation, why
the sudden interest, almost excitement, beginning about 1920-25 and culminating
perhaps in 1935-40, about a concept as wide, elusive, and protean as this? It must
have had some special implications; some portion or corner of it must have been
charged with particular connotations.
      The principal factors that made for the whirl of vogue which acculturation
studies were given for a while      were the beliefs that such studies were imme-
diately   contemporary and that they were practically useful             —plus, probably, a
sense that they dealt with our own civilization as familiar to us and that there-
fore they involved less wrench to our natural ethnocentrism, by our not having
to depart from it to examine other culture and times. With these considerations,
there were mixed some subsidiary ones. For instance, as World War I closed, an
"Americanization" movement swept          patriotic, political,      social,   philanthropic,
and educational circles in the United States. Poles, Italians, and other immigrants
were to be amalgamated. The "foreigners" who were outside were to be kept
out; those who were in were to be remolded, as quickly and effectively as pos-
sible, into reproductions of Anglo-Saxon Americans. Anthropologists and so-

ciologists were to help appraise the methods and the degrees of their assimila-

tion. In England there was a somewhat analogous movement, relating to the

adjustments to European civilization that "natives" under colonial administra-
tion were facing or making.
     Further, it had become an ethnological technique to study other cultures,
especially backward ones, by investigating them in the field, on their own
ground: perhaps the Arunta in Australia, the Toda in India, the Yoruba in
Nigeria, the Dakota or the Hopi on their reservations in the United States. In
every case, these primitive societies had begun to have their culture visibly in-
vaded and affected by Western civilization; some only to a minor extent, others
so far that the former native culture could only be recovered from memories
of the older people, while the present-day population lived in a transitional
hybrid culture   —or sometimes a parasitic one—that was neither quite native nor
quite Western. Often     it   was easier to describe this patent, obtrusive mixture
§   176                            ACCULTURATION                                235
than If) reconstruct tlic native primitive culture before it went all to pieces. One
could observe the workings of the hybrid culture instead of having to extricate
or to infer the workings of the past. Further, the unconscious hold of ethno-
centrism on all of us is strong; so that some students preferred dealing with a
bastard partial derivative of their own culture to orienting themselves in one of
radically different assumptions, patterns, and attitudes; the mental journey took
them less far from home. Again, uncontaminated primitive societies still going
their own way might possess fairly retarded cultures, but normally these would
be adjusted fairly well to their   own problems and making more or less of a
success as going concerns. In contrast, when the much more massive and power-
ful Occidental civilization begins to   impinge on backward cultures, it tends to
disarrange or disorient these. Primitive societies in process of disappearance are
therefore usually full of maladjustments, miseries, and unsolved problems. These
sufferings stimulate students with philanthropic or reformist inclinations or
those interested in social pathology, but tend to distract those    whose interest
lies rather in cultural patterns and their normal values.
     At first, acculturation studies also held out an exciting promise of showing
how the wheels of culture change go round. One saw what people had been,
what they were, what they were turning into, and why. It was like catching the
dynamics of culture change in the act, almost like setting up a laboratory. This
is more or less true. Yet essentially the same thing holds for all culture changes

due to contact, in the past as well as now, between two alien civilizations as well
as when our own is concerned. The precise motivations of the people involved
in these former and foreign situations will mostly not be as familiarly vivid; but
in compensation the ultimate effect on their culture patterns will     normally be
much more fully visible after the act of acculturation has been completed than
while it is still in progress; and the outcome should be more fully understand-
able in the perspective yielded by a more remote period or region. There is no
difference of principle between the acculturation involved in the Hellenization
of the Romans in Italy during the two or three centuries following 270 b.c. and
that of the Americanization of Italians in the United States in the century fol-
lowing A.D. 1850. The chief unlikeness is that the ancient Italians were the domi-
nant and majority group, the modern Italians a minority and socially dominated
group. Which problem one prefers to investigate is largely a matter of taste and
temperament. Those to whom foreign and historical phenomena easily carry a
meaning, or do so only with difficulty, will respectively be interested in one or
the other approach. The approaches are equally legitimate.      Which alternative
one chooses for himself is likely to be determined by the degree to which one is
ethnocentric or allocentric, at home with a synchronic or a diachronic view, in-
clined to discharge ideas into action or to let them sink in deeper   —rather than
being a matter of better or worse scientific procedure.
     At any rate, these reflections on method are of a certain importance because
they show that the particular type of "acculturation studies" developed by an-
236                                CULTURE CHANGE                                     §   l?^

thropologists in the interval between the         two World Wars does not so much
represent the discovery of a radically new type of problem as the emphasizing of
one special aspect of the long-recognized phenomena of culture change, and the
application of investigatory techniques to somewhat nearer and possibly more
"practical" situations.
      What is distinctive in these special acculturation studies, as Linton has
pointed out, consists of several features. First, they view acculturation almost
wholly and one-sidedly from the angle of the impact of a dominant, prestige-
laden society and culture upon a backward or dominated minority. Next, the
changes investigated are almost invariably not spontaneous and automatic, but
purposively directed or controlled, at least in part, by the superior society,
through its Colonial Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Army, police force, au-
thorized missionaries, and the majority public opinion behind these. Special
attention has also been given to phenomena of nativistic revivalism. By this is
meant defense efforts of the dominated culture to glorify its past and to re-
establish at least parts of it. Finally, the acculturation has been studied as            it is


intended to work; namely, to result in ultimate disappearance of the minority—
in its cultural   and social fusion. Even where conspicuous racial differentiation
and a sense of racial superiority tend to prevent social assimilation, as in the case
of the American Negro, there is little doubt that the pressure of the majority
population is in the direction of cultural assimilation. The studies made there-
fore incline both to take ultimate uniformity for granted             and to accept it with
a degree of equanimity.
      All these characteristics of the conventional type of professed acculturation
studies apply to only a selective part of the total phenomena of change resulting
from culture contact, or acculturation in the broadest sense. The following sec-
tions will accordingly try to present some instances of culture-contact dynamics

of a broader and more fundamental type.



      177. ACCULTURATION WITH AND WITHOUT DOMINANCE AND
                                    ASSIMILATION

      Since acculturation basically is the acceptance or borrowing of material from
one culture by another, it always involves some approximation between the
two cultures. But there is no reason why such approximation should continue
into assimilation. Normally, we may expect assimilation only when the outlook
of one society is inclusive and when this society is definitely the stronger and its
culture the more advanced. In the majority of cases the populations somewhat
balance each other in     size,   have separate    territories, are   mutually influenced,
but expect to retain separate ways and customs, and do retain them. In other
words, the acculturation is more or less reciprocal, but incomplete. Each people
§    177                       DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                                   237
is   also likely to be developing new peculiarities even while        it   is   taking over cul-
ture       from the other. This is perhaps the most common form of acculturation:
across a frontier that remains a frontier, although not a closed one.
    A familiar example is the boundary between Mexico and the United States,
which is also the frontier separating the two principal facets of Occidental civili-
zation in the Western Hemisphere: Latin American and Anglo-American. The
border states from Texas to California show a series of influences from Mexico
that are not        found elsewhere: in names, architecture, foods, land grants, com-
munity-property marriage law, frequency of knowledge of the Spanish lan-
guage, and understanding of Latin American ideology and attitudes. Comple-
mentarily for the Mexican states from Tamaulipas to Sonora, as compared with
for instance Michoacan or Oaxaca or Vera           Cruz: people and habits seem and
are more like those of the United States. At the same time there is no question
but that crossing the Rio Grande either way means entering a thoroughly dis-
tinctive form of modern Western culture.
   This type of situation is exceedingly common. It recurs wherever Moham-
medan and Christian peoples adjoin. Religion and language maintain a cultural
barrier that may be stationary for centuries, but which is continually permeated
by diffusion. Spanish civilization for instance has a larger heritage of absorp-
tions from Islamic civilization than any other in western Europe. Witness as a
sample just the following words with the article al-, which were among the many
diffused from Arabic into Spanish, and from there passed through French into
English: algebra, almanac, alkali, alcohol,        alfalfa, alcove,    cotton {algodon in
Spanish), adobe. Primitive tribes        who are neighbors are always partly accul-
tured, as      is   evident from the fact that their cultures regularly resemble each
other even though their speech affiliations may be quite diverse. But no two such
tribal or national cultures are ever identical. Each people is aware that the other

has some peculiarities which have not been accepted by itself.
       Of course assimilation also takes place at times. The Norman and Saxon
fusion after 1066 is a familiar instance. Within three centuries these two strains
were assimilated in culture, speech, and mainly in blood. English civiUzation
was greatly enriched by the infusion of the large Norman-French element into
the Anglo-Saxon, so that by say 1400 it had come to approximate more nearly
French culture in its level; but of course it remained definitely distinct from
French. The Normans produced a decisive effect because their mainland cul-
ture was more advanced and more effective than the belated island culture of
the Saxons; but their being fewer in numbers made the assimilation easy and
natural. Also, they were in a sense professional "acculturators." Only a century
and a half before, in fact, the Viking Norsemen had similarly conquered Nor-
mandy for themselves out of France; and they had since then been acculturing
themselves into fairly close representations of Frenchmen.
       The Manchu, the Mongols, and the still earlier Tungus conquerors of China
238                                 CULTURE CHANGE                                § '77


lost theirown cultures there. This was evidently because they were a small
minority with a much more limited culture than the Chinese. The situation was
almost as if the Apache or the Sioux had overrun the eastern United States
seventy-five or a hundred years ago.        We
                                        might in that event conceivably be
paying taxes to a great Indian chief, while American civilization with its
machinery, highways, schools, newspapers, movies, and slang would perhaps
be going on not so very different from what it actually is. At least one might
so infer from the repeated Chinese cases; and from the story of the Vandals, the
Goths, the Lombards, and other tribes of the Germanic Volkerwanderung. This
hypothetical example indicates that as regards what happens to civilization, the
main results will be much the same, irrespective of who conquers or becomes
"dominant," when a large population possessing a rich culture collides with a
small, backward one. The difference between our imaginary Sioux Indians giv-
ing orders from the Capitol and collecting customs duties for themselves in
New York, and the actual Sioux living submarginally beyond the Mississippi
because they have made a poor go of farming and can't all join             Wild West
shows   —this difference   is   one that affects very profoundly the success and for-
tunes of some ten thousands of Sioux. But that            is   the principal effect the
imagined difference would have had. Native Sioux buffalo-hunting culture
would almost certainly be as essentially disintegrated by now as it actually is,
even if the Sioux had by some miracle conquered us; and American culture
would perhaps have been modified only in minor respects.
     Some United States Indians have worked out an interesting semiassimila-
tion of their own. These are certain central tribes, such as the Winnebago, the
Fox, and the Shawnee. They have accepted American money, dress, houses,
                                   —
furniture, and transportation in other words, the tangibles and the economics
of our civilization. But they have kept their old social institutions and rituals.
This snatching of a half-preservation from the pervasive swamping which
acculturation has meant for most Indians appears to be due to an intransigeant
sense of superiority that these few tribes managed to retain even when defeated
and crowded onto reservations they never accepted spiritual dominance by the
                                       :




white man. The Shawnee have had an unusual history of migrating from west
to east and then north and west again for three hundred years, and of repeatedly
moving into contact with white men and a variety of Indian tribes, and out
again. Exceptionally exposed in these long roamings to a multitude of possible
diffusions, they have ended up by developing an anti-acculturation attitude, in
order to preserve their identity. Thus they avoided or postponed the total as-
similation with which their small numbers threatened them.
      The Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico have also kept their
society and religion intact, plus a good deal of their material culture       and sub-
sistence. This is because for two and a half centuries they were under Spanish
rule, with enforced Christianity. They countered with an outward acceptance of
§    177                    DOMINANCE AND ASSIMILATION                                    239

this,beneath which they kept their old rituals and idea systems alive by a sort
of semisecret passive resistance. They were aided in their conservatism by the
sparseness of Caucasian immigration.
        Somewhat similar is what happened in Latin American countries in which
the Indian racial ingredient remains heavy, especially parts of Mexico, Guate-
mala, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. Here the Aztec, Otomi, Maya, Quechua, or
Aymara Indians were economically oppressed by their conquest, and were made
Christians more effectively than on the remote Pueblo frontier of             New Mexico.
Hence their old religion was completely shattered and is now largely lost, even
where they live in solid populations of hundreds of thousands. Mostly they are
devout Catholics, but with considerable pagan absorptions. Their dress is not
the old native one; but       it   often is distinctive of locality or   class, like   peasant
costume. The rest of their life is a similar mosaic of indigenous and Spanish
elements in complex and unpredictable combinations. There are millions of such
"Indians" in these countries, with a culture that             is   not pre-Columbian, not
Spanish or colonial, not modern Occidental, but some of each, plus local develop-
ments evolved from the mixture during four hundred years. There has been an
enormous amount of acculturing going on here                 in these centuries.       But the
product is better characterizable as a hybridization than as an acculturation, if
that word is allowed to retain         its   usual implication of assimilation into some-
thing superior or larger. These millions of Indians are not "assimilated," either
nationally or culturally.
        A third type of adjustment has been made by the Navaho, a branch of the
Athabascan Apache, along with whom they entered the Pueblo territory in the
southwestern United States an unrecorded number of centuries ago. For some
reason, the Navaho took over more culture from the Pueblos than did the other
Apache: corn-planting, cloth-weaving, probably matrilineal descent, certainly a
great mass of ritual elements. Subsequently they borrowed sheepherding and
silversmithing from the Spaniards. With these enrichments of their culture, they
became definitely prosperous, by their own standards, in a habitat that is pretty
meager in resources. But this very poverty of the land resulted in few Spaniards
or Americans      coming into it. Meanwhile the Navaho multiplied themselves
severalfold in the eighty years   between 1865 and 1945; so that instead of re-
tracting as did so many other tribes, they overflowed their territory. The result
is    that they are largely    self-sustaining,     independent, proud, and willing to
maintain their old ways. They are Navahos with Navaho habits, dress, and
speech, not imitation white men; and the usual absorption by assimilation is not
in the least in sight for them at present. The chief causes of this situation seem
to be their old and skillful adaptation to a rather poor environment; their growth

in    numbers, which made them a regional majority instead of a swamped
minority; and with this the preservation of assurance and even a certain sense
of superiority.
240                                CULTURE CHANGE                                    § 177


    This factor of assurance can be of the greatest importance if a minority
wishes to maintain itself. The Gypsies were satisfied with themselves, wanted
to   remain separate, and did keep themselves          intact in   Europe   for centuries.
They changed in some measure along with the culture that enveloped them, as
in shifting from horses to automobiles in the United States        —but without thereby
ever coming any nearer to social absorption, which they evidently did not desire.
Perhaps the greatest dislocation of the semiautonomy of their caste society in
the United States was due to       WPA
                                     and other work-relief inducements of the
1930's. Since    Gypsies ordinarily possessed only portable and tangible property,
those who, previous to WPA, wished to escape could ordinarily have done so
only    at   a low social level; for this   it   was hardly worth while trading their
unshackledness. It was perhaps the half-realization of this fact which strength-
ened their old attitude of aloofness and professed self-satisfaction.
    On the other hand, the fact that Jews remain a minority group is perhaps
more largely due to Gentile majority pressure. As their enforced segregation and
exclusion diminished cumulatively in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
the Jews began definitely to assimilate culturally, and even socially. They have
been, on the whole, economically prosperous, so that those who wished to and
did flow out of their old caste confinement had opportunity to do so on favor-
able social levels.
       By way of contrast, it may be of interest to consider some cases where
groups of Western origin have become minority populations.


               178.   JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA
    In 1 163 a colony of Jews from Persia settled at K'aifeng in Honan. Five
hundred years later they were still there, as attested by a stone inscription, and
had just rebuilt their synagogue under imperial sanction. Two centuries more,
however, and they were preserving only a consciousness of being Jews and some
scrolls of their Law.    The last rabbi had died about 1830 and the synagogue was
pulled down by 1850. The colony no longer knew Hebrew, could not therefore
read their scrolls, were uncircumcised, had lost their pedigrees, and were indis-
tinguishable in names, dress, and often in features from Chinese.              They had
become poor, and this may have contributed to the relative rapidity of their final
assimilation.
       Even older is a Jewish colony in Cochin in southern India, which was
flourishing in 1020, as is shown by a grant of lands and privileges to one of its
leaders, preserved     on copper plates of that date. There are also Jewish tomb-
stones dated 1269. Following the Hindu pattern, these Jews today are divided
into three castes, which do not marry or eat together, though their religion and
general culture are identical. The so-called "White" Jews number less than 150
and are all in one congregation, to which the "Black" are not admitted. These
§   178              JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN MINORITIES IN ASIA                     24I

Whites may include some descendants of the original Jewish settlers in India,
but seem mainly to be of Spanish Jewish stock that arrived in the sixteenth cen-
tury and kept itself separate. They are of about the same complexion as southern
Europeans, and in blood they are very high in type A (§ 72), a distribution char-
acteristic of the Iberian Peninsula.   The "Brown" caste numbers only two or
three      dozen native servants or ex-servants of the White caste converted to
Judaism. The Black caste is some ten times as numerous as the White and has
seven synagogues. They resemble the Cochin Hindus in color and blood type,
and in origin they must be either outright converts from the native population
or the descendants of former cumulative intermai riages of Jewish immigrants
with natives. The two main castes arc old: in 1686 they were described much
as now, and synagogues still in use by the Whites and the Blacks were built in
1568 and 1489, respectively. The Cochin Jews are at once well fitted into south-
ern-Indian civilization and separate from it where they want to be, which         is

                  and group identity. They live in a ghetto street, but from
chiefly in religion
choice. They all learn to read Hebrew, the Blacks as sedulously as the
Whites, for prayers and services, but talk Malayalam along with the rest of
Cochin. Rice is their staple food, as it is in   all   southern India; but they will
never mix curries of meat with those of milk, in conformity with the orthodox
Jewish injunction. They chew betel, paint their nails, play rummy, but have pre-
served their Hebrew ritual and festivals scrupulously. There is much accultura-
tion,     but also a wholly successful maintenance of the integrity of a minority
group and of a subculture around an intact nucleus of religion.
      Equally interesting are the native Christians of Cochin,      who legendarily
stem from the disciple St. Thomas, and at any rate were found long-established
when the Portuguese reached India in 1498. There are five sects of tJiem. Two
groups are Roman Catholics, one using Latin and the other Syriac as the ritual
language. These both acknowledge the Pope, of course, but represent somewhat
different degrees of secondary influence of Portuguese missionaries on the local
Christians. The native Chaldaean Syrians are under the Patriarch of Babylon;
the Jacobite Syrians, under the Patriarch of Antioch. From these latter, the fifth
sect, the Reformed or St. Thomas Syrians, seems to have branched off, with its

own local bishop as head, under the influence of immigrant Protestant mis-
sionaries; this sect rejects confession, relics, masses for the dead, and invocation

of saints.    To these live sects there correspond seven castes, which absolutely
prohibit interdining     and intermarriage, in conformity with standard Hindu
custom. The Roman Catholics of Latin rite comprise three castes, whose basis
of separatism is not clear. Otherwise, each sect is also a caste, except that the
Jacobite     and Reformed Svrians are jointly split—not on the basis of religious
adherence, but of ancestral residence: the northerners, Jacobite and Reformed
alike, claim to have arrived in India earlier, thus being superior, and accordingly

refusing to marry with the southerners.
242                               CULTURE CHANGE                                   §   178

      It is clear that the customary tolerance of Asiatics toward religions, strength-

ened by the dominant Hindu leaning toward caste particularity, afford minority
groups of foreign origin an excellent chance to maintain themselves without
being extinguished by assimilation, and yet to acculture, outside of their             re-
ligion, as far as is convenient to them. At the same time, it is also evident that

the Cochin Jews, and still more the Cochin Christians, have been aided in the
preservation of their particularities by occasional relations with overseas co-
religionists, resulting in their reinvigoration as minorities.     The Jews in China,
remote, inland, and secluded, were beyond such reinforcement, and both their
social and their cultural identity washed away after some centuries.



              179.   VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION
      It is   true that much modern acculturation of minorities is directed by the
majority culture, and that their assimilation       is   consciously furthered as some-
thing desirable. Uniformity has a way of commending itself to majorities. How-
ever, there is some importance in remembering that assimilation and standardi-
zation are not inevitable outflows from anything in the nature of man or his
culture.      A whole lot of human history has unrolled without any notable en-
deavors at uniformizing. The Persian Empire, the Hellenistic states, and Rome
were all notorious for not attempting any total assimilation of their subjects.
One obeyed the authorities, kept the peace, and paid taxes. Beyond that, one was
free to follow the ways of his fathers or to abandon them. And there was a
deal of acculturation nevertheless. Asia Minor and Syria largely turned Greek
in culture and speech; the greatest Greek city in the world was Alexandria in
Egypt; Gauls and Iberians became utterly Romanized             —of their free   will, be-

cause it was to their own advantage or prestige, not because a ruler or a majority
put pressure on them.
    Ethnically at least, the attitude of the Middle Ages was much the same.
Conformity to the Christian doctrine and church was exacted, but little else.
In fact, controlled acculturation came late. Not until well into the modern period
of European history, along with the rise of consciously nationalistic programs,
did the inclination become strong to improve people of other culture and speech
by inducing or forcing them to accept one's own. China and India have always
been notoriously tolerant or indifferent in these matters. The list of "internally
marginal" backward peoples that have been mentioned (§ 175)              —who are of
                                            —
course only partly accultured populations is evidence.
      A few cases to exemplify this generalization —that much human accultura-
tion has been voluntary     —will now be   cited.   One instance will be recent, one
older, the third in the primitive field.
      Since the Meiji reform of 1868, Japan has obviously been making its culture
over to conform progressively to Western civilization, at least in most respects.
Thus, following the charter oath, M'ith its clause that "intellect and learning
 J   179                     VOLUNTARY OR SPONTANEOUS ACCULTURATION                                243
shall be           sought for throughout the world," in 1871 feudalism was abolished.
Then there followed these introductions:
        1872: compulsory universal education
        1872:       (irst   railroad and telegraph

        1874: Gregorian calendar
        1875: girls' normal school
        1   881:    Bank of Japan
        1889: constitution with a parliament
        1890+: new law codes
        1897: gold standard
        1899: abolition of extraterritoriality
        1902: Anglo-Japanese alliance

        All this "Westernization" or adoption of Occidental culture was voluntary.
Perry had used a mixture of persuasion and threats to open the door and estab-
lish relations;             but none of the actual Japanese acculturation was due to com-
pulsion or even to pressure from outside                 —no more than there had been in the
similarly large-scale Japanese taking-over of Chinese civilization                       between a.d.
400 and 800 discussed in § 172-173 and 303. Neither, of course, was there the
least       diminution of Japanese          social,   racial,   or national integrity.    The whole
matter of minorities and absorption was lacking, as was direction or control from
outside the group. And yet                what happened is one of the most sweeping and
important acculturations in history, even though much too brief to be complete.
    The Lithuanians furnish the contrary example of a people voluntarily sub-
merging both their culture and most of their identity. By about 1200 Europe
had been Christianized, and therewith brought into Occidental civilization,
sxcept for the barbarous, independent Prussi, Litva, Latvi, Kor, and other tribes
along the lower Vistula, the Niemen, and the Dwina. These peoples, often
mistaken for Slavs, were not Slavs, but formed in speech an independent, co-
ordinate division of Indo-Europeans, the Baltic or Lettic branch. To their east,
the Russians had previously been Christianized                       from Constantinople      to   the
rites of the Greek Orthodox Church.                  To the south, the Hungarians and the Poles
had been converted to the authority of Rome. So had the Germans on the south-
west and the Scandinavians to the northwest of the Baltic peoples. From Sweden,
Christianity had been carried to the peaceful pagan Finns off to the north of our
Baits; the latter thus formed the one remaining island of heathenism in Europe
—a typical "internally marginal" retardation.
      Then, in 1226, the Teutonic Knights, a mihtant monastic order, began a
crusade for the conversion or extermination of the Borussians or Prussians. Grad-
ually the whole coastal territory along the east side of the Baltic Sea as far as
the Gulf of Finland was subjugated and appropriated by the                       Germans. Its in-
habitants were either exterminated or Christianized by force.                      One group of
tribes alone, the Litva or Lithuanians, a little farther inland than the rest along
244                               CULTURE CHANGE                             §   179

the  Niemen, fought back for their freedom and managed to retain it long
enough to learn about organized war and statehood from the encroaching Ger-
mans. Beginning with Mindvog in 1247, they developed a series of national
leaders. They also commenced for the first time to found fortified towns such
as Vilna. Soon they passed from holding their own to expanding, especially
toward the south, where the recent Mongol storm had left the several Russian
nationalities and states shattered. Gedymin overran White and Volhynian
Russia; his son, Ukrainian Russia beyond Kiev; under the Grand Duke Jagiello,
Lithuanian dominion reached down the Dnieper almost to the Black Sea. In
1386, the heiress to the Polish crown was persuaded to marry this Jagiello, on
condition that he become Christian; and his people followed him. A personal
union of rule thus bound together Poland, much longer civilized, and Lithuania,
perhaps twice as large. The combination being voluntary and reinforced by joint
successes against the    German Knights, the Lithuanian higher classes eagerly
Polonized themselves. They took over not only the CathoHcism but the speech,
manners, dress, customs, and education of the Poles; and by the diet of Lublin
in 1569 they    handed over the old Lithuanian conquests to Poland. That, inci-
dentally, was the basis of the Polish-Russian disputes over eastern Poland after
World War I and during World War IL The population of the disputed area
still is prevailingly White Russian, as it was when annexed by Lithuania six

hundred years before; but it had been under unchallenged and sole Polish rule
for about two centuries. In the home district of Lithuania, the peasants and
serfs continued to speak Lithuanian and to preserve Lithuanian folk customs;

but the culture of the higher classes was Polish. A heavy proportion of eminent
Poles in all fields of accomplishment were Lithuanian in ancestry, but thought
of themselves as Poles. This was much as a Spaniard or a Tunisian of the early
centuries after Christ would feel himself to be really a Roman in citizenship and
civilization; his actual provincial origin was of no particular moment. All three
of the Baltic states founded in 1919 had genuine difficulties to overcome in their
careers, because they were really erected on a basis of the social submergence of
their nationalities.   The nationalities, as linguistic or ethnic groups, were un-
questionably there. But their educated, prosperous, professional, and politically
trained classes were prevailingly either Germanized, Russianized, or Polonized.
Yet in the case of the Lithuanians, their acculturation and semiassimilation had
really been thoroughly self-sought and self-imposed by a respect for an older
civilization.
      Another voluntary reorientation is that made by the Algonkin and Atha-
bascan hunting and fishing tribes of the great transcontinental coniferous forest
of northern Canada, as a result of European demand for furs. Their habitat was
rich in fine pelts, though miserably poor in almost all other immediate resources.
Deer, moose, or reindeer continued to be hunted for food by these tribes; but
mink, marten, beaver, and ermine assumed a wholly new value in terms of what
white men were ready to give for them: steel traps, firearms, tools and kettles,
§    l8o                  NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                        245
woolen blankets, trinkets, and tea, flour, and pork. A dependence of families,
bands, and tribes on trading posts grew up. Caucasian contacts gave the Indians
more comforts, but also entrenched them more firmly as hunters. Their canoes,
snowshoes, and the like were retained because they had been successfully worked
out to fit living off the country. Their present culture thus has a native founda-
tion, but it also has a large Caucasian constituent and at least partial    Caucasian
motivation. And the acculturation was not due to conquest, to missionaries, or
                        swarming in, but to the fact that the Indians, who re-
to dispossessing settlers
main in the majority, changed their ways of their own accord (§ 327).


                    180. NATIVISM, REVIVALS,         AND MESSIAHS
       After two societies have come into sufficiently close contact for one to feel
the other as definitely more populous, stronger, or better equipped, so that its
own culture is in process of being supplanted by the other, a conscious preserva-
tion effort or defense is often produced. Such reactions have been called nati-
vistic     endeavors or revivals. They envelop with a sort of halo the culture that
is   passing away, and attempt to reaffirm or re-establish it, or parts of it.
       An immigrant group in the United States or Brazil almost always forms an
association of its nationals, not only to give its members aid, but to help preserve
the folkways, customs, speech,      and home life characteristic of the old culture.
This may be done even though the immigrants are economically better off than
they were in the homeland and would not think of returning to the conditions
from which they emigrated. People in growing up do get attached to the ways
of their culture, much as they become attached to their kinsfolk or their old
home. By the time they begin to age, their memories of the culture have got
tinged with pleasurable nostalgic sentiments and assume a symbolic value. Folk
dances, for instance, or literary exercises thus may come to mean much           more
than they did in the old country.
   Much the same effect may be produced when the territory of a more back-
ward minority is being occupied by an alien dominant population; when a
people is conquered and forced to change its ways; or even if it only feels its
own culture peacefully giving way under the automatic weight of a neighbor-
ing larger and more successful one. Thus the ancient bardic gatherings called
Eisteddfods were revived in 1798 for the conscious preservation and cultivation
of Welsh speech, poetry, tradition,and music; these were almost all that re-
mained of the national culture of Wales, since Welshmen had long been full
participants in British citizenship, empire, and civilization.
      With primitive tribes, the shock of cultural contact is often sudden and
severe. Their hunting lands or pastures may be taken away or broken under
the plow, their immemorial customs of blood revenge, head-hunting, sacrifice,
marriage by purchase, or polygyny be suppressed, perhaps their holy places
profaned or deliberately overthrown. Resistance is crushed by firearms or by
246                              CULTURE CHANGE                                §   1   80

superior military organization. Despondency settles over the tribes. Under the
blacking-out of all old established ideals and prestiges, without provision for new
values and opportunities to take their place, the resulting universal hopelessness
will weigh doubly heavy because it seems to reaffirm inescapable frustration in
personal life also. At this juncture a prophet is likely to arise and picture a wish
fulfillment a release from the human impasse by supernatural mechanism. The
              :



ancestral dead are to return and sweep the encroaching whites off the land.
Bulletproof shirts will neutralize firearms. The game animals will pour out
from the bowels of the earth whither they withdrew to evade the white man.
The old customs, the old rituals, the old happy gatherings, will all be re-estab-
lished. All that is needed, says the prophet, is faith in the impending miraculous
event, and some slight token observance of faith, such as dancing, or destroying
one's belongings of white manufacture. Therewith a revivalistic       movement of
return to the good old days is launched. The prophet's motivation       may range
from sincere delusion to desire for power, fame, or even money, or be com-
pounded of these. His converts follow him because of the stress of their social
unhappiness. Skeptical individuals or groups are ignored, or finally get caught
in the mass infection too.
     Some of these cults end in an armed clash and defeat. Such were, among
American Indians, the Delaware Prophet's announcements of 1762 and the
Shawnee Tenskwatawa's of 1805, which were followed by Pontiac's conspiracy
and by Tecumseh, the Battle of Tippecanoe, and the Creek War, respectively.
Other movements merely fade away when the date passes and the prediction is
unfulfilled. More often they maintain themselves as a new, hybrid church com-
bining elements selected out of the former tribal religion and out of Christian-
ity— its hybridity conforming to the transitional character of the dissolving

native culture as a whole. Of this character was the revivalistic cult established
about 1884 by the Columbia River Sahaptin Indian called Smohalla, which
ended in a permanent religion with church buildings, half after the Caucasian
model.
        In 1869 a   Walker Lake Paiute of Nevada named Wodziwob began to
preach locally the end of the world, destruction of the white man, and return
of the Indian dead. This "First Ghost  Dance" belief spread intertribally with
increasing momentum. By 1871      had the Indians of northern California in a
                                   it

ferment (§ 239); but from 1872 to 1874 it broke up into three movements. The
first   of these was the Earth Lodge cult, professing to protect the faithful from
catastrophe by having them enter specially built subterranean houses. Next was
the Bole-Maru, which arose after it began to appear that the world would not
end just then, and which therefore relegated the impending catastrophe and
return of the dead into the background; but its prophets or dreamers seized
upon certain spectacular native dances, simplified these, and combined them
with the use of patterned flags and modifications of white women's dresses. The
third current was the Big Head cult, which drifted away to attach special im-
§   l8o                     NATIVISM, REVIVALS, AND MESSIAHS                      247
portancc to a certain type of feather headdress, which was passed on Hkc a fetish
to new converts. Of these three proHferations of the Ghost Dance, only the Bole-
Maru lasted: it still was being practiced after seventy years at the outbreak
