# Bruce G. Trigger - Understanding Early Civilizations A Comparative Study

*Source: Bruce G. Trigger - Understanding Early Civilizations A Comparative Study.pdf*

Understanding Early Civilizations
This book offers the ﬁrst detailed comparative study of the seven best-
documented early civilizations: ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, Shang
China, the Aztecs and adjacent peoples in the Valley of Mexico, the Classic
Maya, the Inka, and the Yoruba. Unlike previous studies, equal attention is
paid to similarities and differences in their sociopolitical organization, eco-
nomic systems, religion, and culture. Many of this study’s ﬁndings are sur-
prising and provocative. Agricultural systems, technologies, and economic
behaviour turn out to have been far more diverse than was expected. Yet only
two basic types of political organization are found – city-states and territo-
rial states – and they inﬂuenced economic behaviour at least as much as did
environmental differences. Underlying various religious beliefs was a single,
distinctive pattern that is unique to early civilization and must have developed
independently in different regions of the world. Many other shared religious
beliefs appear to have been transformations of a shared heritage from earlier
times. Esteemed lifestyles that differed idiosyncratically from one early civi-
lization to another inﬂuenced human behaviour in ways that often persisted
despite changing material and political circumstances. These ﬁndings and
many others challenge not only current understandings of early civilizations
but also the theoretical foundations of modern archaeology and anthropology.
The key to understanding early civilizations lies not in their historical connec-
tions but in what they can tell us about similarities and differences in human
behaviour.
Bruce G. Trigger was James McGill Professor in the Department of An-
thropology at McGill University. He received his PhD from Yale University
and has carried out archaeological research in Egypt and the Sudan. His in-
terests included the comparative study of early civilizations, the history of
archaeology, and archaeological and anthropological theory. He received var-
ious scholarly awards, including the presitigious Prix L´eon-G´erin from the
Quebec government, for his sustained contributions to the social sciences.
He was an honorary Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland and
an honorary member of the Prehistoric Society (U.K.). His numerous books
include The Children of Aataentsic: A History of the Huron People to 1660
(1976), A History of Archaeological Thought (Cambridge 1989), Early Civ-
ilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context (1993), Sociocultural Evolution (1998),
and The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas, Volume 1
(Cambridge 1996), co-edited with Wilcomb E. Washburn.

Understanding Early
Civilizations
A Comparative Study
BRUCE G. TRIGGER
McGill University

cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, S˜ao Paulo
Cambridge University Press
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, ny 10013-2473, usa
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521822459
C⃝Bruce G. Trigger 2003
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2003
First paperback edition 2007
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Trigger, Bruce G.
Understanding early civilizations : a comparative study / Bruce G. Trigger.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-521-82245-9
1. Civilization, Ancient.
2. Social archaeology.
3. Prehistoric peoples.
I. Title.
cb311.t77
2003
930–dc21
2002074052
isbn 978-0-521-822459 hardback
isbn 978-0-521-70545-5 paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for
the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or
third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such
Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents
List of Illustrations
page vii
Preface
ix
Introduction
1 Rationalism and Relativism
3
2 Comparative Studies
15
3 Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
40
4 Evidence and Interpretation
53
Sociopolitical Organization
5 Kingship
71
6 States: City and Territorial
92
7 Urbanism
120
8 Class Systems and Social Mobility
142
9 Family Organization and Gender Roles
167
10 Administration
195
11 Law
221
12 Military Organization
240
13 Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
264
Economy
14 Food Production
279
15 Land Ownership
315
16 Trade and Craft Specialization
338
v

vi
Contents
17 Appropriation of Wealth
375
18 Economic Constants and Variables
395
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
19 Conceptions of the Supernatural
409
20 Cosmology and Cosmogony
444
21 Cult
472
22 Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
495
23 The Individual and the Universe
522
24 Elite Art and Architecture
541
25 Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
584
26 Values and Personal Aspirations
626
27 Cultural Constants and Variables
638
Discussion
28 Culture and Reason
653
29 Conclusion
684
References
689
Index
733

Illustrations
2.1 Map showing locations of seven early civilizations
page 30
2.2 Comparative chronology of early civilizations
32
6.1 Maps of city-state civilizations, at common scale
95
6.2 Maps of territorial states, at common scale
105
7.1 Urban centres in Mesopotamia and among the Yoruba
128
7.2 Urban centres in Mesoamerica
130
7.3 Urban centres in Egypt and the Inka kingdom
135
7.4 Urban centres in China
138
9.1 Houses in early civilizations
170
12.1 Inka battle scene
246
12.2 Mesopotamian battle scenes
258
14.1 Mesopotamian irrigation system
291
14.2 Egyptian agricultural basin system
296
14.3 Agriculture in the Valley of Mexico
305
16.1 Female weavers in early civilizations
361
19.1 Deities as depicted in early civilizations
427
24.1 Classic Maya and Valley of Mexico painting styles
546
24.2 Early Shang ritual vessels cast in bronze from Zhengzhou
547
24.3 Statues in early civilizations
548
24.4 Inka art styles
552
24.5 Kings subduing enemies
560
24.6 Temples on raised platforms in city-states
569
24.7 Royal palaces in city-states
574
25.1 Early recording in Mesopotamia and Egypt
589
25.2 Development of Mesopotamian signs
590
25.3 Formal characteristics of writing systems in early
civilizations
592
vii

Preface
In 1959, my ﬁnal year as an undergraduate at the University of Toronto, I pro-
duced a paper entitled ‘A Deﬁnition of Urbanism’ for a course in which Ronald
Cohen, then a young assistant professor, sought to introduce his students to
the most recent trends in ecological and neoevolutionary analysis. I compared
the ecological, demographic, economic, social, political, and cultural charac-
teristics of ﬁve urban centres: Tenochtitlan, Akhetaton, Rome, and an ancient
Mesopotamian and a medieval Western European city. I concluded that the
eclectic range of features exhibited by these urban centres did not support
Gideon Sjoberg’s (1955, 1960) general construct of the ‘preindustrial city’ and
that the early development of cities must have been multilinear rather than
unilinear. My recent rediscovery of this early work in a dusty ﬁling cabinet
reminded me of how long I have been interested in comparative studies of
early civilizations.
In the autumn of 1959, as a graduate student at Yale University, I had the op-
portunity to study the theory and methods of cross-cultural comparison under
the expert guidance of George Peter Murdock and Clellan Ford. In 1963–64,
I learned still more about this subject from Raoul Naroll, a senior colleague
at Northwestern University. To these anthropologists, none still living, the
present work owes a great debt.
After that time, my interest in comparative studies was in abeyance while
I worked on settlement archaeology, historical archaeology, and the history of
archaeology. Since 1970, however, I have taught approximately every second
year a course at McGill University entitled ‘The Social Institutions of Early
Civilizations’ and more recently ‘Comparative Studies of Early Civilizations’.
This course encouraged my interest in how early civilizations functioned and
resulted in the publication of a few papers based on the comparative study of
such societies (Trigger 1972, 1976b, 1979, 1985a, 1985b, 1990a, 1990b).
ix

x
Preface
When I ﬁnished writing A History of Archaeological Thought (1989), I be-
gan to search for a way to evaluate the rival claims of cultural ecologists, who
viewed societies as shaped by adaptive factors, and postmodernist cultural rel-
ativists, who regarded all human behaviour as culturally determined. It seemed
to me that research was being guided to an unhealthy extent by theoretical dog-
matism. I sought therefore to determine empirically what aspects of human
behaviour and beliefs were shaped by factors that were common to all hu-
man beings and what aspects were shaped by idiosyncratic features of cultural
systems by examining seven early civilizations distributed around the world,
all but two of which had displayed predominantly independent trajectories of
development. In this way, I hoped to provide an ontological basis for a more
informed understanding of human behaviour. The results of my research are
presented in this book.
The cross-cultural comparison of decontextualized traits concerning large
numbers of societies around the world is, as Murdock often pointed out to
his students, merely a quick way to discover robust patterning in sociocultural
behaviour that requires closer study. When dealing with a small sample such
as is available for early civilizations, data must be considered within a more
contextualized framework if researchers are to understand their signiﬁcance.
The need to present data in their functional context (a kind of comparative
equivalent of ‘thick description’) explains the great length of this book. As a
result, it has also become a summary of my understanding of what is currently
known about the seven best-documented early civilizations. It therefore fulﬁls
my earlier promise to publish a synoptic description of these civilizations as
well as a detailed analysis of how and why they resembled and differed from
each other (1993: viii).
Since 1989, I have spent most of my otherwise unallocated time working
on this book. I began writing it in November 1997, and the ﬁnal draft was
completed in June 2001. The most recent references are to works published
early that year. The structure of the book was greatly inﬂuenced by various
summaries of my research that I was invited to present when this research
was still in its early stages. The ﬁrst of these presentations was in the Depart-
ment of Archaeology at the University of Bergen, Norway, when I was visiting
that university as a guest of the Centre for the Study of the Sciences and the
Humanities in February 1991. A second lecture, ‘Constraint and Freedom in
the Shaping of Early Civilizations’, was delivered a year later to the Depart-
ment of Anthropology at the University of Toronto during a visit sponsored
by the Snider Lectureship Fund. The following December, similar talks were
presented at University College London, at Cambridge University, and as a
Munro lecture at the University of Edinburgh. The stimulating discussions

Preface
xi
that followed each of these presentations greatly assisted my work. Of still
greater value for guiding my research were four lectures that I gave on ancient
Egypt as an early civilization while I was visiting the Department of Sociology,
Anthropology, and Psychology at the American University in Cairo. A year
later these lectures were published as Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in
Context (1993). The reactions to that volume were of great help to my later
work.
Much of Chapter 2 is based on an unpublished lecture entitled ‘Cross-
Cultural Comparison and Postmodernism’ that I gave at the University of
Bradford while I was a guest speaker at the Theoretical Archaeology Group
Conference held there in December 1994. The comparative discussion of writ-
ing systems in Chapter 25 is largely based on a more comprehensive study of
the development of writing systems published in the Norwegian Archaeolog-
ical Review (1998b).
Among colleagues and graduate students who have augmented or altered
my perception of early civilizations in crucial ways or drawn my attention to
vital literature I especially wish to thank John Baines, Mario Bunge, Stephen
Chrisomalis, Jerimy Cunningham, Csilla Dallos, Bernardo Dubrovsky, Harvey
Feit, Katja Goebs, Hilary Gopnik, Peter Gose, John Hall, Alice B. Kehoe,
Andrea McDowell, Joyce Marcus, Lynn Meskell, Steven Mithen, Laura Nader,
Joan Oates, Thomas C. Patterson, Anne Pyburn, J´erˆome Rousseau, Philip
Salzman, Frank Smith, Michael E. Smith, W. J. Stemp, Elisabeth Stone,
Darko Suvin, Alexander von Gernet, Barbara Welch, Robin Yates, and Norman
Yoffee. I also thank the many undergraduates who have taken my early-
civilizations course over the years for the contributions that their discussions,
questions, and essays have made to my understanding of these societies. The
students of the classes of 1999 and 2001, which were taught while I was writing
this book, were especially helpful. I have almost certainly inadvertently failed
to acknowledge others who substantially assisted me over the past twelve years.
To them I apologize.
Throughout the book I have referred to early civilizations in the past tense.
This includes the Yoruba, despite the many continuities in their civilization
through the colonial era to the present. I also have sought as far as possible to
free descriptions of early civilizations from the use of terms, such as demesne,
feudal,peasant,prebend,andoikos,thatrelateprimarilytomedievalEuropean
or Classical Greek and Roman civilizations. The resulting circumlocutions may
seem strange at ﬁrst, but I believe that this procedure helps to reduce bias in
the understanding of early civilizations.
The only language of an early civilization that I have studied is Egyptian.
Standardizing the spellings of words in the various other languages spoken

xii
Preface
in the early civilizations has proved vexatious, since each language has been
transliterated in different ways into the Roman alphabet. While trying, when-
ever possible, to follow current conventions, I was forced to accept as given
the spellings of some words that occur only in single secondary sources. I have
presented ancient Egyptian words without suppositious vowels and generally
have preferred transliterations that use as few diacritics as possible.
While I have read much of the primary documentation that is available
in English by authors such as Sahag´un (1950–82) on the Valley of Mexico,
Cobo (1979, 1990) on the Inka, and Samuel Johnson (1921) on the Yoruba,
I have more often cited secondary sources on the ancient civilizations on the
grounds that their authors’ evaluations of the primary documentation are more
informed than my own. My referencing of factual material aims mainly to
identify variant or contested interpretations of data, guide interested readers
to further sources of information, and provide an idea of the interpretive
literature on which my descriptions of early civilizations are based. I have
listed at the end of the book only those works that have actually been cited.
I cannot claim to possess the expert knowledge about each early civilization
that specialists on those civilizations do and am sure that such readers will
ﬁnd factual errors and egregious deﬁciencies in my understanding of partic-
ular early civilizations. Yet attempts to create multiauthored studies of early
civilizations have their own pitfalls. I hope that a single interpretive viewpoint
more than compensates for my heavy reliance on secondary sources.
My research for this book was greatly assisted by the award of two successive
Killam Fellowships administered by the Canada Council. These relieved me
of most teaching and all administrative duties at McGill University during
calendar years 1990 and 1991. During calendar years 1992 and 1997 I beneﬁted
from McGill University’s enlightened policy of sabbatical leave. Without such
generous support it would have taken much longer to complete this book.
The ﬁnal editing of the manuscript and seeing it through press have been
substantially assisted by the annual stipend attached to the James McGill
Professorship that I received in January 2001. I thank Zarin Machanda for
her word processing of the manuscript that was submitted to the Press,
Barbara Metzger for her expert copyediting, which produced a more readable
book, and Kittisac Chanthaboune for preparing the illustrations. I also thank
Jessica Kuper for her most helpful editorial advice, Frank Smith, Camilla
T. Knapp, and Catherine Felgar for seeing the work through press, Barbara
Chin for securing permissions, Robert Swanson for preparing the index, and
Elizabeth Lewis for her important contributions to correcting proofs.
Readers who are interested in theoretical discussions and conclusions rather
than the evidence on which they are based can read Chapters 1 to 4, the

Preface
xiii
summaries and analysis of my ﬁndings in Chapters 13, 18, and 27, and the
concluding discussion in Chapters 28 and 29. It is, however, impossible to
evaluate the discussion independently of the evidence.
This book is lovingly dedicated to my wife, Barbara Welch. Her enthusiastic
encouragement and critical input into its creation have vastly exceeded the
call of duty. The two of us share, along with much else, a predilection for
comparative studies, which in her case is directed towards Caribbean islands
and banana production.

Understanding Early Civilizations

Introduction

1 Rationalism and Relativism
T
he most important issue confronting the social sciences is the extent
to which human behaviour is shaped by factors that operate cross-
culturally as opposed to factors that are unique to particular cultures. In part
this debate addresses to what degree and in what ways human behaviour is
inﬂuenced by calculations of self-interest that all human beings make in a sim-
ilar manner as opposed to particularistic, culturally conditioned, and largely
autonomous modes of conceiving reality. Marshall Sahlins (1976: ix) has
labelled this confrontation the ‘contest between the practical and the meaning-
ful’. The debate goes beyond this, however, to consider to what extent humans
may be biologically predisposed to understand reality and behave in similar
ways. This debate has pitted materialists against idealists, behaviourists against
advocates of cultural studies, processual archaeologists against postprocessual
ones, and traditional cultural ecologists, as well as Darwinian archaeologists
and sociobiologists, against neo-Boasian postmodernists. It has also split what
remains of academic Marxism into two warring camps.
At the centre of this debate is a fundamental question: given the biological
similarities and the cultural diversity of human beings, how much the same
or how differently are they likely to behave under analogous circumstances?
The answer to this question is crucial for understanding human behaviour
and cultural change and for shaping the future course of human development
(Trigger 1998a). In recent years theoretical positions have been elaborated
with great subtlety and reﬁnement, but there is no sign of consensus. As a
contribution to this debate, this book seeks to establish empirically what fea-
tures seven early civilizations, located on four continents, had in common
and in what ways they differed from one another. I am assuming that, in the
demonstrated absence of historical connections, shared features were either
produced by patterns of thought and behaviour common to all human groups
or shaped by similar environmental or functional constraints and therefore
3

4
Introduction
constitute examples of parallel development or coevolution. Cross-cultural
variation reﬂects the inﬂuence of cultural patterns that are free of such con-
straints. I hope that these case studies will reveal to what extent different
sorts of explanations of human behaviour are useful for explicating particular
data.
Anthropology, as a product of Western civilization, has simultaneously pur-
sued two antithetical but complementary goals: to demonstrate that people ev-
erywhere are biologically much the same and to celebrate the extent of cultural
variation found throughout the world. Both of these concerns can be traced
back to the eighteenth century, the ﬁrst being linked to the rationalism of the
Enlightenment and the second to Johann Herder and the romantic reaction
against the Enlightenment. These two positions have continued to dominate
Western politics and intellectual life and have inﬂuenced the development of
Western civilization in many ways.
rationalism
Rationalists stress the features that all human beings share as members of a
single species. They maintain that, despite cultural differences, human needs,
drives, motivations, desires, feelings, and sentiments are everywhere much
the same. They deﬁne culture as humanity’s learned modes of thought and
behaviour, and they understand such learned behaviour as a far more efﬁ-
cient and therefore evolutionarily superior way for humans to adapt to chang-
ing conditions than natural selection (Boyd and Richerson 1985). Travellers
often remark that it is possible for people from radically different cultures
to understand most aspects of each other’s behaviour even when they can-
not speak one another’s language (D. Brown 1991: 3). Dan Sperber (1985)
argues that ethnographic research is possible only because behavioural dif-
ferences are not very great. The primary role of reason is thought to be to
enable human beings to satisfy biological and psychological needs that are
fundamentally the same everywhere. Sahlins’s (1976) distinction between this
sort of ‘practical reason’ and ‘cultural reason’, by which he means decision
making constrained by the idiosyncratic values of speciﬁc cultural traditions,
is somewhat problematical. All human thought is symbolically mediated, and
therefore practical reason is culturally encoded and generally transmitted from
one generation to another in the form of unquestioned norms of behaviour.
In this respect it is no different from cultural reason. The crucial distinction
between practical and cultural reason is the capacity of practical reason to tran-
scend individual cultures by serving interests that are grounded in panhuman
traits.

Rationalism and Relativism
5
Rationalists also view culture as adapted to the practical needs of everyday
life rather than shaped by beliefs that are independent of such constraints.
They treat the past not as a source of enduring identities, ideals, and models for
action but as something to be transcended by creating ways of doing things that
are better suited to changing circumstances and represent a fuller realization of
humanpotential(Peel1983:7).Religiousbeliefs,values,andculturaltraditions
they tend to view as epiphenomenal. Thus they consider consciousness and
ideas to be shaped by material calculations and to serve principally as a way of
encoding and reinforcing practical behaviour.
From the rationalist perspective, the behaviour of any individual largely re-
sembles that of all humans, and social processes are the collective outcome
of innumerable individual decisions relating to personal status and well-being
that are based on available knowledge and experience. In general, rationalism
values the study of behaviour, especially adaptive behaviour, more highly than
the study of beliefs and consciousness. This is often justiﬁed by advocating a
positivist epistemology. It also privileges the study of cross-cultural similarities
and sometimes dismisses ‘unique, exotic, and non-recurrent particulars’ as the
result of historical accidents and therefore of no scientiﬁc interest (Steward
1955: 209). This emphasis on cross-cultural recurrences and rational explana-
tions of human behaviour does not encourage an interest in cultural traditions.
It does encourage an interest in sociocultural evolution.
Rationalist explanations of the uniformities in human behaviour assume a
variety of forms. One of the most popular is that ecological or economic fac-
tors determine or at least severely constrain the development of sociopolitical
organization and belief systems. Factors such as least effort, relative scarcity,
and individual or collective security are invoked to explain why people be-
have the way they do. This approach generally minimizes the importance of
human agency and accounts for change in terms of the rational calculation
of the relative selective advantages of different strategies – in Sahlins’s (1976:
89–90) words, displacing mind from human beings to the ecosystem. It also
minimizes the consideration of what is speciﬁcally human about human be-
haviour. A second type of explanation, most closely associated with classical
Marxism, sees intrasocietal competition for power and control of material re-
sources as the principal factor bringing about change in human societies. In
its original form this explanation was restricted to class societies, but in recent
years neo-Marxists have attempted to extend it to preclass societies by postulat-
ing analogous forms of competition among lineages, genders, and age-groups
(Bloch 1985).
Many rationalists accept that, while reason facilitates and helps to control
human behaviour, it does not motivate it. Reason has evolved to serve drives

6
Introduction
that are rooted in human nature. Human nature, in turn, is grounded in a com-
mon biology that expresses itself in similar organic needs, forms of intelligence,
and psychology that generate similar impulses and drives. (Debates continue
as to whether biological factors produce signiﬁcant behavioural differences be-
tween males and females, but racist attempts to establish biologically grounded
differences among various ethnic groups have foundered.) The assumption is
that, because of their biological similarities, human beings living under anal-
ogous conditions will respond in much the same way to similar problems.
Bronislaw Malinowski (1939), for example, attempted to ground social insti-
tutions in biological and psychological needs, and George P. Murdock (1945)
and Donald E. Brown (1991) identiﬁed universals in human action, thought,
feelings, statuses, social roles, the division of labour, the underlying structure
of language, reasoning, classiﬁcation, psychological predispositions, and sym-
boling. Brown (1991: 55–60) points out that even historical particularists such
as Franz Boas and Clark Wissler acknowledged the existence of behavioural
universals rooted in a common human nature. Boas (1963 [1911]: 154) ob-
served detailed, far-reaching, and numerous similarities in thought and action
among the most diverse peoples.
According to many rationalists, the existence of these universals refutes the
behaviourist view of the human mind as a tabula rasa on which experience is
objectively recorded and rationally analysed. Early social philosophers such as
Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and John Locke attributed speciﬁc
(though differing) natures to human beings. Karl Marx also assumed that an
underlying sociability and generosity were reﬂected in hunter-gatherer soci-
eties and would be reﬂected once again in the socialist societies of the future.
At the same time, in his desire to avoid supporting conservative ideas that
human behaviour was biologically determined and immutable, he contrarily
asserted that human nature was not innate but determined by the types of
societies in which human beings lived (Fuller 1980: 230–64; Geras 1983).
Rationalists now tend to assume that basic human behaviour has been
shaped by millions of years of hominid evolution, during which natural se-
lection has ‘wired’ the human brain to cope with various speciﬁc as well as
general problems (D. Brown 1991: 85; Mithen 1996). Much of this selection is
thought to have been related to the problems of living in small social groups,
which involved intragroup status competition as well as the need for coopera-
tion to cope with both internal and external problems. It is argued that their
living under these conditions until just a few thousand years ago accounts for
the behavioural similarities shared by all human groups (Carrithers 1992).
Individual interests are complex and cannot be reduced to rational calcula-
tions relating only to personal beneﬁts or the ecological adaptation of groups.

Rationalism and Relativism
7
Individuals rank the objectives they wish to pursue differently, and their dif-
fering understandings may lead to different strategies for achieving the same
goals. They may sometimes decide that their personal goals are best served
in ways that accord with social objectives (Hardin 1968). Under these cir-
cumstances, even in small-scale societies, behaviour can be highly diverse,
and varied individual decisions may play a signiﬁcant role in the formulation
of social strategies. Individual goal-driven behaviour may combine with eco-
logical and other external constraints in complex ways. In an attempt to deal
with this diversity, those who believe that sociocultural phenomena are shaped
most powerfully and directly by ecological or economic factors frequently as-
sert that the greatest degree of cross-cultural regularity among societies at
the same level of development is associated with their economic institutions.
They also assume that more cross-cultural diversity will be found in social and
political institutions, because these institutions are less directly constrained
by environment and technology, and still more diversity in art, philosophy,
and religious beliefs, which are the aspects of behaviour most likely to be in-
ﬂuenced by historical idiosyncrasies (Friedman and Rowlands 1978b: 203–5;
Gellner 1982).
romanticism
Romanticism began as a protest against the rationalism of the Enlightenment,
which many intellectuals believed ignored the importance of emotions and
sensibilities and of attachments to friends, families, religions, communities,
regions, ethnic groups, and nations. More generally, romanticism celebrated
the cultural diversity that characterizes human societies. In the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries, it became identiﬁed with the conservative re-
action against the French Revolution, which, in accordance with the ratio-
nalism of the Enlightenment, had demanded that all human beings should
stand equal before the law, enjoy the same freedoms and opportunities for
self-development, and share responsibility for promoting the common good.
The most recent expression of romanticism in the social sciences is the post-
modernist view of cultural traditions as historically constructed ‘sense-making
systems’ that shape people’s perceptions and values and their reactions to new
experiences. Postmodernists view cultures as highly diverse and idiosyncratic,
and through the advocacy of anthropologists such as Victor Turner (1967,
1975), Marshall Sahlins (1976; 1985), Clifford Geertz (1979; 1984), and James
Clifford (1988) their ideas have acquired enormous inﬂuence. Embracing
cultural relativism and historical particularism, modern cultural anthropology
once again has much in common with that of Boas.

8
Introduction
Cultural relativists assert that human beings live within meaningful schemes
of their own devising, which are contingently constructed and therefore never
the only ones possible. While many of them recognize that material factors
exert real inﬂuences on the cultural order, they reject the suggestion that
any particular cultural form can be read from a given set of material forces
(Sahlins 1976: 206). Which animals are considered appropriate to eat in a par-
ticular culture is determined historically rather than rationally (171). Economic
necessity can never account for the forms assumed by cultural change, which
are invariably constrained and shaped by established but purely conventional
ways of doing things. Such conventions are subject only to the endless modiﬁca-
tions brought about by individual decodings and re-encodings of knowledge.
The resulting idiosyncratic diversity of understandings within each culture
makes cultural change complex and unpredictable. Because relativists ascribe
such great importance to ideas, they accord only minimal inﬂuence to biolog-
ical constraints; both human behaviour and human nature tend to be viewed
as culturally determined.
Extreme forms of relativism minimize the adaptive role of cultures and em-
brace an idealist cultural determination. Clifford Geertz (1965: 101) maintains
that the human essence is manifested in variation rather than in universal char-
acteristics. The only governance of human behaviour is provided by ‘systems of
signiﬁcant symbols’. This cultural variability makes interethnic understanding
very difﬁcult. In one culture avoiding eye contact is a sign of respect; in another
it may indicate insecurity or unreliability. White signiﬁes mourning in one cul-
ture and black does so in another. While classical economists, as rationalists,
consider the proﬁt motive a human universal, cultural relativists maintain that
the production and distribution of goods are determined by concepts that are
highly variable from one culture to another.
Carried to its extreme, cultural relativism encourages the development of a
radical subjectivism in which every decoding of a message becomes another
encoding and it is impossible to comprehend fully what goes on in the mind
of a close relative, let alone that of someone from a different culture. Ideas
and beliefs, rather than the material conditions of life, are of overwhelming
importance in determining behaviour.
Many cultural relativists attribute the determining or constraining power of
culturally transmitted behaviour to a generally uncritical acceptance of what
is learned, whether conscious beliefs or unconscious habits. Practical consid-
erations or universal self-interest are generally considered insufﬁcient to alter
the beliefs and habits that control what people perceive, believe, and hold to
be appropriate. In short, people adapt to the world not as it is but as they
perceive it to be. Beliefs guide behaviour along culturally speciﬁc trajectories,

Rationalism and Relativism
9
as a result of which peoples with different cultures behave differently even
in essentially similar circumstances. This is the essence of Sahlins’s (1976)
cultural reason. Such views are of considerable antiquity. The seventeenth-
century philosopher Francis Bacon maintained that ‘custom is the principal
magistrate of man’s life’ (quoted in Boyd and Richerson 1985: 81), while the
American sociologist William Sumner (1906) argued that humans for the most
part inherited rather than chose their beliefs.
Others attribute the determining power of culture to deep structures that
unconsciously shape the development of beliefs in much the same fashion as
grammar implicitly patterns speech. The anthropologist Claude L´evi-Strauss
(1962) has emphasized universal structuring principles of the mind that realize
themselvesinaseriesofbinaryoppositionsbymeansofwhichcultureiscreated
and can be understood. He views cultures as unconsciously utilizing different
sets of oppositions that encourage their elaboration along distinctive lines.
Still others have argued that the deep structures of languages, particularly as
these are expressed in grammars, encode and thus emphasize different aspects
of reality. Indo-European languages, for example, stress concepts of time by
incorporating elaborate tense indicators into their verbs, while in Semitic lan-
guages verbs are used to distinguish whether actions are completed or still in
progress. Linguists such as Edward Sapir (1921) and Benjamin Whorf (1956)
have proposed that such differences among languages make their speakers
think and behave differently, even though such speakers are not consciously
aware of them. Others deny that such differences are of major signiﬁcance,
arguing that anything that can be said in one natural language can be said in all
others, even if it may be much harder to do so in one language than in another.
A similar objection may apply to the relation between cultural structuralism
and what people think.
Christopher Hallpike (1986: 288–371), although not a cultural relativist, ar-
gues that historically related cultures are guided by inﬂexible core principles
or key ideas that are not functionally related to particular subsistence patterns.
These core principles – general beliefs about the nature of the cosmos and
social organization – supply patterns that shape the development of cultures
and social behaviour. Hallpike maintains that, because peoples tend to ac-
cept particular core principles as givens, such propositions can inﬂuence the
development of historically related cultures for millennia.
Karl Marx and other materialists have objected that a theory that treats cul-
ture as an independent variable and assigns ideas a primary role in inﬂuencing
behaviour is incapable of accounting for change (Bloch 1985: 31). Change
requires either external pressures on individuals or goal-directed individual
action upon society or the natural environment that alters social relations. For

10
Introduction
such purposive action to occur, material interests that are external to culture
must be brought into play. The alternative approach, championed by extreme
relativists, is to treat culture as an indeterminate script that slowly changes
as a result of largely unintended transformations that occur in the course of
individual decodings and encodings of information. This implies that cultural
change has no inherent direction, except perhaps that brought about by the
greater survivability of some forms of behaviour in direct competition with
other forms. The latter sort of cultural selection is, however, of little direct in-
terest to extreme relativists, since it suggests unwelcome limitations on cultural
variability.
Postmodernism has encouraged a revival of the Boasian position that, while
each culture can be studied and understood on its own terms, individual cul-
turescannotlegitimatelybeevaluatedagainstanyabsolutecriteria.IanHodder
(1986; 1987) maintains that, because each culture is a system of meaning that
is the product of its own history and is based on unique assumptions, different
cultures can be understood and evaluated only on their own terms. Moreover,
he argues, because of the intervention of frameworks of culturally speciﬁc
meaning there is ‘no direct, universal cross-cultural relationship between be-
haviour and material culture’ (Hodder 1986: 12). Rather than seeking to under-
stand one aspect of a culture in isolation from the rest, he maintains, anthropol-
ogists must try to discover how the different parts of a culture are cognitively
linked to form a meaningful whole. To understand the principles that guide
agriculturalproduction,forexample,itisnecessarytostudythespeciﬁccultural
context in which such production occurs. Comparing agricultural production
in different societies in isolation from other features of these societies is bound
to be misleading and imposes an erroneous materialistic interpretation on hu-
man behaviour. Agricultural production may be guided primarily by religious
beliefs in one culture and by calculations of monetary proﬁt in another – or,
as Maurice Godelier (1978) put it, any aspect of culture can potentially serve
as infrastructure. To address this argument it would have to be determined
to what extent agricultural production primarily guided by religious concepts
would differ from production based on calculations of monetary proﬁt. Some
materialists argue that such differing approaches to food production would
simply be alternative devices for culturally encoding the same rational princi-
ples of ecological adaptation (Rappaport 1968).
Extreme cultural relativists deny that any effective form of cross-cultural
comparison is possible – a position that essentially eliminates the basis for
anthropology as a comparative study of human behaviour. Others, Geertz
among them, argue that comparison is possible provided that it is an exhaustive,
hermeneutically driven translation of the ideas of one culture into the thought

Rationalism and Relativism
11
patterns of another. This is such a difﬁcult, time-consuming enterprise that
no more than two cultures can be effectively compared. In general, because
they view cultures as systems of knowledge transmitted from earlier periods,
relativists prefer to understand them historically.
confrontation and accommodation
The dichotomy between rationalism and relativism poses many problems for
anthropologists. Relativism encourages an interest in culturally speciﬁc habits,
religious beliefs, art, values, and conceptions of the self that rationalist ap-
proaches tend to view as of minor importance. At the same time, it devalues
an interest in the search for cross-cultural regularities in human behaviour
which is central to a rationalist approach. If a rationalist approach by itself
were capable of explaining all aspects of human behaviour, all cultures at the
same level of development would closely resemble one another, any differ-
ences being attributable to environmental variation. If the range of variation
in learned behaviour were limited only by cultural factors, every culture would
be different except insofar as they were historically related.
The actual range of cross-cultural similarities and differences does not cor-
respond with an extreme version of either of these scenarios. There is far more
cross-cultural uniformity than extreme relativism would allow but less than a
purely rationalist explanation would indicate. Even the most extreme rela-
tivists admit that universal prerequisites relating to biological necessities such
as food, shelter, and biological reproduction impose limitations on cultural
variation. Likewise, most rationalists allow that idiosyncratic cultural variation
occurs but distinguish between the cross-culturally recurrent, adaptive fea-
tures of culture, which are believed to be most evident in subsistence patterns
and other forms of economic behaviour, and more variable cultural features
such as art styles and religious beliefs. Behaviour in the former sphere is seen
as restricted by the inﬂexibility of natural laws and the scarcity of natural re-
sources, while cultural variation reﬂects the relative freedom of the human
imagination. Marvin Harris (1974; 1977; 1979) has gone the farthest in trying
to demonstrate that what appear to be cultural idiosyncrasies are adaptively
determined, but his case studies remain more polemical than convincing. The
challenge is to stop simply supporting one or the other of these alternative
positions in a partisan manner and examine in greater detail the nature of cul-
tural similarities and differences as the basis for constructing a more realistic
theory of the factors shaping human behaviour and cultural change.
Rationalists and relativists agree that all human behaviour is culturally me-
diated and that such mediation deﬁnes a uniquely human form of adaptation.

12
Introduction
Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson (1985) have demonstrated that most beliefs
and behavioural patterns that have been culturally transmitted for long periods
are superior to recent innovations, both because they have been tested longer
and because during that time they have been selected to serve the interests
of societies as well as of individuals. Rationalists and relativists do not agree,
however, whether culture is phenomenal or epiphenomenal. This debate cen-
tres on the extent to which the factors that inﬂuence human behaviour are
determined primarily by culturally transmitted beliefs or by panhuman drives
and aspirations and on the extent to which personal experience can reveal
the limitations or inappropriateness of traditional beliefs. As Childe (1956b:
59–60) once asked, how, and under what conditions, does a society decide
that burning garbage is a more effective way to stop cholera than burning
witches?
Today it is fashionable to argue that all so-called scientiﬁc interpretations
are subjective and inevitably underdetermined by the available evidence
(B. Barnes 1974). In the social sciences most interpretations are provisional
and usually vigorously contested, while high-level theories are generally under-
stood to lie beyond the realm of direct proof. There is no conclusive evidence
that a materialist, behaviourally oriented approach is any more or less objective
than an idealist, culturally oriented one. Yet some evidence is better than no
evidence, and imperfect theories are stepping stones towards a better under-
standing. Cultural and ecological determinism are equally pernicious. Cultural
determinism excludes in advance the consideration of cross-cultural regulari-
ties, while ecological determinism rules out the consideration of cross-cultural
idiosyncrasies.
To circumvent this dilemma, I propose to undertake a comparative exam-
ination of similarities and differences in seven early civilizations. My aim is
to determine to what extent and in what ways these cultures were shaped,
on the one hand, by cross-culturally operative factors such as calculations of
self-interest that are grounded in human nature and, on the other, by highly
variable, culturally constituted, and hence historically speciﬁc and irreplicable
modes of thinking. I am assuming that, if behaviour is determined by culturally
inherited beliefs that are not subject to evaluation on the basis of panhuman
criteria, it will tend to vary idiosyncratically from one early civilization to an-
other. If behaviour is shaped by tendencies that are rooted in human nature,
it will tend to display cross-cultural uniformities.
It is also necessary to investigate the constraints imposed by functional lim-
itations. There appear to be only a limited number of ways in which societies
at a particular level of complexity can function well, or even function at all.

Rationalism and Relativism
13
Hallpike (1986: 141–42) has argued that such functional limitations become
more restrictive as societies grow more complex and competition among so-
cieties at both the same and different levels of complexity increases. The
convergence that comes about as a result of functional limitations suggests
that processes of social and cultural change may be more variable than their
outcomes. Childe (1958) argued that underlying the vast array of prehistoric
European Neolithic cultures was a strictly limited number of forms of social
and political organization. More recently Kent Flannery (1972) maintained
that the factors leading to the development of complex societies are far more
varied and idiosyncratic than the structures they produce. George P. Murdock
(1949; 1959b) demonstrated that only a limited number of systems of kin terms
possess sufﬁcient logical coherence to survive as stable structures. He also doc-
umented that there were many more ways to shift from one kinship system to
another than stable outcomes. The main difference among functional limita-
tions appears to be that in the social and behavioural realm they relate mainly
to making efﬁcient use of limited resources, while in the cognitive sphere they
have to do with limiting the production of a debilitating degree of symbolic
variation (Gellner 1982).
If social organization and cultural coherence exhibit more order than pro-
cesses of sociocultural change, functional studies may be more important for
understanding regularities in human behaviour and for addressing what are
often viewed as evolutionary as opposed to historical processes than many
neoevolutionists have believed. This constitutes a strong argument that the
synchronic-comparative approach adopted in this book may in some respects
be even more useful for understanding sociocultural evolution than the study
of actual sequences of change. It can also be argued that anthropological ar-
chaeologists have erred in trying to explain changes without ﬁrst seeking to
understand how what is changing functioned.
Constraint can be viewed as imposed on human behaviour by ecological
and biological factors (as the latter constitute human nature), functional lim-
itations, and cultural patterns. Ecological uniformities and functional limita-
tions promote various kinds of cross-cultural convergences and uniformities,
while ecological variations and divergent cultural patterns promote and sustain
cross-cultural variation. Ecological factors and functional limitations encour-
age rational, conscious and individual responses to situations, while cultural
patterns invite passive acceptance or active elaboration of established trajec-
tories. It is evident that to some extent individuals and groups are able to
reinterpret and alter cultural patterns for their social and material advantages
and so that they can interact more effectively with the natural environment.

14
Introduction
the proposed study
Unlike most anthropological analyses, this study focuses not on how seven
early civilizations evolved but on what their similarities and differences can tell
us about factors that inﬂuence human behaviour. This requires determining
what kinds of similarities were shared by all seven early civilizations, whether
these similarities were general or speciﬁc, and whether some early civilizations
shared certain features but not others. To what extent were speciﬁc sets of fea-
tures shared by the same civilizations, making it possible to deﬁne subvarieties
of early civilizations? What features varied idiosyncratically from one early
civilization to another? How were these various types of features functionally
correlated? My goal is to subject theories of sociocultural change to empirical
testing.
The study I am undertaking is the sort of comparison that extreme rela-
tivists maintain is impossible. No one, they claim, can understand one or more
other cultures sufﬁciently well to make comparisons that are more than projec-
tions of ethnocentric fantasies. To abandon an effort to understand patterning
in human behaviour on the grounds of such dogmatic and unsubstantiated
assertions would be a shameful act of intellectual cowardice.
In the next three chapters, I will assess comparative research, deﬁne early
civilizations, and discuss some of the problems I have encountered in my re-
search and how Ihave dealt with them. This will be followed by the examination
in turn of the sociopolitical organization, the economy, and the beliefs, knowl-
edge, and values of the seven early civilizations in order to ascertain the extent
of their similarities and differences. This survey will differ from many previous
ones, which have generally privileged the investigation of similarities or differ-
ences according to the theoretical preconceptions of the researchers. In three
sectional summaries and an integrative chapter, I will assess the theoretical
implications of my ﬁndings.

2 Comparative Studies
C
omparative studies are potentially of great value for understanding
human behaviour and cultural change, but all too often a lack of rigour
renders them uninformative or even highly misleading. There is never enough
information to explain all aspects of any early civilization, and this lack of infor-
mationhasstimulatedmanyanthropologiststoextrapolatewhatisknownabout
one society to other, presumably similar ones. The societies being compared
often represent different levels of development, and even societies on the same
level cannot be assumed to be sufﬁciently alike to justify such extrapolation.
It is proposed, for example, that Maya political organization may have had
signiﬁcant ‘feudal’ characteristics, and attempts have been made to understand
it better by comparisons with the feudal societies of medieval Europe and
premodern Japan (Adams and Smith 1981). Yet, how can such comparisons
be justiﬁed, let alone prove useful, when so little is known for certain about
Maya political organization? While ‘feudalism’ signiﬁes that land is granted
by an overlord in return for political support and military service, nothing is
known about relations between landholding and political authority among the
Classic Maya. In Maya studies ‘feudalism’ tends to be used loosely to refer to
any form of delegated authority. Beyond this, the civilizations being compared
in this example were not at the same level of development. The feudal orders
of medieval Europe and premodern Japan both evolved out of the collapse
of more centralized forms of government and coexisted symbiotically with
international religions of foreign origin that strongly assisted their political
functioning. This type of religion was not associated with early civilizations.
Other scholars have compared Maya political organization with that of West
African peoples, such as the Yoruba, and with the so-called galactic polities
and theatre states of Southeast Asia (Fox et al. 1996; Demarest 1992).
In the cultural sphere, Susan Gillespie (1989) has noted parallels between
Aztec and Central African beliefs that kings originated as strangers to the
15

16
Introduction
people they ruled. Yet limited comparisons of this sort leave unresolved the
question of whether such parallels are isolated historical coincidences or ex-
amples of a more general phenomenon. A more comprehensive study of the
concept of the king as a stranger by Gillian Feeley-Harnik (1985) suggests
that this theme recurs in many cultures that lack obvious historical connec-
tions. The idea of the king as a stranger may be related to a broader set of
beliefs that kings and ruling classes differ, either supernaturally or ethnically,
from their subjects. Familiar examples include the distinctions that were drawn
during the eighteenth century in Britain between an aristocracy that traced its
descent from Norman conquerors and indigenous Anglo-Saxon commoners
and in France between the upper classes, which claimed to be of Frankish
(German) origin, and the rest of the population, which was assumed to be de-
scended from subjugated Romano-Celtic peoples. These distinctions ceased
to be important with the emergence of a modern sense of national identity
(Olivier 1999: 177).
A detailed and independent understanding of each early civilization is a pre-
requisite for comparative study. Using information about one early civilization
to ﬁll gaps in our knowledge of another inevitably creates the appearance of
greater cross-cultural uniformity than was actually the case.
history of comparative studies
Cross-cultural comparative studies must be distinguished from more detailed
and intensive comparisons of a smaller number of societies. Cross-cultural
comparisons examine data concerning selected features in a large number of
societies in order to determine whether regularities are present that seem
worthy of more detailed study and explanation. For example, a comparison of
subsistence patterns and political organization would suggest that no hunter-
gatherer society has ever developed a hereditary monarchy. Various explana-
tions can be offered for this, including the lack of need for formal governance
in small, mobile societies and the inability of such societies to produce a sur-
plus capable of supporting such an institution. It would be very surprising if
more intensive investigations produced evidence of even one example of that
combination.
The ﬁrst effort to collect information that would allow research to be carried
out in this fashion was the British philosopher Herbert Spencer’s Descriptive
Sociology, which he began planning in 1859 as background for his Principles
of Sociology (1876–96). Descriptive Sociology was compiled by Spencer and
three assistants and published (partly posthumously) in ﬁfteen volumes be-
tween 1873 and 1932. These volumes, organized by region, consisted of tables

Comparative Studies
17
of statements summarizing the institutions and, if known, the histories of par-
ticular societies and reproducing extracts from the works cited. An additional
section in which the extracts would be grouped under thematic headings, such
as political, ecclesiastical, or ceremonial institutions, was never completed
(M. Harris 1968: 159–61).
The ﬁrst study to use a statistical cross-cultural approach to discover pat-
terning in ethnographic data was that of Edward B. Tylor, who in 1889 read
a paper to the Royal Anthropological Institute using data relating to marriage
practices and subsistence patterns in several hundred societies around the
world to provide evidence that matrilocal residence had preceded patrilocal
residence. In keeping with the times, Tylor’s ﬁndings were organized in a uni-
linear evolutionary format, with the developmental sequence being inferred
from different subsistence patterns.
Tylor’s approach was pursued by the Dutch sociologist S. R. Steinmetz (1930
[1900]) who set out to code ethnographic data concerning 1,000 to 1,500 ‘peo-
ples and phases’. Although he did not achieve this goal, his student H. J.
Nieboer (1900) examined relations between slavery and economic factors in
65 hunting and ﬁshing societies, 22 pastoral groups, and 219 agricultural so-
cieties. Steinmetz’s approach also inspired T. S. van der Bij’s (1929) cross-
cultural study of warfare, J. H. Ronhaar’s (1931) examination of matrilineal
societies, and Jan Tijm’s (1933) comparative study of the role of women in
North American Indian societies (M. Harris 1968: 612–13).
In their book The Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler
Peoples, the British sociologists L. T. Hobhouse, G. C. Wheeler, and Morris
Ginsberg (1915) sought to determine the extent to which modes of food pro-
duction were correlated with other aspects of culture, such as political and
juridical organization, family structure, warfare, social stratiﬁcation, and prop-
erty, in an initial sample of 640 societies. Amplifying Nieboer’s classiﬁcation,
they distinguished three grades of hunting societies, three of agriculturalists,
and two of pastoralists.
The most sustained application of the statistical cross-cultural comparative
method resulted from the creation at Yale University, in 1937, of the Human
Relations Area Files (until 1949, the Cross-Cultural Survey), a systematic com-
pilation of ethnographic sources relating to more than 240 cultures. Over the
years, hundreds of thousands of pages of ethnographic material have been ﬁled
under uniform subject headings. The creation of these ﬁles opened the way for
a vast number of cross-cultural studies addressing many different topics and,
in the words of Marvin Harris (1968: 614), ushered in ‘a whole new era of the
comparative method’. Beginning in the 1950s, George P. Murdock, who had
played a leading role in the development of the Human Relations Area Files,

18
Introduction
organized the compilation of a ‘World Ethnographic Sample’ and an Atlas of
World Cultures (Murdock 1981), in which 563 cultures were described with
respect to several dozen sets of coded features. This Atlas has made possible
the investigation of correlations between numerous predetermined aspects of
culture.
The principal feature of general cross-cultural research as it has developed
since the nineteenth century has been the use of large samples and the search
for correlations between speciﬁc features of cultures. This sort of research has
sought almost exclusively to establish cross-cultural uniformities rather than
differences. It therefore accords best with the rationalist approach, which
postulates a high degree of uniformity among cultures. While the capacity of
this approach to falsify assumptions by failing to ﬁnd empirical evidence of
correlations renders it capable of refuting or weakening as well as conﬁrming
rationalist theories (Weber 1976 [1896]: 285–86), it is generally associated with
the search for positive correlations that accord with a rationalist outlook.
This sort of cross-cultural approach was especially attractive to the Amer-
ican archaeologists who adopted a more behaviourist and neoevolutionary
approach in the 1960s. The development of radiocarbon dating in the 1950s
had permitted the correlation of prehistoric sequences around the world and
the determination of rates of change, making it possible for the ﬁrst time for
archaeologists to generalize about the nature of cultural change. In an effort to
improve the behavioural interpretation of archaeological data, Lewis Binford
rejected the haphazard analogies that hitherto had been employed and argued
that interpretations had to be based on lawlike generalizations. This required
establishing strong correlations between physical artifacts and speciﬁc forms
of behaviour in living cultures that could be used to infer behaviour from
material culture in the archaeological record (Binford 1962; 1972; 1978).
An example of this approach is Binford’s (1971) systematic correlation of
mortuary practices with dimensions of social behaviour such as age, sex, and
social position in forty societies around the world. In this paper, which fol-
lowed standard Human Relations Area Files procedures, Binford demon-
strated that more behavioural dimensions were distinguished in burials in
sedentary societies than in non-sedentary ones. In ‘Willow Smoke and Dogs’
Tails’ (1980), however, no data or scores for individual hunter-gatherer soci-
eties were presented, and on the correlation chart only seven outlying societies
were identiﬁed by name. Binford’s explanation of centrally based hunting as an
ecological adaptation to high latitudes was therefore very difﬁcult to assess. In
more recent work, Binford (1983) based generalizations about hunter-gatherer
camp layouts and other forms of spatial behaviour on ethnographic observa-
tions he made among the Nunamiut Eskimo of Alaska, provided that these

Comparative Studies
19
observations were not contradicted by the sometimes casual observations that
he and other anthropologists have made among the San hunter-gatherers of
southern Africa and the Australian Aborigines. This trend has been reversed
only in Binford’s (2001) detailed ethnographic study of ecological adaptation
among hunter-gatherer societies.
Apart from Binford’s work, little use has been made of statistical cross-
cultural studies by neoevolutionary archaeologists or, with rare exceptions such
as Robert Carneiro (1970a), by neoevolutionary social anthropologists. While
George P. Murdock (1949), R. B. Textor (1967), and other social anthropol-
ogists made considerable use of general cross-cultural research to investigate
regularities in human behaviour, only a small number of social and cultural
anthropologists have consistently used cross-cultural data for delineating cul-
tural similarities and differences (Ember and Ember 1983; Otterbein 1989).
Declining interest in systematic cross-cultural comparison in both archaeology
and anthropology has discouraged the comparative study of early civilizations.
challenges to cross-cultural generalization
From the beginning, the validity of statistical cross-cultural studies as a method
for delineating regularities in human behaviour was seriously challenged on a
number of grounds. In the discussion that followed Tylor’s presentation of his
paper, the geneticist Francis Galton questioned its conclusions by enquiring
rhetorically in how many cases the traits Tylor was examining had spread
by diffusion or migration from one society to another rather than occurring
independently. Tylor regarded this objection to his method as so serious that he
ceased to use it. Subsequent research has made it clear that diffusion plays an
important role in shaping the distribution of cultural traits. In a study using data
concerning all documented North American aboriginal groups, Harold Driver
(1966)demonstratedthathistorical-diffusionalfactorsexplainedkin-avoidance
practices much better than existing functional and evolutionary theories.
Beginning in the 1960s, comparative anthropologists sought to devise vari-
ous answers to what became known as Galton’s problem (Naroll 1961). Their
proposed solutions were based on the assumption that, since diffusion was
most likely to inﬂuence contiguous areas, studying the results of coevolution
or parallel development required worldwide samples that were either max-
imally dispersed or stratiﬁed according to linguistic families which it could
be assumed indicated populations that had separate histories. Researchers
asking a general question such as whether matrilineal descent was function-
ally correlated with one type of subsistence more than any other tended to
use a standard worldwide sample of over 250 societies, while a more speciﬁc

20
Introduction
question such as Binford asked about logistics in hunter-gatherer societies
might be addressed using a sample of only 40 or so relevant societies (Ford
1967; F. Moore 1961).
Still other comparativists advocated employing very large or even exhaus-
tive samples numbering thousands of societies (Driver 1966: 147; Jorgensen
1966: 168–69). This procedure made it possible to render informed and spe-
ciﬁc judgements about the extent to which distributions of traits resulted
from diffusion or independent development. While studies of this sort have
been carried out for North America (Jorgensen 1974), the information and
resources are generally lacking to do this on a worldwide scale. Ruth Mace
and Mark Pagel (1994) have suggested that studies of parallel development
require the identiﬁcation of independent events of cultural change rather
than independent cultures. This is done historically, by constructing phylo-
genies of cultures and relating independent instances of culture change to
them.
While there is no clear and effective way to distinguish cross-cultural reg-
ularities resulting from historical connections (homologies) from similarities
resulting from independent development (analogies) in the cultural sphere, as
can be done in biology, the samples that have been developed by the Human
Relations Area Files and the statistical methods employed in analysing the
data they contain seem capable of identifying at least some analogies. Power-
ful functional constraints reveal themselves in the form of strong worldwide
correlations. Weaker ‘tilts’ and ‘trends’ indicate both the random countervail-
ing inﬂuences of diffusion and the relatively weak and slow-acting nature of
less powerful functional constraints (Coult and Habenstein 1965). Weak cor-
relations may also indicate the involvement of multiple factors, the operation
of which can be understood only as a result of the detailed study of a number of
cases (Roberts 1996). A worldwide sample thus appears to be able to identify
only those parallel developments that result from strong functional constraints.
Unfortunately, robust correlations that go beyond what is self-evident tend to
be infrequent.
Some critics of coevolutionary interpretations have proposed that various
cultural similarities can be traced back twelve thousand years or more to a com-
mon culture that gave rise to the later ones of Northeast Asia and the Americas.
They argue that the shared shamanistic beliefs of Siberian and New World
hunter-gatherer cultures formed a substratum for the development of similar
religious beliefs associated with the much later Chinese, Korean, Mexican, and
Peruvian civilizations (K. Chang 1983; 1984; P. Furst 1977; Seaman and Day
1994). Still more radical diffusionists seek a single original culture from which
all other cultures are derived, just as some linguists attempt to trace the origin

Comparative Studies
21
of all modern languages back to a single mother tongue (Ruhlen 1994). This
sort of approach proposes a historical explanation for the common features
shared by hunter-gatherer cultures throughout the world. Other anthropol-
ogists maintain that speciﬁc ancient beliefs which spread with the earliest
human populations around the world have persisted throughout later human
history. Weston La Barre (1984) has labelled beliefs that are so ancient and
widespread that they seem inextricable from all human thought ‘archoses’.
While such historical explanations cannot be ruled out, many similarities in
cultures at all levels of complexity are accounted for far more convincingly
from an evolutionary perspective. These include social institutions, forms of
behaviour, and beliefs that are characteristic of complex societies but not of
nomadic, hunter-gatherer ones and that recur throughout the world in situ-
ations for which the archaeological record does not provide any evidence of
signiﬁcant historical contact.
Beginning in the 1950s, British and Dutch social anthropologists objected to
the statistical comparison of individual traits wrenched from their sociopolitical
context (M. Harris 1968: 616–33; K¨obben 1952; 1973). They argued that, be-
cause all aspects of social relations are parts of socially integrated wholes and
individual cultural traits acquire their functional signiﬁcance from the roles
they play in such social systems, anthropologists must ﬁrst seek to understand
every trait in relation to the rest of the social system. Even if cross-cultural
samples were chosen with greater care than in the past, the comparativists’
decontextualization of traits was viewed as the continuation of practices asso-
ciated with long discredited nineteenth-century evolutionism.
Social anthropologists were not in principle opposed to the comparative
study of human societies. A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1952) believed that the ulti-
mate goal of social anthropology was to become the equivalent of comparative
anatomy, with societies being treated as if they were equivalent to organisms.
On the basis of this analogy, it was argued that, before societies could be
compared, anthropologists needed to determine in detail how each society
was constructed and how it functioned. This could be done only through the
detailed analysis of ethnographic data collected during the course of lengthy
ﬁeldwork. The use of both historical and archaeological data was rejected be-
cause these data were not sufﬁciently contextualized or veriﬁable. As a result
of the high standards set for collecting data, social anthropologists became so
concerned with studying individual societies that most of them lost interest
in carrying out comparative studies. Some of the best comparative work, by
the American social anthropologist Fred Eggan (1966), examined cultures that
were historically related to each other in an effort to understand why variations
had arisen within single traditions.

22
Introduction
Comparative studies were strongly repudiated by the new cultural anthro-
pology that developed in the 1970s (Clifford 1988; Geertz 1973; V. Turner
1967; 1975). Like Boasian anthropologists, the new cultural anthropologists
supported a humanistic, historical orientation in opposition to a generalizing,
behaviouristic, and scientiﬁc one. Inspired by postmodernist relativism, they
argued that every culture was a unique combination of traits that could be
understood only in terms of their relation to the culture of which they were
a part. Like social anthropologists, they associated comparative studies with
cultural evolutionism and what was now viewed as its untenable assumption of
cross-cultural uniformity. As a result of their cognitive rather than behavioural
emphasis, cultural anthropologists proclaimed that each culture was a unique,
self-contained system of meanings that could be understood only on its own
terms. This position was reinforced by demonstrations that material culture,
beliefs, and behaviour can distort, invert, and naturalize, as well as reﬂect and
reinforce social reality (Hodder 1982a). On these grounds, cultural anthropol-
ogists went even farther than social anthropologists and rejected in principle
the possibility of making meaningful cross-cultural comparisons. Yet, in prac-
tice there has been considerable ambivalence about comparisons. Ian Hodder,
who in some of his writings asserted the incomparability of cultures, elsewhere
proposed that regularities in the way garbage is used to mark social boundaries
by various African societies and by European gypsies permitted archaeologists
to discern social boundaries in Neolithic Western Europe (Hodder 1982b: 67;
1986; 1987).
The decline in comparative studies thus has a curious aetiology. Social an-
thropologists identiﬁed the general comparative approach’s decontextualiza-
tion of data and its search for cross-cultural regularities with the research
methods of long-discredited nineteenth-century evolutionists, and new cul-
tural anthropologists identiﬁed the search for these regularities with the neo-
evolutionism they were seeking to discredit. Yet neoevolutionists showed little
interest in large-scale cross-cultural studies, apparently because they did not
regard cross-cultural uniformity as something that had to be demonstrated
(Fried 1967; Sahlins 1958; 1968; Service 1971). Much neoevolutionary theo-
rizing relied on ethnographic data concerning the speciﬁc part of the world
with which these anthropologists were most familiar, generally Oceania. As a
result, data from Africa and North America were not checked to determine
how similar societies exhibiting the same general level of complexity in various
parts of the world were to one another. The failure of social anthropologists to
challenge such assumptions of uniformity reﬂected their growing belief that
anthropological data were too contaminated, as a result of acculturation to

Comparative Studies
23
dominant colonial societies, to be useful for revealing key patterns at earlier
stages of development (Schrire 1984).
There are indications of a renewed interest in comparative studies. These
include Mace and Pagel’s (1994) paper, referred to above, and C. L. Costin’s
(1996) advocacy of cross-cultural studies for understanding the relations be-
tween gender and craft specialization. Such research is inspired by a desire to
distinguish between cultural universals, which may be biologically grounded,
and idiosyncratic variations that clearly are not. Sociologists such as Ernest
Gellner (1988), John Hall (1986), and Michael Mann (1986) have also shown
great interest in the comparative study of complex societies, although their in-
terest is oriented towards establishing the uniqueness of Western civilization.
Comparative studies and in particular statistical studies are a way to discover
patterning in human behaviour, which in turn needs to be explained. For the
most part, such studies have concentrated on documenting similarities rather
than differences and therefore have been linked primarily to evolutionary and
rationalist approaches. The search for similarities is not, however, inherent in
the method, which can be used to document cross-cultural variation as well as
uniformity.
comparative studies of early civilizations
The comparative study of early civilizations has followed a somewhat different
course from that of general cross-cultural research. This is partly because the
number of historically independent early civilizations is limited but more im-
portantly because many non-anthropologists study early civilizations and the
humanist approach to them tends to be non-comparative. Based on Johann
Herder’s belief that each civilization should be studied and appreciated for
its own sake, this approach tends to treat each early civilization as unique.
Similarities among them have generally been explained from the perspective
of Weltgeschichte (world history), which maintains that all cultures have inter-
acted with and to some extent inﬂuenced one another. Instead of considering
the possibility of coevolution, humanists have traditionally offered diffusionary
explanations of similarities. Only a few have studied early civilizations from a
comparative perspective.
ThearchaeologistGordonChilde(1934)andtheOrientalistHenriFrankfort
(1956) conducted detailed comparisons of the civilizations of ancient Egypt
and southern Mesopotamia and concluded that they had evolved in distinc-
tive ways and remained fundamentally different from one another. Southern
Mesopotamiahaddevelopedasaseriesofcity-statessharingacommonculture,

24
Introduction
while ancient Egypt was united very early in its history as a divine monarchy,
and its high culture had developed at the royal court. Childe, a materialist
and a possibilist, attributed this difference to a contingent divergence in the
ways the ruling classes in these two civilizations had devised to extract food
surpluses from farmers. Frankfort, an idealist, attributed these differences to
what Hallpike (1986) would later call distinctive ‘core principles’. Frankfort
believed that these core principles were elaborated out of distinctive ideas that
had existed prior to the rise of civilization in these two regions.
The most inﬂuential comparative study of early civilizations was that of the
ecological anthropologist Julian Steward (1949), who compared civilizations
in ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, northern China, highland Mexico, and Peru.
Steward viewed cultures as adaptive systems and believed that they devel-
oped along similar lines in similar environments. Yet, unlike many nineteenth-
century unilinear evolutionists, he thought that it was necessary to take account
of the impact of different environments on cultures, an approach that he called
multilinear evolution. Under the inﬂuence of Karl Wittfogel (1938; 1957), he
proposed that all the earliest civilizations had developed in a single type of arid
environment, where irrigation was necessary to sustain dense populations. All
other civilizations, he argued, were secondary ones, having come into existence
only as the result of inﬂuences emanating from the ﬁrst.
According to Steward, the earliest civilizations had evolved in arid envi-
ronments as population growth and the need to coordinate labour to build
and maintain irrigation systems led to the development of centralized con-
trols, which radically transformed the political organization of these societies.
Steward believed that the earliest civilizations had been governed theocrati-
cally by priests but with increase in population and in interstate conﬂict, had
fallen more and more into the hands of military leaders. Early civilizations be-
came locked into cycles of increasing violence, which eventually undermined
their economies and led to population declines. This made possible a new cycle
of economic development, followed in turn by more violence and another de-
cline. Steward regarded the civilizations that had evolved in arid regions as
essential for the development of complex societies in all other environmental
settings, but at the same time he thought of them as evolutionary dead ends.
The development of more complex civilizations required environments that
had more potential for economic and demographic expansion.
As an evolutionist and an ecological determinist, Steward believed that,
because ecological factors played a crucial role in shaping cultures, the cross-
cultural variation of early civilizations was limited. He also argued that an-
thropology could develop as a science only if anthropologists abandoned the
preoccupation with the ‘unique, exotic, and non-recurrent particulars’ that had

Comparative Studies
25
fascinated the Boasians and focused instead on explaining the cross-cultural
similarities in structure and developmental trajectories of societies found in
similar natural settings (Steward 1955: 209). He held that the ‘cultural core’,
which he deﬁned as the cross-culturally similar economic, political, and reli-
gious patterns that resulted from different societies’ coping with similar envi-
ronmental challenges, had to be delineated empirically. Yet in retrospect it is
clear that he imposed a pattern of structural similarities and shared develop-
mental trends on the ﬁve early civilizations he was studying that was far more
uniform than was warranted by the facts.
Much less was known about early civilizations in the 1940s than is known to-
day, and this encouraged Steward to extrapolate what was known about partic-
ular early civilizations to others. He also ignored available evidence and chose
not to employ sound comparative methods in his efforts to impose upon early
civilizations the uniformity that he wished them to exhibit. He did not take note
of the signiﬁcant differences that Childe and Frankfort had already delineated
betweenancientEgyptianandMesopotamiancivilizations.Hemisrepresented
northern Chinese subsistence patterns, which had been based on rainfall agri-
culture, and did not examine the Classic Maya, Yoruba, or Cambodians, who
had created civilizations in tropical-forest environments. For a long time he
and his followers argued that all civilizations occurring in tropical forests had
to be secondary ones and that because of environmental limitations they could
ﬂourish only brieﬂy in such locations. Since then it has been demonstrated
that the most spectacular early complex culture in Mesoamerica, that of the
Olmec, developed in the tropical forest bordering the Gulf of Mexico begin-
ning around 1200 b.c. It also appears that the development of both highland
and lowland Maya cultures was inﬂuenced more by the Olmec culture than by
parallel developments in Central Mexico (Coe 1977; Flannery 2000). Finally,
there is evidence of the spectacular growth of Maya culture in the tropical
lowlands during the late ﬁrst millennium b.c., at the same time that complex
societies were developing in highland Mesoamerica. While the Classic Maya
culture ﬂourished during the ﬁrst millennium a.d., Maya urban centres had
developed considerably earlier in the lowlands and continued to ﬂourish on the
Yucat´an Peninsula until the Spanish conquest in the sixteenth century. Archae-
ological evidence indicates that Yoruba civilization developed in the tropical
forest of West Africa during the ﬁrst millennium a.d. and only later spread
north onto the savanna (Shaw 1978). Thus there is no reason to deny that early
civilizations were able to develop and ﬂourish outside those arid regions where
irrigation agriculture was required to support dense populations.
Nevertheless, because Steward’s ﬁndings were compatible with the unilin-
ear preconceptions of the neoevolutionary anthropology that developed in

26
Introduction
the 1960s, they exerted great inﬂuence on how anthropologists perceived the
organization and development of early civilizations (see, e.g., Service 1975;
Sanders and Price 1968). Field research, much of it carried out by neoevolu-
tionary archaeologists, eventually revealed the severe problems that resulted
from Steward’s preoccupation with cross-cultural uniformities. In historical
perspective, it must be concluded that his ‘Cultural Causality and Law’ was
not only the most inﬂuential cross-cultural study of early civilizations ever
published but also the most pernicious.
Another comparative study that belongs to the neoevolutionary tradition is
The Early State, edited by Henri Claessen and Peter Skaln´ık (1978). It was
based on specially prepared (but not standardized) summaries of the sociopo-
litical features of twenty-one early states, a category that included not only early
civilizations but also secondary civilizations and certain less complex central-
ized polities that are often called chiefdoms. More speciﬁc features were used
to divide these early states into three types (inchoate, typical, and transitional),
whichwerearrangedtoformanevolutionarysequence.Earlycivilizationswere
assigned to the typical (Egypt, Inka) and transitional (Aztec, Shang China) va-
rieties, although on the basis of rather arbitrary criteria. Structural differences
were interpreted as indicating successive stages of unilinear development, and,
while different factors were acknowledged as promoting the development of
states, it was assumed that, as a result of functional constraints, the result was
always very much the same.
A very different sort of comparative study, Robert McC. Adams’s The
Evolution of Urban Society (1966), was a detailed comparison of early
Mesopotamian civilization with that of the Aztec of Central Mexico. Adams
found these two civilizations, which had developed totally independently of
one another, to be structurally very similar and attributed these similarities to
functional limitations on what is possible in social and political organization.
In contrast to Steward, Adams paid attention to the differences between these
two cultures as well and regarded both differences and similarities as worthy
of scientiﬁc explanation. My present research demonstrates that, apparently
by chance, Adams opted to compare two early civilizations that closely resem-
bled one another, just as Childe and Frankfort had compared two that were
very different. Thus the very different conclusions that these eminent scholars
reached resulted largely from differences in the units they were comparing.
An important recent contribution to the comparative study of early civi-
lizations is The Archaeology of City-States, edited by Deborah Nichols and
Thomas Charlton (1997). While this volume also considers city-states in later
preindustrial societies, most of the case studies concern early civilizations.
Although the editors note that most contributors recognize the city-state as

Comparative Studies
27
being only ‘one of two or three major forms of early states’, they view city-
states as a cross-cultural regularity. They also espouse Steward’s goal of ‘trying
to differentiate the patterns of cultural order from the background noise of
cultural diversity’ (Charlton and Nichols 1997a: 5), and this perspective has
encouraged them to apply the label ‘city-state’ to early civilizations that might
more appropriately have been classiﬁed as territorial states and ones for which
too little information was available to permit any certain classiﬁcation. The gen-
eral conclusion that while ‘city-states are normal products of worldwide social
evolutionary trajectories . . . early territorial states, like Egypt, are quite excep-
tional’ (Yoffee 1997: 262) appears to ﬂow at least as much from the premises of
the volume as from the evidence. Norman Yoffee seems uncertain how many
territorial states are examined in this volume, referring to Egypt at one point
as ‘our single example of a territorial state’ (260) but elsewhere including the
Inka and Tiwanaku states in that category (262).
In spite of these limitations, the case studies document signiﬁcant variation
among city-states, whether within the same or different early civilizations, and
draw attention to signiﬁcant factors that may have shaped their development.
Nevertheless, the volume as a whole documents a continuing commitment to
a unilinear evolutionary perspective. The inﬂuence of unilinear evolutionary
thinking is particularly evident in David Wilson’s (1997) opposition not only to
‘multistage state typologists’ such as Claessen and Skaln´ık but also ‘modiﬁed
stage typologists’ such as myself, who postulate that different types of early
civilizations may have existed at the same level of development. Wilson ar-
gues that ‘the systematic features common to all states, or any other kind of
society . . . should be of more interest in the cross-cultural perspective advo-
cated by Steward [than] the unique local features of societies’ (231).
Archaic States, edited by Gary Feinman and Joyce Marcus (1998), includes
several theoretical papers arguing that early civilizations were characterized
by resistance to state power and therefore by instability and periodic break-
down and exploring the possibility that early civilizations changed in nature
over time. Marcus (1998) rejects the suggestion that most early civilizations
consisted of city-state systems and argues that early civilizations ﬁrst devel-
oped as large states, which in many cases later broke apart to form city-state
systems. Feinman (1998) suggests that larger polities may have been required
to produce pristine states than were needed to sustain later cycles of state de-
velopment. This approach argues in a unilinear evolutionary fashion that much
of the variation among early civilizations reﬂects the particular stage of devel-
opment each civilization had reached and that, because all the oldest states
were non-literate, their earliest phases can be studied only archaeologically.
This theory does not, however, correspond with what is known about Egypt

28
Introduction
and Mesopotamia, which suggests that early civilizations initially developed in
more varied ways than Marcus’s proposal envisions.
These behaviourally oriented papers are complemented by John Baines and
Norman Yoffee’s (1998) magisterial comparison of the cultural development
of early civilizations in Egypt and Mesopotamia. This study shows how, early
in the histories of these two civilizations, the upper classes developed highly
distinctive conceptions of what a civilization should be like that they never lost
sight of, despite repeated cycles of political unity and disunity. Egyptian leaders
did not abandon the ideal of political unity, which was deeply embedded in
their religious and cultural beliefs, while in Mesopotamia the early assumption
that unity was cultural rather than political never wholly disappeared. Baines
and Yoffee suggest that idiosyncratic cultural features are likely to have played
a far greater role in the political processes of early civilizations than the other
contributors to this volume recognize.
the present study
This study compares seven early civilizations that developed in different parts
of the world: Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt (2700–1780 b.c.), southern
Mesopotamia from Early Dynastic III to Old Babylonian times (2500–
1600 b.c.), northern China in the late Shang and early Western Zhou periods
(1200–950 b.c.), the Valley of Mexico in the late ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth
centuries a.d., the Classic Maya (a.d. 250–800), the Inka kingdom during the
early sixteenth century a.d., and the Yoruba and Benin peoples of West Africa
from the mid-eighteenth century to the beginning of the colonial era in the
late nineteenth century (Figs. 2.1, 2.2). The Yoruba states and Benin, selected
to represent sub-Saharan Africa, constituted the best-documented and one of
the culturally most advanced early civilizations of that region (Frobenius 1913,
1: 153). The same is true of the Late Aztec period in the Valley of Mexico in
the broader context of highland Mesoamerica, of the Inka kingdom in the
context of Peru, of the Shang state in relation to all of China, and of southern
Mesopotamia in relation to the Middle East. Ancient Egypt and the Classic
Maya were the sole early civilizations that developed in their particular areas.
It will be argued below that each of these civilizations developed substan-
tially independently of the other six. With one exception, none of the languages
spoken in these early civilizations is historically related to those associated with
any other. The Akkadian language spoken in Mesopotamia belonged, as did
other Semitic languages, to the same Afroasiatic language family as ancient
Egyptian, but Sumerian, the other main language of southern Mesopotamia,
was not related to ancient Egyptian.

Comparative Studies
29
Each early civilization was ‘primary’ or ‘pristine’ in the sense that its institu-
tions do not appear to have been shaped by substantial dependence upon or
control by other, more complex societies. Henry Wright (1998: 172) deﬁnes
primary states as ones that arose from interaction among prestate societies
only; ‘secondary civilizations’ frequently display combinations of features that
would not have been present at the same time had these civilizations not devel-
oped under the inﬂuence or tutelage of more advanced neighbours. The ad-
ministrative skills of international religions such as Christianity and Buddhism
played a major role in the development of nascent states in northern Europe,
Nubia, Korea, and Japan, but international religions did not develop until
early civilizations had evolved into more complex preindustrial ones (Trigger
1978).
To qualify for this study, early civilizations did not have to have been ‘pris-
tine’ in the more speciﬁc sense of being ﬁrst to develop in a particular region
of the world. That would be necessary only if Marcus (1998) were correct that
ﬁrst-generation early civilizations differed in some striking fashion from all
later ones. Late Aztec–period civilization in the Valley of Mexico has been de-
scribed as a third wave of urban development in that region, which drew upon
the cumulative experiences of over ﬁfteen hundred years of complex societies
in Central Mexico (Charlton and Nichols 1997b). The city-state conﬁguration
that existed in Late Aztec times differed considerably from those which had
evolved earlier, not least as the result of a much higher overall population
density. Yoruba civilization likewise had ﬂourished for many centuries prior
to European contact and appears to have experienced one or more phases
of widespread disruption during the prehistoric period. The Maya civilization
drew upon previous Olmec achievements, the Inka upon earlier state building
in the southern highlands and along the north coast of Peru, and the Egyptian
perhaps upon contemporary developments in Southwestern Asia. Yet, at the
periods we study them, these civilizations do not appear ever to have been
directly subordinated to neighbouring early civilizations. Inka civilization de-
veloped in a region of the Andean highlands where political institutions had
not previously advanced beyond the chiefdom level. The material culture that
was distinctive of the Inka state also developed from local antecedents and
was stylistically different from that associated with older civilizations in the
southern highlands (J. Moore 1996: 798). Thus, even if the civilizations being
examined were not ‘primary’ in the narrow sense, neither were they ‘sec-
ondary’. They were instead manifestations of indigenous traditions of early
civilizations that arose from local prestate societies. The decision not to study
secondary civilizations ruled out the employment of a large sample to reveal
signiﬁcant cross-cultural patterning.

30
Introduction
Tropic of Capricorn
Tropic of Cancer
Equator
0  
Valley of 
Mexico
Classic Maya
Yoruba-
Benin
0
5000 km
1000
2000
3000
4000
Scale at Equator
Inka
Kingdom
2.1. Locations of seven early civilizations.
My early training in social anthropology inclined me to believe that com-
parative studies cannot produce optimal results without analysts’ ﬁrst seeking
to understand the functional relations that endow individual traits or institu-
tions with behavioural and cognitive signiﬁcance. To avoid treating social and
cultural traits out of context, I sought to understand each of the seven early
Comparative Studies
31
Egypt
Southern
Mesopotamia
Shang
China
0  
civilizations as a functioning system before I compared them. This meant
intense study of the available archaeological data and written sources. Archae-
ological ﬁndings supply valuable information about technology, subsistence,
circulation of goods, settlement patterns, and the distribution of wealth, and
data of this sort are becoming increasingly abundant and comparable for early

3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
B.C.
A.D.
1500
1000
500
Mesopotamia
Egypt
North China
Maya
Lowlands
Basin
of Mexico
Peru
Coast
Highlands
Southwestern
Nigeria
Old Babylonian
Jemdat Nasr
New Kingdom
Middle Kingdom
Old Kingdom
Early Dynastic
Western Zhou
Late Shang
Early Shang
Erlitou
Late Postclassic
Early Postclassic
Terminal Classic
Early Classic
Late Classic
Late Preclassic
Late Aztec
Early Aztec
Toltec
Teotihuacan
Inka
Chimu
(chiefdoms
and small states)
Wari
Tiwanaku
Moche
Yoruba
2000
Isin-Larsa
Ur III
Akkadian
Early Dynastic
civilization
Late Uruk
2.2. Comparative chronology of early civilizations (periods examined in this book shaded).

Comparative Studies
33
civilizations. It is, however, very difﬁcult to infer social and political organiza-
tion from archaeological evidence alone. Many sites have been excavated that
belong to the Indus Valley civilization, but it remains unresolved whether it was
a state, a number of kingdoms, or a stateless commonwealth. So few written
documents on this early civilization have been preserved that it seems unlikely
that this and other questions will ever be answered (Kenoyer 1997; Maisels
1999: 186–259; Possehl 1998). Before the decipherment of Maya writing, sim-
ilar problems beset the understanding of Classic Maya civilization. Scholars
tended to assume that the Maya had theocratic rulers and debated whether
these rulers presided over a series of city-states or a large territorial state
(J. Thompson 1970). Once the Classic Maya inscriptions could be read, Maya
society looked more like other early civilizations than most Mayanists had be-
lieved. What many scholars had thought might be sculptures of gods or theo-
cratic priests turned out to be representations of kings, and it became certain
that the Classic Maya were organized as a series of independent city-states.
A holistic understanding of early civilizations such as is necessary for this
study also requires information about religious beliefs, cosmologies, and sec-
ular and spiritual values. While religious structures and tombs loom large in
the archaeological record, the beliefs that inspired these monuments can be
recovered only from written or verbal records. I have therefore sought to ex-
amine the oldest phase of civilization in each region for which we have not only
good archaeological evidence but also substantial written records produced ei-
ther by a literate minority within the societies being examined or by European
visitors and colonists. The three civilizations mainly recorded in written form
by European visitors were ones that either lacked visual recording systems
completely (Yoruba) or did not possess varieties that could record the spo-
ken word (Inka, Valley of Mexico). This requirement of substantial written
sources meant that I could never study the earliest stage in the development
of civilization in any particular area. Societies that evolved their own writing
systems did not become fully literate until after they became early civiliza-
tions. Effective documentation of speech began several hundred years after
the initial development of civilization in Egypt and after even longer intervals
in Iraq and northern China and among the Maya. In the Valley of Mexico,
Peru, and West Africa the states being studied had existed for varying lengths
of time before Europeans ﬁrst recorded information about them and were
not necessarily the earliest civilizations in their regions. The vast majority of
the surviving Maya texts relate to the Late Classic period, which, because of
the Maya custom of constructing new temples and palaces on top of older
ones, is also far better documented archaeologically than any earlier period.
What makes cultures suitable for comparison is not how early they occur in a

34
Introduction
developmental sequence but whether, structurally and culturally, they conform
to the deﬁnition of an early civilization.
Archaeologists are usually concerned with how civilizations evolved but gen-
erally have much less information on earlier phases than on later ones. This
is because there were often fewer early sites to begin with, these sites were
generally smaller, and the more important sites, which continued into more re-
cent times, were covered over by later buildings and hence have less chance of
being excavated. Thus requiring written evidence to be part of the sample
meant that I would usually be studying periods that are archaeologically better
documented as well.
I would have liked to include at least one early civilization from the Indian
subcontinent, especially since Jonathan Kenoyer’s (1997) archaeological anal-
ysis leads him to suggest that principles of social segregation resembling the
later jati (caste) system were already present in the Indus Valley civilization.
Yet not enough archaeological and contemporary historical evidence was avail-
able to include either the Indus Valley or the early phases of the later Gangetic
civilization in my sample. Much of what passes for knowledge of pre-Mauryan
Gangetic civilization is based on highly speculative and often ideologically
driven conﬂations of limited archaeological data and later texts (Allchin 1995;
Chakrabarti 1997; Erdosy 1988). This omission deprived my sample of signiﬁ-
cant variations in social organization and beliefs that may have been associated
with the earliest civilizations of South Asia.
The civilizations in my sample are examined over periods that last from less
than a century in the case of Inka Peru to almost a millennium each for ancient
Egypt and Mesopotamia. The length of time over which each early civiliza-
tion is studied has been determined by pragmatic considerations. Civilizations
for which written documentation was provided by European visitors (Valley of
Mexico, Inka, Yoruba) can be studied only for the brief period between earliest
European contact and the establishment of direct colonial control. In the case
of civilizations that produced their own literary documentation (Mesopotamia,
Egypt, China, Maya), the earliest surviving written records are generally more
limited in volume and content, and much longer periods are required to pro-
vide necessary information. These periods must, however, be spans of time
during which no major irreversible changes occurred in the organization of
the civilization. While the Old and Middle Kingdoms can be combined to
provide information about the earliest phase of Egyptian civilization that is
documented by written records, Egyptian social organization was sufﬁciently
altered by the beginning of the New Kingdom that including most forms of
information from that period in the present study seemed inappropriate. I
therefore refer to the more abundant New Kingdom data principally to clarify

Comparative Studies
35
how Egypt was different in earlier times. I do not deny that Egyptian soci-
ety and culture changed signiﬁcantly between the start of the Old Kingdom
and the end of the Middle Kingdom, but these changes, in contrast to those
that followed, do not appear to have markedly altered the existing pattern of
Egyptian civilization. Where possible, the primary focus will be on the Old
Kingdom, especially the Fifth Dynasty.
The study of Mesopotamian civilization is limited to southern Iraq, which
contemporary documents such as the temple hymns of Enheduana suggest
regarded itself as a culturally distinct group of city-states that did not include
kingdoms located farther north, such as Assur and Mari (Postgate 1992: 26).
While urban centres emerged in this region in the fourth millennium b.c.,
substantial written documentation ﬁrst becomes available in the Early Dynas-
tic III period. The lasting incorporation of southern Mesopotamian cities into
larger regional states, which became normal only after the Old Babylonian
period, places that period at the very end of the time span being considered.
J. N. Postgate (1992: xxi) observes that Old Babylonian culture had deep roots
in the third millennium and that, while later periods are largely irrelevant for
understanding earlier times, what is known about it usually ends up having
been true earlier as well. Thus, he argues, scholars can proﬁtably generalize
about southern Mesopotamia from 3000 to 1500 b.c. In contrast, Jean-Louis
Huot (1989: 10) sees the reign of the Akkadian monarch Naram-Sin as a ma-
jor watershed in Mesopotamian history, while Norman Yoffee (1995: 282–83)
objects that Postgate’s approach unduly homogenizes successive historical pe-
riods. Taking account of these differing opinions, the main focus of my study
will be on the Early Dynastic III period, although fuller epigraphic documen-
tation invites considering speciﬁc data from as late as the Old Babylonian. I
reject, however, the notion that Mesopotamian culture did not change in any
way during this time span.
Although there is a powerful temptation to project what is known about later
phases of early civilizations back to earlier, less well-documented periods, it
is dangerous to attempt this. Injudicious extrapolations to poorly documented
periods of early civilizations are likely to be as misleading as what was achieved
a century ago when Egyptologists employed what Greek and Roman authors
had written about Egyptian customs to infer Egyptian behaviour in the New
Kingdom. The result was like trying to reconstruct life in Elizabethan England
from what is reported about England in modern newspapers. Formal Christian
religious beliefs may have remained generally similar, but not social organiza-
tion, scientiﬁc knowledge, values, or daily life. Just as scholars cannot justify
using what they know about one early civilization to ﬁll gaps in their knowl-
edge of another, so they cannot use information about later phases in the

36
Introduction
development of a civilization to remedy deﬁciencies in what is known about
earlier periods (Houston 1993: 7).
I therefore avoid using what the Spanish recorded about Maya culture in the
sixteenth century a.d. to augment what is known about Classic Maya culture
more than seven hundred years earlier. Likewise, there is no general warrant
for projecting speciﬁc Western Zhou or still later Chinese customs back into
Shang times. While I focus primarily on Shang civilization after the appearance
of written texts about 1200 b.c., I will, where it seems appropriate, discuss
early Western Zhou customs when little speciﬁc is recorded about analogous
aspects of Shang culture. It does seem justiﬁed, however, to use information
about Yoruba culture in the twentieth century to supplement what is known
about poorly documented aspects of Yoruba life in the late precolonial period.
In this case the time gap is relatively short, and sparse but signiﬁcant older
data permit examination of the appropriateness of these extrapolations.
I do not attempt to present data as if they referred to the way of life that
existed in each civilization only at a single point in time in the style of the
anthropologists’ traditional ‘ethnographic present’. On the contrary, I agree
with the social anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1962) that the best way
to determine how the various parts of a culture are functionally interrelated is
to observe how they change in relation to one another over time. Seeing how
bureaucratic structures changed as different factions among the upper class
competed with one another and sought to alter existing arrangements to their
own advantage is particularly useful for understanding political organization.
My aim in doing this is not to study change for its own sake but to understand
each early civilization better.
An important question is whether the sample of seven early civilizations
used in this study is large enough to reveal the full range of variation in early
civilizations. It is clear from the very different conclusions that Childe and
Frankfort drew from their comparisons of Egypt and Mesopotamia and Adams
from his comparison of Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico that a sample
consisting of only two civilizations can be highly misleading about the general
nature of early civilizations. It has been argued that civilizations such as those of
the Indus Valley (Possehl 1998) and Teotihuacan (Cowgill 1997) may have been
constructed on radically different principles from those associated with any
historically documented early civilization. These arguments have been revived
in the context of recent discussions of heterarchical political organization and
corporate power (Blanton et al. 1996; Crumley 1987; Ehrenreich, Crumley,
and Levy 1995). Yet none of the suggested examples has provided certain
evidence of early civilizations that lie beyond the general range of variation
documented in the present sample.

Comparative Studies
37
As early as the 1920s it was recognized that not all early civilizations were of
the same type. One of the aims of the present study is to determine whether the
seven civilizations being examined can be assigned to two or three different
categories or vary idiosyncratically. If the ﬁrst option can be sustained, the
sample is probably reasonably representative of the full range of variation in
early civilizations. If no two civilizations turn out to be similar in any signiﬁcant
way, the sample is almost certainly inadequate.
Finally, this study must evaluate the persistent claim that the similarities
shared by these seven early civilizations are or might be the result of historical
connections rather than of parallel evolution. From the hyperdiffusionist point
of view, there is only one pristine civilization: the ﬁrst, whether real or hypoth-
esized, to develop anywhere in the world (Hancock and Faiia 1998). For the
most part, this claim is an attempt to call into question the likelihood that cul-
tural coevolution ever occurred. With the nineteenth-century German ethnol-
ogist Friedrich Ratzel, its advocates dogmatically assert that one must rule out
any possibility of diffusion before one can argue in favour of parallel evolution.
Yet the claim that early civilizations developed independently of one another
does not require proof that there was absolutely no contact between them.
The Classic Maya and the Aztec were closely related historically and cultur-
ally, having evolved as part of a widespread Mesoamerican way of life based on
the cultivation of maize, beans, and squash (Blanton et al. 1981). Yet their very
different environmental settings and dissimilar economic, social, and political
organizations are reasons for studying both. Despite many shared religious
beliefs, in the Valley of Mexico the concept of divine kingship was less extreme
and less central to the functioning of the state than that held by the Classic
Maya (Cowgill 1997). Art and architectural styles, agricultural practices, and
the organization of cities were also dissimilar in the two regions. Because of
such differences, I decided that adding the Classic Maya did not compro-
mise the integrity of my sample, especially since it remained too small to be
manipulated statistically.
Likewise, the ancient Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations were lo-
cated only a few hundred kilometres apart, and both had developed from the
NeolithicoecumenethathadextendedovermuchoftheMiddleEastandNorth
Africa and was based on the cultivation of wheat, barley, and ﬂax and the herd-
ing of cattle, sheep, and goats. They participated in common trading networks,
and a few artifacts of Mesopotamian origin turn up in the formative stage of
Egyptian civilization along with artistic motifs and architectural elements that
appear to copy Middle Eastern prototypes (Frankfort 1956; Joffe 2000; Mark
1998). Yet, despite such clear historical connections, no two civilizations in our
sample were more different from one another in almost every respect.

38
Introduction
More limited and indirect historical connections appear to link the remain-
ing civilizations in our sample with each other and with those already discussed.
North Chinese civilization developed from local Neolithic cultures that had
evolvedtheirownagriculturaleconomybasedonmillet,sorghum,pig,dog,and
silkworm production. While it is evident that early claims of massive Western
inﬂuence on the development of Chinese civilization were grossly exaggerated,
some traits – most notably the horse-drawn chariot, which appeared during
the Shang Dynasty – may be of Western Asian origin. There is, however, no
evidence of inﬂuences of Western origin prior to 1300 b.c. or of any direct
link between Mesopotamian and early Chinese civilization (K. Chang 1962;
Ho 1975).
There is also evidence of cultural contacts between Mesoamerica and Peru.
At an early period corn, beans, and other tropical crops spread south from
Mesoamerica and were incorporated into an indigenous Andean agricultural
complexbasedonhighlandgrainsandtubersandtheherdingofcameloids.Var-
ious shared iconographic motifs, including eagles, serpents, and jaguars, also
date from an early period (Willey 1955). In late prehistoric times trade between
coastal Peru and Mesoamerica introduced knowledge of bronze-working into
the Michoac´an area of western Mexico (Hosler 1988).
Archaeological evidence refutes the persistent efforts of colonial apologists,
pan-Africanists, and Yoruba exposed to Islamic inﬂuences to derive Yoruba
culture from ancient Egypt or the Middle East (Diop 1974; Lucas 1948). It is
clear that West Africa was a creative region in its own right and that Yoruba
culture developed from a local Neolithic complex that was based on indigenous
root and seed crops, particularly yams (Shaw 1978). Common traits such as
headrests suggest, however, that various indirect contacts linked Egypt and
West African cultures with each other and with other parts of Africa (Celenko
1996).
Finally, as noted above, it has been argued that certain cosmological and
religious concepts that recur in the Chinese, Mesoamerican, and sometimes
Peruvian civilizations may be derived from a common set of shamanistic beliefs
that date from the Palaeolithic period in Northeast Asia and were carried into
the Americas by the ﬁrst Amerindians (P. Furst 1977; Seaman and Day 1994;
Willey 1985). Arguments in favour of the trans-Paciﬁc diffusion in later pre-
Columbian times of ideas concerning the zodiac, geomancy, and techniques
for making bark cloth have been advanced by professional archaeologists but
not widely accepted (Kelley 1971; Tolstoy 1963; 1966).
Thus there are indications that limited cultural contact may have occurred
during the development of these seven early civilizations. Nevertheless, ar-
chaeological evidence makes it clear that each of these civilizations evolved

Comparative Studies
39
separately and largely independently in its own region. General patterns of
civilization did not diffuse from one region to another. If diffusion accounted
for major similarities in economic, social, and political organization, those civ-
ilizations that were geographically closest and therefore most easily accessible
to one another ought to have displayed the greatest similarity. Despite their
propinquity, ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia were structurally far more dif-
ferent from one another than Egyptian civilization was from that of the Inka
or Mesopotamian civilization was from that of highland Mesoamerica or the
Yoruba. Structural similarity does not correlate with geographical or temporal
propinquity or with similarities in environmental settings. While the Classic
Maya and Aztec civilizations were historically related and shared many cultural
traits, their structural differences make their inclusion in this sample of vital
interest. It is therefore possible, without stridently rejecting claims that there
were varying degrees of historical contact among these civilizations, to treat
them as examples of independent development and hence as equivalent units
for comparative study.

3 Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
I
dentifying early civilizations for comparative study requires ascertaining
the general features that distinguish them from both simpler and more
complex societies. Such criteria do not constitute an ‘ideal type’, which, accord-
ing to Max Weber (1949), seeks to order reality by selecting and accentuating
certain elements of it. Instead, they identify a natural but not necessarily ex-
clusive category within which it is possible to conduct a more detailed study
of differences and similarities. Nevertheless, even postulating such a category
as ‘early civilizations’ attracts charges of subjectivity and ethnocentric bias. Do
early civilizations constitute a natural class that is susceptible to the kind of
comparative study I am proposing? Does degree of complexity have any real
meaning?Isitpossibletomeasurecomplexityobjectively?Donotfundamental
historical differences render all societies inappropriate for comparative analy-
sis? Extreme relativists would answer the last question with a resounding yes.
‘Early civilization’ is undeniably an evolutionary concept. It assumes the ex-
istence of less complex societies, some of which evolved into early civilizations,
and more complex ones, which either developed out of early civilizations or
grew up alongside of and ultimately replaced them. The aim of my research is
not to evaluate the concept of sociocultural evolution (but see Trigger 1998a)
or to try to account for how and why early civilizations developed. Yet, in order
to demonstrate that the societies I am examining are at the same level or stage
of development, it is necessary to argue that sociocultural evolution is a valid
scientiﬁc concept.
sociocultural evolution
The idea of social evolution has been violently attacked in recent decades as a
myth created by Western European scholars, beginning in the eighteenth cen-
tury, to justify colonial exploitation in many parts of the world (Diamond 1974;
40

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
41
Patterson 1997; Rowlands 1989). Although there is much truth to this charge,
I reject the suggestion that the idea of evolution as an approach to the
study of human history is inherently and inescapably colonialist and racist.
Archaeological research inspired by an evolutionary perspective has demon-
strated the creativity of indigenous peoples around the world and the progress
they achieved in prehistoric times, and growing knowledge of these achieve-
ments has played a signiﬁcant role in undermining the justiﬁcations offered
for colonialism and assisted independence movements.
Extreme relativists also object that the concept of cultural evolution at-
tributes a spurious linearity and regularity to cultural change. It is only, they
argue, by rejecting evidence that does not conform to expectations – that is,
by imposing a false pattern on human history – that evolutionists have been
able to suggest such regularity (Giddens 1984: 236; 1985). Cultural evolution-
ary explanations are denounced for their reliance on ecologically deterministic
explanations of culture change. This, it is maintained, denies the importance
of ideas in guiding human behaviour and the role of individual preferences
and contingent events in shaping human history. Very little attention is paid
by these critics to the role that relativists assign to cultural traditions as fac-
tors restricting or inhibiting individual choice. Evolutionary approaches are
viewed as materialist attempts to deny the diversity of human behaviour and
the capacity of culturally mediated ideas to create still more diversity.
It has been demonstrated archaeologically that all modern societies are de-
scended from Upper Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer bands and these in turn
from still earlier scavenging societies. Along the way, societies that abandoned
hunter-gatherer economies experienced major changes in social organization
and understandings of the universe and the place of humans in it. As knowledge
of the past has increased, many concepts formerly associated with evolution-
ary theory have been recognized as erroneous and abandoned. A teleological
view of sociocultural evolution has been slowly but remorselessly discarded.
Evolutionary specialists no longer claim that a speciﬁc trajectory is inher-
ent in sociocultural evolution and shapes human behaviour independently
of human will. Such views are now summarily dismissed as ‘God-surrogates’
(Gellner 1988: 144) intended to preserve a belief that human history was the
unfolding of some predetermined plan at a time when faith in divine prov-
idence was yielding to a more secular outlook. Today it is recognized that
change is neither more nor less normal than stasis, that most innovation tends
to promote random or multilinear rather than orthogenetic cultural change,
that cultural change occurs for many different reasons and in highly contingent
ways, and that, because of this, it is not predictable in speciﬁc instances. It is
also recognized that greater social complexity is not necessarily accompanied

42
Introduction
by an increase in human happiness and that the concept of progress is a purely
subjective one that has no place in scientiﬁc discourse.
In spite of this, a strong tendency has been noted for sociocultural change
to move in the general direction of greater complexity. This results from the
greater capacity of more complex societies to compete successfully with less
complex ones for control of territory and other resources. As a result of such
competition, in all but the poorest and most marginal environments (and in-
creasingly even in these) smaller-scale societies must either acquire the key
attributes of more complex societies or be displaced or absorbed by them.
Convergence of this sort occurs far more readily in human societies than
among other animal species because of the unique degree to which human
behaviour is learned. As small-scale societies are deprived of resources and
become less able to maintain a satisfactory lifestyle, many individuals in such
societies adopt new forms of behaviour either to survive or because they are
positively attracted by more successful ways of doing things. It is the short-
term competitive advantages of societies that determine their relative viability.
Small-scale hunter-gatherer societies may as a type possess greater long-term
viability than industrial societies, but in direct competition it is the industrial
societies that prevail (Trigger 1998a: 170–77). Increasing complexity also ap-
pears to foster a more scientiﬁc understanding of the material world and of
human behaviour, as well as the development of higher levels of both social and
self-control (Elias 1978; 1982). These attributes also appear to have a selective
advantage.
Thus cultural selection provides a general direction to cultural change that
justiﬁes attempts to identify various stages in the development of greater cul-
tural complexity, including early civilizations. This does not mean that all soci-
eties evolve along a single trajectory to a common future or that cross-cultural
differencesarelessimportantthansimilarities.Unlikenineteenth-centuryevo-
lutionists, who posited the successive development of speciﬁc types of society,
cultural selectionists allow for the development and survival of many differ-
ent sorts of societies in particular social and natural settings (Yoffee 1993).
Any form of cultural evolutionism that seeks to account only for sociocultural
regularities is bound to be scientiﬁcally inadequate. In order not to mask vari-
ability and bias their conclusions, anthropologists who employ an evolutionary
perspective must pay as much attention to cultural differences as they do to
cultural similarities. They must accept the possibility that features common
to a particular stage or level of social complexity may be few by comparison
with dissimilar ones. They also must determine empirically to what extent early
civilizations or any other types of society were or were not clearly distinguished
from other types.

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
43
defining ‘early civilization’
Unilinear evolutionists in the nineteenth century and more recently neoevolu-
tionists believed that all societies at the same stage of development were very
similar. Societies could therefore be assigned to a particular stage on the basis
of a small number of distinctive criteria or even a single trait. In the past, civi-
lization was often equated with the presence of writing, on the ground that the
abilitytorecordspeechmadepossiblenewformsofinnovation,commerce,and
understanding (Morgan 1907 [1877]: 12). Yet this association cannot be sus-
tained any more than any other attempt to deﬁne early civilizations in terms of
speciﬁc items of material culture. In Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, and among
the Maya, scripts that could be used to record speech were invented at a
relatively early period. In highland Mexico, Peru, and West Africa recording
devices of this sort did not develop. Yet there is no perceptible difference in
the overall degree of social, economic, and political complexity reached by
early civilizations that utilized writing and those that did not.
The situation is not improved by employing longer trait lists. Childe (1950)
attempted to distinguish the earliest cities, and by implication early civiliza-
tions, from Neolithic villages in terms of ten criteria: (1) large urban centres,
(2) craft workers, merchants, ofﬁcials, and priests supported by the surpluses
produced by farmers, (3) primary producers paying surpluses to a deity or
divine ruler, (4) monumental architecture, (5) a ruling class exempt from man-
ual labour, (6) systems for recording information, (7) the development of exact
practical sciences, (8) monumental art, (9) the regular importation of raw ma-
terials both as luxuries and as industrial materials, and (10) resident specialist
craft workers politically as well as economically under the control of secular or
religious ofﬁcials. Charles Maisels (1999: 25–27) has pointed out that Childe’s
ﬁnal point is composed of three separate criteria: (10) peasants, craftsmen,
and rulers form a community, (11) the social solidarity of the community is
represented (or misrepresented) by the preeminence of temples and funer-
ary cults, and (12) a state organization is dominant and permanent. Childe
clearly believed that these features had evolved in a coevolutionary fashion
and were all present in any social system that had reached a certain level of
complexity. His deﬁnition of early civilization resembled the trait lists that
were still used in the 1950s to deﬁne archaeological cultures. Such listings of
features were later used by evolutionary anthropologists to delineate stages of
cultural development.
One problem with such enumerative deﬁnitions is that even small dis-
agreements about how speciﬁc criteria are deﬁned or interpreted affect what
societies are assigned to a particular category. In his effort to produce a

44
Introduction
general characterization of early civilizations, Childe deﬁned terms such as
‘city’, ‘monumental architecture’, ‘systems of recording’, and ‘exact sciences’
in a loose or abstract rather than an operational manner. Cities in fact differed
considerably in size, layout, and function in early civilizations, and scholars who
used highly speciﬁc deﬁnitions of urbanism maintained that some civilizations,
such as those of ancient Egypt and the Maya, lacked them (J. Thompson 1970;
J. Wilson 1960); yet no anthropologist was prepared on that account to deny
these two particular literate societies the status of civilizations. At the same
time, the highly urbanized Yoruba have often been denied the status of a civi-
lization or of having ‘cities’ rather than ‘towns’ because they were non-literate
(Sjoberg 1960). The Shang Chinese occasionally have been described as a
‘chiefdom’ or ‘prestate society’, but those who did so never denied that they
constituted a ‘civilization’ (Treistman 1972: 130). Each early civilization was
the result of individual historical processes that produced distinctive material
and institutional expressions. Such complex entities cannot usefully be deﬁned
by establishing a monothetic set of speciﬁc attributes that each of them must
possess.
A useful characterization of early civilizations must instead be framed in
terms of the general sorts of social, economic, and political institutions and
the associated types of knowledge and beliefs that were required for societies
of that degree of complexity to function. Behaviour is accorded priority not
because material culture, especially technology, was unimportant but because
it was embedded in society. Technology, settlement patterns, art, and archi-
tecture can be understood only in terms of the roles they played in materially
supporting such institutions, facilitating social interaction, and promoting the
ideological objectives of various segments of society. Cross-cultural regularities
in beliefs and values must be interpreted in relation to the social conditions
that produced them. A useful deﬁnition must therefore be constructed within
a social anthropological framework. In the following sections, I will survey the
common features that anthropologists have attributed to early civilizations in
recent decades and determine how these general features differ from those
associated with more and less complex societies.
Anthropologists apply the term ‘early civilization’ to the earliest and sim-
plest forms of societies in which the basic principle governing social relations
was not kinship but a hierarchy of social divisions that cut horizontally across
societies and were unequal in power, wealth, and social prestige. In these so-
cieties a tiny ruling group that used coercive powers to augment its authority
was sustained by agricultural surpluses and labour systematically appropriated
from a much larger number of agricultural producers. Full-time specialists
(artisans, bureaucrats, soldiers, retainers) also supported and served the ruling

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
45
group and the goverment apparatus it controlled. Rulers cultivated a luxurious
style of life that distinguished them from the ruled.
The horizontal divisions found in these societies are usually termed ‘classes’.
Classesaredistinguishedbytheirgeneralityfrommorespeciﬁcinterestgroups,
based on common cultural, ethnic, religious, regional, or occupational afﬁni-
ties, that unite to pursue their members’ specialized objectives. They are fewer,
usually last longer, cut across entire societies, and inﬂuence virtually every as-
pect of their members’ lives. Patricia Crone (1989: 101–2) maintains, however,
that no preindustrial society had classes because, in contrast to the working
classes in industrial societies, farmers, who constituted the majority of people
in preindustrial societies, could not easily develop common goals beyond the
local level and were therefore unable to unite as a group to pursue their eco-
nomic interests in opposition to the ruling stratum. Crone argues that, because
of this, preindustrial societies may have been horizontally divided into strata,
ranks, or orders but not into classes. She thus equates the term ‘class’ with
what some Marxists call ‘classes for themselves’, by which they mean social
orders that are not only aware of themselves but also united in the pursuit of
common political goals (Terray 1975). She also maintains that in preindustrial
societies wealth was mainly determined by status, whereas in more rapidly
changing and vertically mobile industrial societies class membership tends to
be determined principally by wealth. The close association between wealth
and class in industrial societies reﬂects the high degree of vertical mobility
that results from the economic expansion and rapid social change that are
inherent in capitalist societies.
Crone is not alone in recognizing that social scientists must choose between
a broad deﬁnition of ‘class’ that can be applied to all varieties of complex
societies, taking account of the different forms that it assumes in different
types, and a deﬁnition that would restrict ‘class’ to modern industrial societies.
The latter sort of deﬁnition treats preindustrial societies as having different
kinds of stratiﬁcation that arise from factors other than owning capital or the
means of production (Bottomore 1974: 953). Historical usage both supports
and undermines Crone’s usage. While the term ‘class’ (classis) was an ancient
Roman one, it came to be widely used only in modern Europe in the early
nineteenth century, replacing earlier terms such as ‘rank’ and ‘order’, to denote
hierarchical divisions that were increasingly being deﬁned in economic terms.
Nevertheless, the Romans used the term ‘class’ to designate the division of
their society into formal orders based on personal wealth, which in turn deﬁned
individual and family rights and responsibilities in relation to the Roman state.
This indicates that classes, even as narrowly deﬁned by Crone, existed in some
preindustrial societies.

46
Introduction
Yet I agree that the terminological issue she has raised is not trivial – that
farmers had difﬁculty in organizing for broadly based social action in prein-
dustrial societies and that in these societies wealth tended to be derived from
political power far more frequently than political power was derived from
wealth. There is also evidence that in early civilizations major social divisions
were perceived very differently from the way we regard them; the members of
different social strata were sometimes assigned separate supernatural origins
and different roles that were considered in accord with a divine plan. Every
complex society had its own particular view of the nature, origin, and roles
of its social strata. Crone’s argument raises the possibility that different terms
might proﬁtably be employed to designate social hierarchies in industrial and
preindustrial societies.
At the same time, while the roles played by wealth, power, prestige, edu-
cation, and manners in acquiring membership in particular societal levels can
vary greatly from one society to another, it appears that in all complex soci-
eties there is a strong correlation between wealth, power, and prestige. This
suggests that similar concerns drive the development of and sustain horizontal
divisions in all complex societies, even if the basic ways in which these divi-
sions develop and maintain themselves change as societies increase in scale
and complexity. Material concerns are not absent at any level, and economic
and political motives appear inextricable regardless of how they are pursued.
Even if farmers were unable to unite as a single group to achieve their political
goals in early civilizations, they were as aware of the social hierarchy and of
their place in it as members of the ruling group. Such knowledge played a
major role in ordering individual behaviour in early civilizations and some-
times resulted in political action in the form of farmers’ revolts or workers’
demonstrations. Thus farmers constituted de facto ‘classes in themselves’ even
if they did not constitute ‘classes for themselves’, and I am prepared to use the
term ‘class’ as a cross-cultural label for the major hierarchical divisions found
in early civilizations. ‘Early civilization’ can thus be summarily deﬁned as the
earliest and simplest form of class-based society.
early states and early civilizations
Early civilizations were not the ﬁrst societies to be divided into classes. Small-
scale societies such as the sedentary, food-collecting Tlingit and Kwakiutl
peoples of coastal British Columbia or the agricultural Kayan of Borneo were
held together by kinship relations, and their leaders depended on public opin-
ion for such support as was at their disposal, but they were divided into at least
three hereditary strata or classes: chiefs or nobles, commoners, and slaves

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
47
(Donald 1997; Rousseau 1990; 2001). Early states such as Buganda, the Zulu
kingdom in southern Africa, early historical Hawaii, and the seventeenth-
century Powhatan polity in Virginia consisted of several thousand to sev-
eral hundred thousand people, living in kinship-based communities or small
chiefdoms held together by rulers who regularly used force to maintain their
authority. The core of such an early state (or complex chiefdom) was an eth-
nic group, tribe, or ruler’s kindred to which other groups willingly or unwill-
ingly paid tribute. This tribute supported a higher standard of living for the
core group, which was entirely or partly freed from agricultural labour, giv-
ing its members more time to carry out administrative tasks and suppress
rebellions. Political control was based on patron-client relations, and the suc-
cess of a polity depended largely on the personal qualities of its paramount
leader (Earle 1991; Price and Feinman 1995; Upham 1990). Borders ﬂuctu-
ated and cores fragmented when political leadership failed. While the rul-
ing group’s lifestyle was more luxurious than commoners’, the gap between
these two groups was less marked than it was in early civilizations. These
rudimentary classes were superimposed on hierarchically structured kinship
networks or ethnic groups, with kinship remaining the basis of sociopolitical
organization.
In early civilizations, in contrast, class displaced kinship and ethnicity as the
main organizing principle of society. While kinship remained important at the
local level and in reinforcing relations among the upper classes, endogamous
classes allocated rights and responsibilities and protected the interests of a
privileged minority. Power was based primarily on the control of agricultural
surpluses, which the upper classes extracted in various ways from the rest of
the population. While the technology remained simple, the organization and
management of human labour sometimes became quite complex. Authorita-
tive power in the form of institutionalized administrative positions replaced
the more informal patron-client relations found in early states. Each state was
administered by multiple levels of ofﬁcials who were able to mobilize the entire
population for defence and public works and provided the political security
that allowed farmers to prosper and increase in numbers. Governments were
sufﬁciently stable to endure over many generations. There was more strategic
and symbolic emphasis than in early states on controlling territory; borders
tended to be more clearly deﬁned and guarded. This and the increased impor-
tance of class resulted in more restricted roles for kinship and ethnicity than
at earlier stages of political development.
Central governments possessed ultimate control over justice and the use
of force. The ruling class was able to exert various forms of coercion, but de-
mands for the production of surpluses, corv´ee labour, and mandatory military

48
Introduction
service were kept at a relatively low level, and ofﬁcials often reciprocated for
such work with food and entertainment. Although most early civilizations had
slavery, it was less extensive and oppressive than in many later preindustrial
societies. The scale and productivity of early civilizations nevertheless per-
mitted the upper classes to extract sufﬁcient surpluses to support a markedly
more elaborate lifestyle than that enjoyed by the lower classes or by anyone
in less complex societies and to create monumental art and architecture that
required a wide range of raw materials, highly skilled craftspeople, and profes-
sional planners and administrators. These creations became symbols of their
power and leadership ability.
The upper classes claimed privileged relations with the supernatural, and
rulers frequently were ascribed divine or semidivine status. Just as class had
replaced both real and metaphorical kinship as a basis for organizing societies,
so religious concepts replaced kinship as a medium for social and political
discourse (Sahlins 1976: 211–12). There is little evidence that such issues were
formulated in terms of explicitly political or economic concepts; this would
have been especially difﬁcult where paramount rulers claimed absolute and
divinely sanctioned authority. As had been the case in less complex societies,
religious concepts did not differentiate clearly between what we regard as the
social, natural, and supernatural realms. Yet, despite a general tendency to
view nature as animated by supernatural power and able to understand and
respond to human entreaty, there is abundant evidence that the people who
lived in early civilizations, like all other human beings, clearly understood the
relation between cause and effect in their everyday dealings with the natural
world. They were also keenly aware of self-interest and how it could be most
effectively pursued in the social realm.
later preindustrial civilizations
Later preindustrial civilizations, what Talcott Parsons called ‘Advanced
Intermediate’ societies as opposed to ‘Archaic’ ones (Sanderson 1990: 110),
developed either directly from early civilizations or as secondary civilizations
on the borders of early ones that they eventually dominated and transformed.
Among them were the Assyrian and Persian Empires, Classical Greece,
Republican and Imperial Rome, Mauryan India, Han Dynasty China, and
the feudal and mercantile states found in Europe, Japan, and elsewhere in
medieval and early modern times. These societies were organized either as
city-states or regional states, with the latter tending to predominate. One of
the key features that distinguished these societies from early civilizations was
the widespread use of money, usually in the form of metal coins, to facilitate

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
49
exchange and store wealth. The mass production of coins of small value, of-
ten made of copper, incorporated low-wage earners more deeply into market
and wage economies. This was associated with the growing diversiﬁcation of
economies and the increasing importance of production, exchange, and ﬁnan-
cial services as sources of income (Heichelheim 1958: 251–54). Even in feudal
societies, where a non-commercial form of landholding was associated with
political power, money played an increasingly important role in facilitating
the accumulation of wealth. In Western Europe this process led to the rise
of capitalism (Braudel 1982; Wallerstein 1974). Money also served as a com-
mon denominator for calculating an individual’s total assets, and this made it
possible for the abstract concept of wealth to replace control of land or crop
surpluses as a measure of position and status. A common measure of wealth
also made it easier for an increasing number of individuals to invest in a variety
of economic activities.
In many later preindustrial civilizations, military forces were more numer-
ous, specialized, and institutionally distinguished from the state and from so-
ciety in general. In early civilizations full-time soldiers tended to be few and
to be led by kings, government ofﬁcials, and local authorities. As military tech-
nology and tactics grew more complex, professional armies were created that
were commanded by career ofﬁcers. When the civil administration of the
Roman Empire declined, generals used the disciplined and still well-ﬁnanced
military power at their disposal to override civil authorities and compete with
one another for imperial ofﬁce. In all societies where armed forces became
institutionally distinct from the government, controlling the military became
a growing source of concern for government ofﬁcials (Mann 1986: 163–67).
Whereas in early civilizations supernatural powers were regarded as inher-
ent in nature, in the course of the ﬁrst millennium b.c. in Greece and parts
of the Middle East, India, and China, the natural world became increasingly
desacralized. Instead of being regarded as animated by supernatural energy,
which endowed trees, rocks, and stars with reason, emotions, and will, as well
as power, the physical universe came to be viewed as inanimate and plants
and animals as lacking the reason and insight possessed by human beings. The
world and the things in it became entities that human beings might try to
understand through observation and thereby control more effectively.
This new understanding meant that the natural, social, and supernatural
realms were for the ﬁrst time explicitly distinguished from one another. The
realization that the natural and social realms needed to be understood in
different ways encouraged the development of new and more aggressive forms
of enquiry into the nature of things. Some philosophers denied the existence
of the supernatural altogether; others regarded the supernatural realm as

50
Introduction
remote and largely irrelevant for everyday human affairs. Most people, how-
ever, viewed deities as increasingly transcendent: human beings and the world
depended on the gods for their creation and survival, but the gods were not be-
lieved to depend upon any aspect of their creation. New international religions,
such as Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam, stressed individ-
ualism and the difference between the real and the ideal. Instead of being
identiﬁed with a particular state or civilization, these new religions claimed
to be relevant for all human beings, and they promised personal salvation
to all who believed their teachings and were prepared to live as they pre-
scribed. Even those forms of Judaism which rejected proselytization regarded
their god as the ruler of all peoples and places (Eisenstadt 1986; Gellner
1988). Religious loyalties thus extended over much broader areas than polit-
ical and ethnic ties or than religious systems had done in early civilizations.
Communities of believers in international religions played a major role in facil-
itating international trade and communication in a world in which production
and exchange networks were becoming increasingly important and extensive
(Mann 1986: 363–71).
These views affected political life. Old rituals in which monarchs medi-
ated between the human and the supernatural realms persisted in some later
preindustrial civilizations, but the conceptual separation of the natural, social,
and supernatural realms promoted a view of kings as humans who at most
received divine protection. The sacral kingship associated with early civiliza-
tions was replaced by diverse forms of government. Democracies, oligarchies,
tyrannies, and military dictatorships ﬂourished alongside both limited and ab-
solute monarchies. Power increasingly depended on the ability of rulers to use
military force to maintain high levels of agricultural productivity and sustain
the bureaucracies that collected the revenues required to meet the state’s ex-
penses. The increasing power of the state meant that in some societies the
prevalence of slavery and the exploitation of the poor reached higher levels
than before.
While later preindustrial civilizations varied in scale and in economic,
political, and ideological organization, they tended to be more powerful
than early civilizations and better adapted to the transsocietal division of
labour that characterized an oecumene stretching from Europe to East
Asia. Ancient Egypt lost its political independence and then its distinctive
political and religious institutions as it was absorbed successively into the
late Roman and then the Islamic cultural sphere. Mesopotamian culture lost
its distinctive characteristics following its incorporation into the Hellenistic
world. In northern China the transition was internal and more gradual and
did not involve such a spectacular break with the past, but it too came

Deﬁning ‘Early Civilization’
51
about as the result of centuries of competition among rival states. The
disappearance of the distinctive features of early civilizations is evidence
of their inability to compete with the institutions that characterized later
preindustrial civilizations (Crone 1989; Gellner 1988; Hall 1986; Mann 1986).
In sub-Saharan Africa and the Americas, no indigenous societies had evolved
beyond the level of early civilizations by the time of European contact. One
possible exception was the Postclassic Maya (a.d. 900–1530), who built palaces
and temples on a more modest scale than the Classic Maya and more struc-
tures serving public functions. Kings appear to have been less revered than
previously, and at least one major centre, Chichen Itza, had a multepal, or
joint government of nobles (Schele and Freidel 1990: 361). Maya art of the
Postclassic period emphasized communal and social themes rather than the
royal ones that had predominated during the Classic period. There is, how-
ever, no evidence of major changes in religious beliefs or other aspects of their
social organization. It may be that what looks like an incipient development
beyond the level of early civilization merely reﬂected highland Mesoamerican
inﬂuences on the Maya of that period.
The Spanish conquests of Mexico and Peru were assisted by a smallpox
pandemic that killed a vast number of indigenous people, and the subsequent
consolidation of these conquests was aided by many epidemics of European
diseases against which local peoples lacked immunity. Yet the rapid subjugation
of Mexico and Peru, as well as the scarcely opposed British conquest of Benin,
were a consequence not merely of superior European military technology but
also of superior organization, discipline, and self-discipline and more aggres-
sive ideologies, both religious and secular. These momentous events constitute
further evidence of the superior organizational (but not ethical) achievements
of later preindustrial and industrial civilizations.
asiatic societies
The concept of ‘Asiatic society’ or the ‘Asiatic mode of production’ was promi-
nent in discussions of early civilizations during the 1970s and 1980s, when
Marxism brieﬂy played a signiﬁcant role in theoretical debates among anthro-
pologists. Karl Marx (1964) had postulated that the traditional state structures
of India and China consisted of egalitarian farming villages based on collec-
tive landholding that were dominated and taxed by a military elite. While the
regional government structures created by this elite rose and fell as a con-
sequence of military competition, farming villages remained unchanged over
long periods. Marx viewed these arrangements as a primitive form of class
society but one which, as a result of the village self-sufﬁciency on which it

52
Introduction
was based, had little potential for development. He believed that, because of
this, the class societies of India and China were doomed to remain unchanged
until European colonialism brought new and more dynamic economic factors
into play. This concept introduced an element of multilinearity into Marx’s
thinking but also exhibited a strong Eurocentric bias. Marx himself was clearly
ambivalent about the concept of Asiatic society and did not include it in his
more dogmatic and unilinear versions of world history (Bailey and Llobera
1981; Dunn 1982; Krader 1975).
Some anthropologists identiﬁed Asiatic society as a form of the early state,
while others equated it with early civilization and more speciﬁcally with what I
will call early civilization’s territorial variant. Marx equated it with later prein-
dustrial societies as well as some early civilizations. In fact no early civilization
appears ever to have had an egalitarian village base, all such communities hav-
ing been hierarchized to varying degrees as a consequence of having existed
in the context of class societies (Trigger 1985b). The concept of Asiatic society
has generated some useful discussions, but its main features do not appear
to correspond with any societies that have actually existed. It is a product of
inadequately documented nineteenth-century speculation.

4 Evidence and Interpretation
F
or each of the seven early civilizations being compared, I compiled in-
formation regarding its environmental setting, population density and
distribution, family and community organization, government, legal system,
technology, land tenure, subsistence patterns, trade, manufacturing and distri-
bution of goods, art, architecture, religious beliefs and practices, moral codes,
specialized knowledge, and beliefs concerning the universe, the nature of the
individual, and esteemed forms of behaviour. My goal was to ascertain how
these elements were articulated in individual civilizations before attempting
comparisons.
I sought to determine empirically the amount of research that was required
by noting when I began to encounter a sharp and consistent decline in infor-
mation that either supplemented or contradicted what I had already collected.
Reaching that goal necessitated taking notes on as many as one hundred books
andmonographsdealingwitheachcivilizationaswellasreadingalargenumber
of recent papers. After this stage was reached, I read mainly newly published
works that provided general overviews of speciﬁc early civilizations or dealt
with aspects that had been poorly covered in earlier studies. By doing the re-
search myself, I sought to ensure comparability in the way data were collected
and processed.
In the course of this research I became aware that there were many biases
and limitations both in the sorts of data available concerning each early civiliza-
tion and in modern interpretations of these data. Understanding the reasons
for such variations and making allowances for them are vital for the success
of any comparative investigation. This chapter discusses these problems and
what I have done to try to minimize their negative inﬂuence.
53

54
Introduction
sources of data
Because early civilizations are large and complex societies, the study of them
is comparable to the proverbial blind men’s investigation of an elephant. Both
of the main sources of primary information regarding early civilizations –
archaeological data and written records produced either by the civilization
being studied or by outsiders – tend to be patchy and incomplete, and what is
available varies considerably from one early civilization to another. By far the
most valuable archaeological data come from the detailed settlement pattern
surveys that have been carried out in southern Iraq (R. McC. Adams 1981), in
the Valley of Mexico (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979), and, in recent years,
despite the great physical difﬁculties caused by extensive tropical-forest cover,
in large stretches of Classic Maya territory (Culbert and Rice 1990). The least
satisfactory settlement data are available for the Yoruba and for Shang and
Western Zhou China. In China, historical archaeology, despite its professed
Marxist orientation, has continued to concentrate on studying ﬁne art. Much of
the eastern part of the Shang homeland lies buried under the many metres of
alluvium that the Yellow River has deposited over the past two thousand years
(Jing, Rapp, and Gao 1997). Settlement surveys have been carried out in Egypt
and highland Peru but on a local rather than a regional scale.
In the absence of extensive settlement data, much more tends to be known
archaeologically about large urban centres than about farm villages and more
about state-sponsored activities and the lives of the upper classes than about
ordinary people. In Egypt differential preservation and recovery have also pro-
duced far more information about burial practices than about everyday life.
Despite this variation, the archaeological data appear to have more compara-
bility than the data from written sources. Also, while archaeological techniques
change and evolve, because they are applied in a relatively uniform fashion they
offer more standardized insights into early civilizations than written records.
Archaeological data are generally believed to be more objective than written
information, but Ian Hodder’s (1982a) examination of material culture indi-
cates that problems of objectivity and bias are inherent in them as well.
The written records produced by early civilizations never provide compre-
hensive or unbiased information. Literacy was severely restricted, and writings
tended to reﬂect the interests and preoccupations of institutions, administra-
tors, and the upper classes. Even when texts mention artisans or farmers, they
describe them from above. The materials on which different sorts of messages
were recorded and the ways in which they were curated inﬂuenced a text’s
chances of survival. The Classic Maya wrote on stone, ceramic vessels, and
folded sheets of parchment and bark cloth. Only their writing on stone, pottery,

Evidence and Interpretation
55
and the walls of caves has survived in legible form; none of the books found
in tombs is in readable condition. The messages recorded on ceramic vessels,
mainly in association with religious themes, were different from the dynastic
records carved on stone monuments. Even the general contents of Classic
Maya books are unknown; the few surviving Maya books, dating from much
later times, were divinatory manuals. While there is no direct evidence that
the Maya used writing for administrative purposes, Maya art depicts scribes
recording information for rulers.
Similarly, the only written records to survive from the Shang Dynasty are
annotations on cattle scapulae and tortoise shells that were used for divination
and brief inscriptions, recording mainly names and titles, on bronze ritual ves-
sels. Epigraphic and historical evidence indicates that the Shang Chinese also
wrote on strips of bamboo held together by string, but such records have per-
ished. Studies of historical records and songs attributed to the Shang Dynasty
that have survived in the Chinese literary canon appear, on stylistic and lin-
guistic grounds, to have been forgeries composed during the succeeding Zhou
Dynasty. The much longer texts commemorating signiﬁcant historical events
that were cast on early Western Zhou bronze vessels do, however, conﬁrm the
authenticity of the Zhou records that Chinese historians have preserved from
ancient times.
A much wider range of texts has survived from ancient Egypt and
Mesopotamia. These include business and administrative documents, per-
sonal letters, historical records and propaganda, royal proclamations, religious
rituals, myths, divinatory literature, teaching materials, and collections of prac-
tical advice. At ﬁrst these records tended to be terse, but by the late third
millennium b.c. longer texts started to appear, some of which were clearly
intended for enjoyment as well as to serve practical and religious ends. The
Mesopotamians recorded ofﬁcial inscriptions on stone or metal but mainly
wrote on clay tablets which, when baked (either accidentally or deliberately),
became almost indestructible. Examples of even the humblest forms of docu-
mentation have therefore survived. In Egypt formal religious and government
texts carved on stone and school texts and business records written on pot-
sherds and limestone ﬂakes frequently survive, as do religious texts painted on
wooden cofﬁns or papyrus scrolls preserved in tombs. Government adminis-
trative records and temple rituals written on papyri have mostly perished. Thus
what we can learn about these early civilizations is determined by the range of
what was recorded, which we sometimes know and sometimes do not, and by
the extent to which texts of various sorts have been preserved and recovered.
The Aztec and other groups in the Valley of Mexico recorded ideas but
not speech in bark-cloth books. Their subject matter was largely limited to

56
Introduction
divination, schematic ethnic histories, upper-class genealogical records, and
tribute lists (Galarza 1997). Inka records consisted of knotted cords which,
despite some claims to the contrary (Urton 1998), appear to have been used
only for keeping accounts.
For descriptions of early civilizations that did not record the spoken word, we
are dependent on the records produced as a result of European contact. Much
information about the indigenous peoples of the Valley of Mexico (especially
the Aztec and the people of Texcoco) and the Inka kingdom was recorded soon
after the Spanish conquered these two civilizations. The earliest descriptions
by Spanish conquerors tend to be of limited value because their authors had
acquired only a superﬁcial understanding of these cultures. Spanish settlers,
government ofﬁcials, and Christian priests gradually gained deeper insights
into indigenous ways of life even as these were being radically transformed by
European diseases and political and economic disruptions. Spanish ofﬁcials
recorded detailed information about indigenous patterns of land ownership,
tax payments, and social organization in order to facilitate acquiring control
over valuable local resources. Spanish priests in the Mexico City area col-
lected detailed information in the Nahuatl language in order to identify and
expunge indigenous religious beliefs (Dur´an 1971: 20–23). While analogous
records of Andean culture are less abundant and sometimes inﬂuenced by
existing descriptions of Aztec customs, their study is facilitating an improved
understanding of indigenous Peruvian social organization, religious beliefs,
cosmology, and ritual.
Despite the large amounts of information that were gathered in both re-
gions, there is evidence that people deliberately concealed certain types of
knowledge from Spanish priests and ofﬁcials in an effort to protect traditional
religious practices and avoid being interrogated by the Inquisition (Klor de
Alva 1982). Further, Elizabeth Brumﬁel (1991: 245–46) observes that these
texts recorded normative accounts of human behaviour, usually from the point
of view of upper-class male informants, that lack the ﬂexible, adaptive, and
dynamic qualities of real life.
Other important sources of information about Aztec and Inka culture were
the descriptions produced by mestizo descendants of Spanish men and upper-
class indigenous women and the data collected by educated Spanish settlers
from their upper-class native wives and these women’s families. These docu-
ments preserve valuable information about indigenous culture and oral history,
but it is evident that native informants sought to make their ancestors seem as
much as possible like Christians and Spaniards in order to win the approval
of European readers. Indigenous historical accounts were also revised and
new works created as ways to cope with national defeat and humiliation. The

Evidence and Interpretation
57
Cantares Mexicanos, Aztec poems once thought to date from before the con-
quest, are now believed to have been composed in response to that cataclysmic
event (Bierhorst 1985).
Information about the Yoruba and Benin peoples began to be recorded by
European visitors as early as the sixteenth century. These sources became more
abundant in the course of the nineteenth century and were supplemented by
the writings of Yoruba converts to Christianity (S. Johnson 1921). In evaluating
this material, the Europeans’ limited understanding of Yoruba culture prior
to the mid-nineteenth century and their pejorative attitudes towards African
societies need to be considered, as well as the desire of Yoruba Christians to
please European readers and enhance the status of their indigenous culture in
the opinion of European co-religionists. In contrast to the other civilizations
we have been considering, Yoruba culture continues to ﬂourish despite radical
economic and political changes during the colonial and postcolonial eras and
widespread conversion to Christianity and Islam. Much has been recorded
about Yoruba culture as a result of ethnographic research carried out by Yoruba
as well as by European and American scholars during the twentieth century.
These studies contextualize many categories of information about the Yoruba
that were recorded only summarily in earlier times.
Four early civilizations that we are examining were composed of political
units usually referred to as city-states. Adjacent city-states varied considerably
in population, political organization, wealth, and relative power. In general,
more is known about powerful and wealthy city-states than about smaller and
poorer ones. It is therefore important to examine the full range of variation
among states in each civilization in order to avoid exaggerating differences be-
tween city-state systems as a result of inadvertently comparing individual states
that were at different levels of complexity. An internal comparison also provides
information about how different aspects of speciﬁc early civilizations varied
according to the size and power of individual states. It is clear that, as a result
of interstate competition, the size and power of individual city-states changed
radically over time. Therefore detailed information about a single state at one
point in time does not shed adequate or reliable light on the full range of
variations or transformations that characterized these civilizations. Interstate
variation is documented most systematically for the Yoruba and to a consider-
able degree for the Valley of Mexico (Hodge 1984; 1998). Much information
must be available for Mesopotamia, but most of it is not yet in a form that
non-specialists such as myself can synthesize. The study of social and political
variation among the Classic Maya states is only beginning. For larger territorial
states, more records describe the highest levels of the ruling class and the cen-
tral administration than deal with life in provincial centres and the countryside.

58
Introduction
Probably more is known from both archaeological and written sources about
the early sixteenth century in the Valley of Mexico than about a similarly brief
period in the history of any other early civilization in our sample. This re-
ﬂects the scholarly ability of Spanish priests and ofﬁcials living in Mexico City
and their Nahuatl informants’ skill in communicating knowledge. Specialists
have produced fairly comprehensive, although less even, knowledge concern-
ing the Yoruba and less comprehensive information about the Mesopotamian,
Inka, and Egyptian civilizations, in approximately that order. Written informa-
tion about the Inka appears to be inferior both in quantity and in quality to
that on the Aztec, perhaps because the centre of European intellectual life
in Peru was Lima rather than the Central Andean heartland of Inka civiliza-
tion. Much less is known archaeologically about highland Peru than about the
Valley of Mexico as well. Despite the vast resources poured into the study
of ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt, knowledge about any one period remains
uneven. The more comprehensive archaeological surveys and the preservation
of a wider range of written materials mean that more is known about ancient
Mesopotamian civilization than about ancient Egypt, for which information
tends to be focused more on the upper classes and on state-patronized cul-
ture. The two least well-known civilizations in our sample are Shang China and
the Classic Maya. The main problem with the Maya is the restricted nature
of surviving written information, which generally deals with the activities of
kings. For Shang China a similarly restricted range of written texts is combined
with limited archaeological data, which are also skewed towards upper-class
culture.
scholarly biases
Understanding early civilizations necessitates knowledge not only of the lim-
itations of data concerning the past but also of the biases that are inherent in
modern scholarly interpretations of those data. Evaluating the modern schol-
arly literature requires comprehensive knowledge of what is known about each
early civilization and the application of the standard techniques of historical
source criticism to individual texts (Roberts 1996). The biases and skills of both
original recorders and modern analysts must be considered.
In general, problems of interpretive misunderstanding are greatest when
written information about an early civilization was recorded by outsiders.
One of the best studies of such misunderstandings is Sabine MacCormack’s
(1991) work on the writings of Spaniards and Inka from the 1530s until the
eighteenth century, which investigates how information about Inka religious
beliefs and practices was recorded and how existing scholarly knowledge

Evidence and Interpretation
59
shaped interpretations of new information and reinterpretations of what
was already known. Although it was not the main purpose of her study,
MacCormack was able to make progress in distinguishing between early Inka
religious beliefs and practices and the biased understandings of Spanish and
mestizo interpreters.
The prejudices and academic allegiances of modern interpreters play a cru-
cial role in determining what is available for comparative studies. Rationalists
expect to ﬁnd a high degree of uniformity, while relativists anticipate minimal
similarities, except as a result of historical connections. Neither orientation
is inherently bad provided that it is treated as a working hypothesis. What is
unacceptable but occurs both consciously and unconsciously is the tailoring
of data to accord with these preconceptions – assuming that less well-known
civilizations will resemble better-known ones and ignoring data that do not
accord with favoured theories. Identifying and making allowances for inter-
pretive biases are vital to the success of any investigation that depends mostly
on secondary sources.
Anthropological interests in early civilizations have altered signiﬁcantly in
recent decades as the focus has shifted from social behaviour to culture. Studies
of early civilizations in the 1960s were dominated by a materialist perspective
that highlighted subsistence patterns, craft production, exchange, settlement
patterns, and political organization. Today there is increasing interest in reli-
gious beliefs and culturally determined perceptions, both as objects of interest
in their own right and as signiﬁcant determinants of social, political, and eco-
nomic behaviour. While the idealist perspective that underlies much modern
research is at odds with the materialism of an earlier era, the two approaches
tend to be complementary and, when combined, produce richer and more nu-
anced insights into the nature of early civilizations than either by itself. Both
have been enriched in recent decades by the critiques and new perspectives
offered by feminist and gender studies.
Lack of awareness of the wide range of alternative arrangements possible in
early civilizations tends to produce dogmatic misconceptions that lead to mis-
interpretation. The most striking example of such a misconception was Karl
Wittfogel’s (1957) notion of ‘Oriental despotism’, which he believed evolved
as a result of leaders’ self-interested extension of the authoritarian patterns
needed to build and maintain extensive irrigation systems in arid lands to con-
trol all aspects of public life. This construct, which dominated the interpre-
tation of early civilizations in the 1950s and 1960s, was effectively challenged
only after Robert McC. Adams’s (1965) detailed studies of settlement patterns
in Iraq demonstrated that large irrigation systems in that region were a con-
sequence rather than a cause of the development of complex societies. This

60
Introduction
freed scholars to ask questions they had ignored about the social organization
of early civilizations and to formulate new theories about their development
(Flannery 1972; E. Hunt 1972).
No less inhibiting were Karl Polanyi’s dicta that proﬁt-oriented exchanges
did not occur in early civilizations and that exchange mechanisms evolved from
reciprocity through institutionally directed redistribution to markets (Polanyi
1968; Polanyi, Arensberg, and Pearson 1957). This misconception, which re-
quired several decades of research to dispel, seriously distorted the under-
standing of the economic and social organization of early civilizations. It is
now recognized that market exchange, which was often proﬁt-oriented, ap-
peared prior to and continued to exist alongside redistribution by government
bureaucracies (Curtin 1984: 87–89).
Biases that inﬂuence the study of particular early civilizations also create
serious comparative problems. Interpreters of Aztec culture have long been
divided between those who view the Aztec upper class as brutal warriors appro-
priating human protein and other people’s wealth (Caso 1958; Harner 1977;
Soustelle 1961) and those who prefer to regard them as sensitive intellectu-
als disinterestedly probing the mysteries of the cosmos (Le´on-Portilla 1963;
1992).
The study of ancient Mesopotamia has been shaped by the belief that this
civilization crucially inﬂuenced both the ancient Hebrews and the Greeks
and hence the origins of Western civilization. Many Assyriologists have been
encouraged by this belief to make their interpretations of the behaviour of the
ancient Mesopotamians conform as closely as possible to the values of modern
Westerncivilization.Othersinsistthat,ifitistobeunderstoodproperly,ancient
Mesopotamia must be studied independently from all other early civilizations
(Landsberger 1976). Both approaches lead to an emphasis on the differences
between Mesopotamia and other early civilizations (Bott´ero 1992).
Egyptologists study a culture that Western civilization has traditionally re-
garded not only as a repository of arcane wisdom but also as the despotic
and idolatrous antithesis of the Judaeo-Christian tradition. Yet Egyptologists
ﬁnd the civilization they study very different from this stereotype. To counter
traditional biases, most have adopted the rationalist claim that all human be-
ings have a common nature and seem convinced that they can automatically
reproduce in their own minds the thought processes of an ancient Pharaoh.
Even Barry Kemp (1989), who agrees with Henri Frankfort (1956) that cer-
tain highly distinctive themes shaped the development of Egyptian culture,
assumes that most ancient Egyptian behaviour was inﬂuenced by concepts of
self-interest and entrepreneurship that he considers to be shared by all human
beings.

Evidence and Interpretation
61
Most Inka specialists since the 1960s have argued that without paying
special attention to the idiosyncratic principles of Andean culture it is im-
possible to understand Inka behaviour. They believe that the development of
Inka society was shaped by postulates of reciprocity and community auton-
omy that were unique to the Central Andean world and make any comparison
of Inka culture with non-Andean societies highly deceptive (Zuidema 1964;
D’Altroy 1987a: 5). These studies are oriented very differently from Thomas
Patterson’s (1991) investigation of Inka dynastic politics, which emphasized
the rational pursuit of political power and material resources by the various
branches of the royal family and their supporters.
The cultural uniqueness of different early civilizations has also been empha-
sized by Dutch structural anthropologists. Rudolph van Zantwijk (1985) and
Thomas Zuidema (1964; 1990) have drawn upon data recorded in the sixteenth
century to reconstruct the cosmological beliefs of the Aztec and the Inka and
demonstrate how these beliefs inﬂuenced social organization, architecture, rit-
ual practices, and the use of agricultural land. Their intricate analyses, which
integrate large amounts of esoteric religious and symbolic data that might oth-
erwise have been ignored, suggest that extraordinarily elaborate cosmological
ideas guided every aspect of Aztec and Inka life. Few scholars doubt that van
Zantwijk and Zuidema have gained important insights into particular Aztec and
Inka understandings of how the cosmos and their own societies functioned.
Nevertheless, questions about the work of these two scholars remain unre-
solved. Their analyses assume that the principles which generated these ideas
underlay and guided all Aztec and Inka perception and behaviour, but there
is no way of knowing to what extent everyone shared these ideas at either a
conscious or an unconscious level. Were these ideas alternatively elaborations
by priests and ofﬁcials of a simpler, more widely shared set of beliefs? Or were
they developed symbolic interpretations created by and read into traditional
ways of doing things by a small coterie of indigenous intellectuals? One must
also consider whether van Zantwijk and Zuidema elaborated ideas to a greater
extent than anyone in these early civilizations. Barry Kemp (1989: 4–5), com-
menting on some of the more elaborate and arcane interpretations of ancient
Egyptian symbolism, has noted that, while these ideas may ‘be quite true to
the spirit of ancient thought’, there is no way to determine whether such ideas
‘ever actually passed through the minds of the ancients’. Kemp argues that it
is possible for modern scholars to understand ancient concepts in such detail
that they can pursue lines of thought that accord with the beliefs of an ancient
civilization even though there is no evidence that such ideas ever occurred to
any ancient person. The validity of interpretations of this sort is also hard to
prove. Their questionable status is revealed when contrary postulates produce

62
Introduction
mutually contradictory interpretations of the same data. Although structural
analyses provide valuable insights into early civilizations, studies of this sort
risk giving rise to dangerous misunderstandings and must therefore be used
carefully.
While my study seeks to be empirical, I do not subscribe to a narrow, pos-
itivist epistemology or deny that subjective elements inﬂuence the construc-
tion of knowledge and hence behaviour. Instead, I regard subjective elements,
whether they are present in the original sources or in secondary interpreta-
tions, as challenges that must be indentiﬁed and understood if comparative
work is to be effective.
emic and etic approaches
It is generally agreed that comparative research requires a standard set of
categories to arrange and compare information about each society. There
is the danger, however, that representing individual sociocultural systems
with a single standardized terminology may be misleading. Faulty transla-
tions of indigenous concepts into such a nomenclature may bias and distort
the results of comparative studies, usually in the direction of exaggerating
the extent of uniformities among cultures. Such dangers can be countered
by careful hermeneutic study. This view accords with the claim that an idea
expressed in one natural language can be expressed in any other. General cat-
egories can be used for comparative purposes provided that it is established
to what understandings each category refers in the various societies being
compared.
Just as I have argued that anthropologists must understand early civilizations
as holistic systems before they begin to compare analogous parts of them, so I
would argue that, before making comparisons, anthropologists must attempt
to understand each early civilization in the same terms as it was understood
by its own people. While it is generally acknowledged that this sort of under-
standing is essential for comparing belief systems, even apparently utilitarian
processes such as growing crops and working metals are enmeshed in com-
plex systems of values and beliefs that may vary signiﬁcantly from one cul-
ture to another (Lechtman 1993). The comparative study of early civilizations
therefore requires both an emic and an etic approach to the understanding of
culture.
This pair of terms is derived from linguistics, where phonetics refers to
recordings of speech in which every sound variation that can be scientiﬁcally
distinguished is noted. This amounts to several hundred sounds and intona-
tion patterns, far more than can be distinguished in everyday speech. Phonemic

Evidence and Interpretation
63
recording notes only the two or three dozen sounds that are meaningfully dis-
tinguished by the speakers of any particular language. In English ‘pin’ and ‘bin’
are two different words, while in Arabic p and b are interpreted as the same
sound. In English ‘king’ and ‘queen’ are believed to begin with the same sound,
although k is velar and q uvular. In Arabic, however, kalb signiﬁes ‘dog’ and qalb
‘heart’. In anthropology etic refers to analysis in terms of cross-culturally appli-
cable scientiﬁc terms and emic to the study of the terminology and underlying
concepts that have meaning for the people who belong to a particular society.
As Clifford Geertz (1979) has put it, an etic terminology employs ‘experience-
distant’ concepts, while an emic analysis relies on ‘experience-near’ ones. It is
frequently objected that etic concepts are merely the emic concepts of modern
science and hence of Western civilization, which are ethnocentrically imposed
on other cultures, but this does not have to be the case.
To limit imposing my own preconceptions on the data, I have attempted
as far as possible to understand each early civilization on its own terms. I
have done this by examining the terminology used in each early civilization
for key concepts such as soil types, social classes, administrative titles, types of
landholding, and religious beliefs. It is impossible to master all the languages
required to understand seven different civilizations emically, but I have found
a limited word-based approach helpful. Any emic approach, however, is time-
consuming and has inherent limitations. In most cases, information concern-
ing how people in early civilizations classiﬁed things is very limited. This is
especially true for the lower classes, about whose beliefs little documenta-
tion survives. Emic studies depend on knowledge of a culture as expressed
in its own language or languages. Yet a modern understanding of the ancient
Egyptian language, which has had to be derived from ancient texts (assisted
by knowledge of the Coptic language which is descended from it), remains
limited despite almost two hundred years of intensive investigation. Often the
number and variety of surviving texts are insufﬁcient to support hermeneutic
analyses that would reveal the exact meanings of many words. Hence what
pass for translations of ancient Egyptian and Sumerian texts contain many ap-
proximate glosses rather than precise readings. The understanding of Classic
Maya texts, which began to be deciphered only recently and survive in far
lower numbers, is still more limited (Houston 2001).
The best-understood early civilization, from an internalist as well as other
points of view, is that of the Valley of Mexico. The Nahuatl language is still
spoken by a signiﬁcant number of people, and in the sixteenth century very
detailed descriptions of Aztec and Texcocan culture were recorded from in-
digenous informants in that language. This vast corpus of information has pro-
vided material for extraordinary studies such as Alfredo L´opez Austin’s The

64
Introduction
Human Body and Ideology: Concepts of the Ancient Nahuas (1988). L´opez
Austin describes how the Aztec ascribed to each human being not one but at
least three very different ‘souls’ or ‘life-forces’. It is clearly misleading to gloss
these concepts with a single etic term such as ‘soul’.
Research of this sort in richly documented contexts also reminds us of
the possible complexities of meaning that may underlie poorly understood
concepts in other early civilizations. Ignorance of such complexities makes it
easy unwittingly to impose our own understandings on other peoples. Realizing
this reinforced my determination to learn as much as I could about how the
people of each early civilization conceptualized their world before I attempted
to translate such concepts into ‘scientiﬁc’ cross-cultural terminology. Where
this exercise failed to produce positive enlightenment because the original
terminology was not systematically preserved or inadequately understood, it
helped to increase awareness of the limitations of the current understanding
of particular early civilizations.
Emic approaches are essential for understanding belief systems. The an-
cient Egyptians had two words, nh
• h
• and dt, that they frequently used to-
gether and that Egyptologists long translated as synonyms meaning ‘forever’.
Today it is understood that both words meant ‘lasting as long as the cosmic
order endures’. The word nh
• h
• referred, however, to an entity’s surviving by
means of renewal that involved cycles of death and rebirth such as the daily
setting and rising of the sun, the fall and rise of the Nile, and the death and
birth of successive generations of plants, animals, and human beings. In the
course of such renewals, vital forces were believed to pass from one manifes-
tation to another. Certain human life-forces could, for example, after death
unite with the sun in the underworld and be reborn with it each morning.
The term dt, in contrast, referred to things’ surviving by perpetually stay-
ing the same, the prime example being a mummiﬁed body preserved in its
tomb. Humans looked to both forms of enduring to ensure the long-term sur-
vival of the various vital forces that constituted a living individual. Analyses
of this sort supply information about the speciﬁc ways in which people liv-
ing in particular early civilizations perceived themselves, their society, and the
universe.
Not all emic studies are so productive. It was argued in Chapter 3 that
‘class’ is a crucial concept for understanding early civilizations, but if there was
a generic term corresponding to ‘class’ in each early civilization it is not easy to
identify. Its absence may not be particularly signiﬁcant, however, since generic
words are relatively infrequent in the languages of the early civilizations. There
was no common term for ‘religion’ in ancient Egypt, any more than there was
in Classical Greece (Vernant 1995: 9), but that does not signify that religion

Evidence and Interpretation
65
did not play a major role in both societies. Similarly, the absence of a word
for ‘law’ in ancient Mesopotamia (Bott´ero 1992: 179) does not mean that that
civilization lacked a legal system or the lack of a Babylonian word for ‘court’
(Postgate 1992: 277) that there was no formal litigation. The absence of a
word for ‘religion’ probably indicates that in ancient Egypt religion was so
intertwined with daily life that it did not require a separate designation. In
the same fashion, failure to designate ‘class’ may reﬂect a conception of social
organization not as something distinct but as occurring in a broader context
that embraced religious and other elements.
There were also considerable variations in the explicitness with which social
hierarchies were terminologically expressed. The Egyptians used various
terms for farmer, such as sh˘
ty (marsh/country dweller), mrt (serf), and nıswty
(‘free peasant’ or ‘royal tenant’) (Janssen 1978: 227). The meanings of these
terms may have been exclusive or overlapping. Yet there is no evidence of a
generic word denoting farmers as a class. The Aztec, in contrast, had a well-
ordered class terminology. The upper class (pipiltin, singular pilli) was divided
into three levels: tetecuhtin (singular tecuhtli) (high lords), pipiltin (ordinary
hereditary nobles), and quauhpipiltin (nobles by achievement). Commoners
were divided into macehualtin (singular macehualli), taxpaying members of
collective landowning groups, and mayeque, rent-payers seemingly bound to
land held by nobles in return for service to the state. There were also tlacotin
(singular tlacotli) (slaves) (Berdan 1982: 46). For other early civilizations it has
not been possible to work out a nested set of terms that precisely paralleled
the social hierarchies indicated by their sumptuary laws and marriage pat-
terns. Yet in the social and political spheres, the use of etic classiﬁcations may
be analytically justiﬁed even if emic equivalents for such units are not always
forthcoming. The situation is not markedly different in the class terminology of
most modern societies, outside the specialized sphere of discourse inﬂuenced
by the social sciences.
While the lexical approach is not as thorough as a detailed understanding
of the languages spoken in each civilization would have been, together with
a study of what is known about the beliefs of these societies, expressed in
various literary genres such as hymns and myths, it helps to restrain scholars
from unthinkingly imposing their own ethnocentric beliefs on the data and thus
making the thoughts and behaviour of the people who lived in these societies
appear more like our own and therefore like each other’s than they really
were. Because all behaviour is guided by beliefs, values, and expectations that
are shaped to varying degrees by cultural as well as material considerations,
it is vital that a comparative study of early civilizations take account of such
ideas.

66
Introduction
prospect
It is clear that the ‘facts’ about early civilizations, especially those that are de-
rived from secondary or heavily interpreted primary sources, are to a large
extent consensually established rather than scientiﬁcally demonstrated. It is
also clear that many interpretations are ideologically or theoretically driven.
Much of the current literature about the Classic Maya is based on the belief
that patrilineal extended families constituted the basis of Maya society, a claim
that some eminent Mayanists reject as undemonstrated if not erroneous (Wilk
1988). Speculation based on such assumptions must be treated cautiously in a
study of this sort. Scholars who regard a speciﬁc early civilization as unique will
emphasize different facts from those who believe that cross-cultural regulari-
ties provide a reliable guide for understanding that civilization. Materialists and
idealists will emphasize different data. I hoped, however, that by examining an
extensive literature produced, over a ﬁfty-year period that has witnessed many
theoretical changes, by scholars with many different interests and theoretical
orientations, I might partially neutralize the effects of these biases.
In the substantive chapters that follow, I have no doubt unwittingly adopted
many speciﬁc interpretations that for one reason or another will not stand the
test of time. I have also doubtless failed to note the contested nature of other
interpretations and unconsciously permitted my personal views to inﬂuence
what evidence I have and have not considered and how I have synthesized
that evidence. I believe, however, that much of the information concerning the
seven early civilizations that are being compared is sufﬁciently sound that my
analysis can lay claim to a signiﬁcant degree of objectivity. In illustrating major
points I have tried to draw equally on all seven civilizations. In some instances,
however, data are entirely lacking for some early civilizations, and in other
cases there is much better documentation for one or two early civilizations
than there is for the rest.
The following nine chapters compare various aspects of the sociopolitical
organization of the seven early civilizations that have been selected for study.
After that, ﬁve chapters deal with economic matters and nine more with knowl-
edge, religious beliefs, and values. I could have started by examining either
the economy or cultural features. An economic start would have implicitly
privileged an ecological perspective and a cultural start an idealist approach to
explaining human behaviour. After considerable experimentation, I concluded
that beginning with a examination of sociopolitical features facilitated a more
economical and generally more comprehensible comparison than starting with
either of the alternatives. Such a conclusion accords with the traditional views
of social anthropologists, who have maintained that all other aspects of a culture

Evidence and Interpretation
67
acquire their functional signiﬁcance from the manner in which they are related
to social organization. It also accords with classical Marxism, which, although
materialist, attributes the key role in bringing about change not to ecological
factors or technological change but, at least in class-organized societies, to uni-
versal calculations of self-interest that alter the social relations of production.
According priority to social relations also makes sense phylogenetically. Our
primate ancestors were social creatures long before they developed technol-
ogy and before their relations to the natural world and to each other were
symbolically mediated (Mithen 1996). Thus social relations constituted the
preexisting matrix that was radically transformed by the changing adaptive
strategies and developing cognitive abilities of early hominids. Social relations
were the core around which later developments accrued and in relation to
which they acquired their functional signiﬁcance. While social anthropolo-
gists and Marxists generally pay little attention to physical anthropology, the
order in which different forms of human behaviour developed provides the
most convincing argument for starting a general cultural comparison with an
examination of social and political relations.

Sociopolitical Organization

5 Kingship
A
ll the early civilizations compared in this study had kings. In modern
political terminology this signiﬁes that sovereignty, or supreme author-
ity, was symbolically embodied in an individual person rather than in some
collectivity of people such as all adults, all males, all property owners, or all no-
bles or some abstract concept such as God or Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s General
Will (Kamenka 1989: 7).
The terms used to designate kings had different meanings and connotations
in the different civilizations. The Aztec word that is glossed as ‘king’ was tla-
toani (plural tlatoque), which in Nahuatl meant ‘great/revered speaker’. The
Aztec and their Nahuatl-speaking neighbours applied this term to all hered-
itary heads of states, but they conceptualized political leadership in a dyadic
fashion. The tlatoani shared sovereignty with the cihuacoatl, a hereditary ofﬁ-
cial appointed from a junior branch of the royal family who could not become
king. The cihuacoatl oversaw the courts and palace administration and when
necessary acted as regent. Although his title meant ‘snake woman’, like the
tlatoani the holder of this ofﬁce was always a male. In Aztec thought, the tla-
toani and cihuacoatl together symbolized lordship, just as the supreme deity
Ometeotl, Lord and Lady of Twoness, was a dual entity that constituted the
totality of existence. In practice, however, the Aztec tlatoani was a supreme
ruler.
The Yoruba also had a generic title for their hereditary heads of state, oba.
This title indicated descent from Oduduwa, the god who had created the
world, and was traditionally restricted to the hereditary rulers of the signiﬁcant
Yoruba states and neighbouring Benin. Some subordinate local rulers also
claimed the title of oba, although they did not enjoy many of the prerogatives
of that ofﬁce. In contrast to the English term ‘king’, ‘oba’ did not refer to
the hereditary rulers of non-Yoruba states or to the heads of smaller Yoruba
polities. Each Yoruba state also had a special title for its oba, such as the Oni of
71

72
Sociopolitical Organization
Ife, the Alaﬁn of Oyo, the Aleketu of Ketu, the Owa of Ilesa, and the Orangun
of Ila. Among the Maya, the ruler of a city-state was designated k’ul ahaw (holy
lord). Various Sumerian terms (en, ensi, lugal) designated the heads of Early
Dynastic Mesopotamian city-states, but none of these terms was exclusive to
a single city.
In Egypt the most important title used to designate the head of state was
nswt. Only one legitimate nswt could exist in the world at a time, although the
title was also applied to the king of the gods (nswt ntrw). The nswt ruled by
right not only Egypt but the entire world and was responsible for maintaining
both the social order and the cosmic balance. He had to be Egyptian. If, during
periods of civil strife or political division, more than one person claimed the
title, it was understood that only a single claimant could be the true universal
ruler. The kings of other countries were called wr (‘prince’ or ‘great one’) or
h
• q3 (ruler), terms which were also applied to subordinate ofﬁcials or chiefs
within Egypt.
Egyptian royal titles expressed many levels of cultural meaning. ‘Nswt’, in
addition to signifying ‘universal ruler’, meant more speciﬁcally ‘King of Upper
(Southern) Egypt’. Rulers were also given the title bıty, which meant ‘King
of Lower (Northern) Egypt’. According to the assymetrical dualism that dom-
inated Egyptian thought, the term ‘nswt’ not only contrasted with ‘bıty’ but
also incorporated it. This usage reﬂected the Egyptian belief that at the dawn
of history an Upper Egyptian kingdom had conquered and incorporated a
Lower Egyptian one to create the Egyptian state. The king was also called
nswtbıty, ‘King of Upper and Lower Egypt’, which meant the same as ‘nswt’
in its inclusive form. After death kings were referred to only as ‘nswt’, which
presumably designated the eternal, unchanging aspect of the monarchy: king-
ship as an eternal (dt) ofﬁce and the dead kings who were identiﬁed with the
god Osiris. The title ‘bıty’ may have referred to the transitory, accidental, and
renewing (nh
• h
• ) aspects of kingship: the king as a living individual. The titles
h
• m (‘Majesty’ or ‘individual in whom kingship is incarnated’) and nb (lord)
also designated the king as a mortal individual (Allen 2000: 31–32; Ray 1993:
70; Silverman 1995: 64–69).
The Inka ruler also had an exclusive title, sapa inka (unique Inka) (Rowe
1944: 258). The Shang ruler was titled wang. It is unclear whether the Shang
rulers acknowledged the existence of other wang, ruling regions the Shang
kings did not control.
Thus the terms for ‘head of state’ in different early civilizations covered only
partially overlapping semantic ﬁelds. In general, city-states tended to designate
kings generically, while territorial states acknowledged the existence of only
one universal ruler. While ‘king’ may provide a reasonable gloss for these

Kingship
73
various words, a sound understanding of kingship in early civilizations can
only grow out of a detailed comparative study of the concepts of kingship of
particular early civilizations.
In recent years it has been suggested that some early civilizations may have
lacked monarchs, but the proposed examples, which include the Teotihuacan
state in the Valley of Mexico in the ﬁrst millennium a.d. (Cowgill 1997) and the
IndusValleycivilization(Possehl1998),arearchaeologicalonesforwhichthere
is no contemporary written documentation. The main argument advanced in
favour of the absence of kings is the lack of representation of rulers in the
iconography of these states. There is, however, a conspicuous lack of royal
portraiture in the surviving art of Shang China and the Inka. For the Shang,
there is no evidence that kings, who feature prominently in written records,
were ever represented in art. We know, however, from historical sources that
life-size statues of Inka rulers hammered from sheets of gold were objects of
veneration. All these statues were melted down by European invaders in the
sixteenth century. Likewise, in the Valley of Mexico, clearly identiﬁed royal
representations appear to have been infrequent during the Late Aztec period
and were associated mainly with larger and more centralized states. Hence
a dearth of royal portraiture in some early civilizations does not indicate an
absence of kings. Furthermore, each of the Yoruba states, in which much of
the political power is known to have been formally shared among the heads of
various leading families, had a divine king.
It therefore seems reasonable to conclude that all early civilizations probably
had monarchs, even if kingship was deﬁned somewhat differently and the
actual political power exercised by such rulers varied considerably from one
to another. While some small, non-state societies may have survived within or
on the borders of city-state systems, republican forms of sovereignty within
states, whether they took the form of despotisms, oligarchies, or democracies,
arose from and replaced monarchies. The universality of kings in our sample
suggests that in all early civilizations political power was represented in a
personal manner. Hallpike (1986: 282) has observed that monarchs provided
a concrete and hence easily understood way to represent supreme authority
at the state level.
Early states also had kings. There are examples, in Hawaii and among the
Zulu, of the evolution of kingship as the political power of certain chiefs in-
creased (Flannery 1999). In the early civilizations, however, supreme power
was less charismatic, more institutionalized, and more routinely transmitted
from one generation to the next. As a result, the ofﬁce of kingship grew ever
more important by comparison with the particular incumbent of that ofﬁce.
Sovereigntyneverthelesscontinuedtobeviewedasanattributeofanindividual

74
Sociopolitical Organization
person. Even though kinship was no longer the only or even the most important
principle structuring society, kings styled themselves fathers to their nations,
a metaphorical status that combined concepts of benevolence and authority
(Trigger 1985b). Kings were regarded as responsible for the general well-being
of their realm, and their duties included maintaining internal order and pros-
perity, defending their kingdom from foreign enemies, and managing relations
with the supernatural.
Kingship provided the ultimate level at which conﬂicts were resolved and
decisions were made about general policy, although this was often done in
the king’s name rather than through his personal intervention. Maintaining
public order required ensuring that farmers remained submissive to the state,
produced food surpluses, and paid taxes and rents. It also involved mediating
and resolving conﬂicts among the ruling classes that threatened the unity of
the state. Kings were normally supreme military commanders. Although in
Oyo and other Yoruba states military leadership was monopolized by a chief
ofﬁcial from a leading non-royal lineage, Yoruba kings formally declared war
and were held to be supernaturally responsible for the success or failure of
military campaigns (R. Smith 1969: 120). It was believed that, if an army were
defeated, the king had failed to perform his supernatural role, and regicide
or royal suicide sometimes followed (Ajisafe 1924: 21). While the powers of
kings varied, kingship constituted a focus that was essential for coordinating
and managing matters of general concern.
qualifications for kingship
In all early civilizations male monarchs were preferred, and in at least ﬁve
(Mesopotamia, China, the Valley of Mexico, Inka, and Yoruba) it appears that
only males were allowed to rule. Among the Yoruba, references to female obas
are conﬁned to the early and largely mythological period (Denzer 1994: 8).
The only female ruler reported in Mesopotamia was Ku-Baba, the reputed
ﬁrst ruler of Kish, who was also a goddess (Lerner 1986: 59). Occasionally
female monarchs ruled Egypt, and the late Egyptian historian Manetho said
that it had been agreed in very early times that women might rule. Never-
theless, female monarchs generally were installed only during dynastic crises,
and their reigns were regarded as contrary to the normal order. They also
contradicted Egyptian religious dogma, which viewed kingship as transmit-
ted directly from the god Osiris to his son and reincarnation Horus. The
goddess Isis, wife of Osiris and mother of Horus, was solely the means by
which divine kingship renewed itself (Troy 1986). It is uncertain whether the
female Maya rulers reported at Piedras Negras, Palenque, and Naranjo were

Kingship
75
monarchs in their own right or merely regents for juvenile male rulers (Graham
1991: 473).
A king symbolically embodied a polity’s identity and reconciled the conﬂict-
ing interests within it. The normal pattern of political and religious leadership
in the Valley of Mexico was based on a principle of dual authority that re-
ﬂected the primordial order of the universe. Yet the tlatoani, who represented
the male cosmic principle, predominated and was the de facto paramount ruler
of each city-state (Rounds 1983). In the 1960s some anthropologists theorized,
on the basis of the Aztec example, that all early civilizations had two or more
kings who shared power and reigned at the same time. Zuidema (1964: 127)
suggested that the Inka had a pattern of dual kingship, with the leader of the
dominant royal moiety acting as the primary ruler, but it is now clear that at
the highest level the Inka speciﬁcally rejected the general principle of moiety
co-leadership in favour of a single ruler (Gose 1996b). Some kingdoms in the
Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba simultaneously had multiple kings,
but these were inevitably small, poorly integrated states made up of a number
of groups each of which followed its own leader.
Kingship was hereditary in practice in all seven early civilizations and hered-
itary in theory in all except perhaps the Sumerian parts of Mesopotamia. This
arrangement reﬂected the generally stable, institutionalized nature of leader-
ship in early civilizations. Kingship tended to pass from father to son or from
older to younger brother before descending to the next generation. In some
states, such as the Asante kingdom of northern Ghana which developed as re-
cently as the eighteenth century, royal ofﬁce was inherited matrilineally. Yet,
even in this matrilineal society, kings sought to marry in ways that would ensure
that their sons or grandsons would succeed them (Wilks 1975). Because most
kings had to play an active role in governing early civilizations, the inheritance
oftheroyalofﬁcewasrarelydeterminedstrictlybymaleprimogeniture.Choice
was required to maximize the likelihood that each king would be followed by
a capable successor. Under these circumstances, various selection procedures
were used to determine the succession. There was variation from one early
civilization to another in deﬁning both the group from which a successor might
be chosen and how and by whom the selection was made.
Among the Classic Maya, kingship appears normally to have passed from a
ruler to a son by his principal wife. Recent studies of Maya royal genealogies
eliminate the suggestion that in the Early Classic period Maya kingship had ro-
tated among a number of different patrilineages (A. Miller 1986: 41). The pres-
tige of both parents’ patrilineages played a role in establishing the hereditary
status of an heir, thereby weakening the chances of succession by a king’s sons
born to women other than his principal wife. It is unclear, however, whether

76
Sociopolitical Organization
there was a preference for male primogeniture. The Maya practiced special
heir-designation rituals, apparently in an effort to ensure a stable succession.
This suggests the possibility that an eldest son’s right to kingship might be
called into question. It has also been argued that the custom of holding Maya
rulers captured in battle as prisoners for long periods before killing them was
intended to induce instability in their kingdoms by preventing their sons from
formally succeeding them in the interim (Schele and Freidel 1990: 194).
In Mesopotamian city-states, kingship likewise regularly passed from a ruler
to his son. Nevertheless, the succession had to be sanctioned by a city’s patron
deity, whose will was determined by oracles and divination. Urukagina of
Lagash, who did not become ruler by inheritance, boasted that his city’s god
had selected him to be king from among thirty-six thousand male citizens
(Postgate 1992: 268). Some early kings are also reported to have been selected
or approved by popular acclaim. It was envisaged that a king could be unseated
by an uprising of his own subjects, who were carrying out the wishes of their
city god. J. N. Postgate (1992: 270) suggests that patrilineal descent was not
an exclusive or adequate qualiﬁcation for kingship and that Sumerian ideology
did not admit of a hereditary right of royal succession (see also Mander 1999;
Steinkeller 1993).
Both in Egypt and among the Inka, kingship was passed down from father
to son, with the heir being designated by the ruling monarch. Ideally the heir
was a son of the king’s chief wife, but in exceptional circumstances such sons
could be passed over in favour of a more capable son by a secondary wife. Even
when an heir was designated well in advance, conﬂict over the succession might
break out following a king’s death, with different factions of the royal family
and the upper classes supporting rival candidates. To further ensure a peaceful
succession, Egyptian and Inka kings sometimes installed their preferred heirs
as junior rulers during their own lifetimes. Often the junior king took command
of the army as a deputy for his elderly father. Aged or weak monarchs in both
civilizations were sometimes killed or deposed by ambitious sons seeking to
prevent another brother or half-brother from being named as successor. In
Egypt it was essential for a new king to perform his predecessor’s burial rituals
in order to validate his claim to the throne (Shafer 1997b: 283 n. 16, 287–88
n. 52). Among the Inka the previous ruler’s choice of an heir was conﬁrmed
by a council of high ofﬁcials, by oracles from the sun god that were delivered
through the high priest of that deity, and by the oracle priests who spoke for
previous kings (Kendall 1973: 72–73; Patterson 1991; Rostworowski 1999). In
both states the transfer of royal ofﬁce was regarded as an event by which both
the cosmic and the political order were ﬁrst threatened and then ultimately
renewed.

Kingship
77
The Aztec king was selected, often amidst considerable rivalry, from among
the brothers or sons of the dead king by a council made up of the four highest
ofﬁcers of the state (van Zantwijk 1994). These ofﬁcials were usually mem-
bers of the royal family, and the new king was one of them. The cihuacoatl,
acting as regent, also played a role in the selection. It is reported that in
the formative period of the Aztec monarchy the election of a new king had
been conﬁrmed by all the men and women of the state (Dur´an 1964: 40–
41), but later the people merely acclaimed the new ruler. As the Aztec state
grew more powerful, succession shifted from a father-to-son pattern to one in
which the kingship often passed from one brother to another before descend-
ing to the next generation. This change is believed to have been intended to
increase the number of experienced adult candidates from whom a new ruler
might be selected. The new procedure favoured the appointment of a member
of the royal family who was already militarily and politically successful. As the
Aztec state came to dominate more neighbouring kingdoms, such qualities
were increasingly valued in a leader (Rounds 1982).
It has been suggested that in the Shang Dynasty kingship may have rotated
between two patrilineal branches and ten matrilineal divisions of the royal
clan (K. Chang 1976: 84). (Simpler rotations occurred among branches of
royal families elsewhere, including Yoruba ones and that of the early medieval
Scots [Whitaker 1976].) Yet there is no conclusive evidence that such a circu-
lation of kingship occurred in Shang China (Vandermeersch 1977: 284–93).
At ﬁrst kingship appears to have passed from older to younger brothers of a
single lineage before descending to the eldest son of the eldest brother. Later,
kingship passed from father to son, with a strong preference for primogeniture
(Chˆeng 1960: 216–17). This trend – the opposite of what happened among the
Aztec – may have reﬂected a need to balance the strong emphasis on seniority
as a source of higher status with a growing need for rulers who were in the
prime of life as military leadership became more important. Strictly fraternal
succession, with little possibility of passing over any but the most hopelessly
incapable candidates, would have encouraged a rapid succession of aged rulers.
The Yoruba king was chosen from among the male descendants of previous
rulers by hereditary ofﬁcials who belonged to the most important non-royal
patrilineages, acting in consultation with prominent members of the royal clan.
Kingship frequently rotated among two or more lineages or branches of the
royal family, so that a king was rarely succeeded by his own son. The state
council could order an unsuccessful king to commit suicide or to be slain
by his palace staff, but kings in turn had to conﬁrm the appointment of new
members to this council (Bascom 1969: 30–33; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996:
76–79). The obas of Benin, who had gone farther than any of the Yoruba kings

78
Sociopolitical Organization
in reducing the powers of their state council, also established a direct father-
to-eldest-son inheritance of kingship, which accorded with the general Edo
rule of inheritance. In contrast to Yoruba kings, the oba of Benin also could not
be deposed by his chief councillors (Bradbury 1957: 40–41). Like the ancient
Egyptian kings, a new king of Benin had to validate his succession by burying
his father and performing elaborate installation rituals. Inability to fulﬁl these
requirements might disqualify an incompetent elder son from becoming king.
In Oyo and some other Yoruba states, the king’s biological mother was killed
or expected to commit suicide at the same time that her son was ‘reborn’ as
king (S. Johnson 1921: 56) and was replaced by a woman who was appointed to
be the ofﬁcial queen mother (iya oba) (Law 1977: 70–71). In Benin, the king’s
mother was not killed but installed in a palace at Uselu, just outside Benin
city, where she wielded considerable power. She and her son, who was now
a divine ruler, were, however, never allowed to meet again (Ben-Amos 1983;
Bradbury 1973: 55).
Thus in early civilizations sovereignty was embodied in an individual, and
the stability of kingship was both guarded and symbolized by the continuity
of royal ofﬁce within a single family. In more powerful royal families, king-
ship tended to be inherited either fraternally or generationally within a single
lineage, but in some weaker ones it rotated among a number of lineages that
claimed descent from a single remote ancestor. While such rotation has been
explained as a device for holding together extensive kingdoms in the absence
of centralized authority (Whitaker 1976), this cannot account for the practice
in Yoruba city-states. Among the Yoruba, rotation perhaps mitigated compe-
tition among branches of royal families that might have torn states apart and
resulted in the out-migration of defeated candidates for royal power and their
supporters. The relatively low population density of the Yoruba facilitated such
movement.
Because kings in early civilizations, unlike modern constitutional monarchs,
had to be able to govern effectively and often provide personal military lead-
ership, it was highly desirable that they be adult and competent males. For
that reason, it was also desirable that a selection be made among a number
of rival candidates. Where kings had more power, kingship was inherited ac-
cording to male primogeniture or the reigning monarch decided which of his
sons should succeed him. In other cases, decisions about the succession were
made either by representatives of the royal family or by powerful members
of the upper class. Even where the heir was speciﬁed by primogeniture, the
need to perform various rites in order to become king ensured that a new ruler
either could govern effectively or was controlled and supported by people who
could.

Kingship
79
the sacred character of kingship
Although individuals, families, and small communities often had patron deities
with whom they communicated either directly or through the spirits of their
dead ancestors, ordinary human beings had only limited contact with the su-
pernatural. The king, standing at the apex of society, constituted the most
important link between human beings and the supernatural forces on which
the welfare of both society and the universe depended. These relations were
mediated by rituals that only kings or their deputies were able to perform.
Only the Shang rulers were able to sponsor the scapulimantic divination
rituals (divining according to the cracks that appear on burnt bones) that al-
lowed them, through their dead ancestors, to communicate with their high
god, Shangdi. These divinations also made possible the correct sacriﬁces that
ensured good crops and the welfare of the realm (K. Chang 1983: 44–45).
Maya kings sought, by ritually shedding their own blood or ingesting hallu-
cinogenic substances, to enter into trance states that would permit them to
communicate with the spirits of their dead ancestors and with cosmic deities.
In Egypt ofﬁcial doctrine maintained that only the king could make offerings
to the gods in temples throughout Egypt, to the royal ancestors, or even to
dead commoners in their graves. The ritual formula that transferred offerings
to the life-force (k3) of a dead person described them as ‘a gift that the king
gives’. Thus, in theory, even the water that a farmer poured onto the grave of a
dead relative passed into the spirit world as a gift from the reigning monarch,
whose presence caused Egypt to prosper (Gardiner 1950: 170–73). It has been
suggested that in Egypt prolonged natural catastrophes at certain periods may
have led to the slaying or deposing of kings who were judged incapable of
sustaining the cosmic order (B. Bell 1971).
Their being regarded as the embodiment of the strength and vitality of
the kingdom led to an emphasis on the health and vigour of individual kings.
Egyptian pharaohs, after a thirty-year reign and at frequent intervals thereafter,
celebrated a Sed ritual (h
• b sd) in the course of which they symbolically died
and were reborn. This ritual was believed to renew an aging ruler’s physical
and mental powers (Gohary 1992). Egyptians believed that a similar renewal
took place when an old king died and was replaced by his son. In general, the
iconography of kingship in early civilizations emphasized youth, prowess, and
martial skills. Egyptian kings were rarely, if ever, portrayed as old or feeble.
Because of their close association with supernatural forces kings were as-
cribed various divine attributes. The most extreme claims about the divinity
of kings were made in large territorial states, where direct contact between
the ruler and most of his subjects was very limited. Because royal authority

80
Sociopolitical Organization
was necessarily mediated through multiple levels of ofﬁcials, the ruler was
perceived as a remote being who affected people’s lives in much the same way
as deities or natural forces (thought to be the same), and this made it easier
for ordinary people to accept the notion of the divinity of rulers.
The Egyptian state placed special emphasis on the king’s being the son or
earthly manifestation of the solar-creator god and hence a universal ruler. Like
thesun,thekingexperiencedendlesscyclesofdeathandrebirth.Kingsclaimed
to be the earthly manifestation of all the major Egyptian gods, each of whom
wasassociatedwithaparticularcommunityinEgyptandidentiﬁedinthatplace
as the creator deity. By nourishing all these gods as a son nourished the spirits of
his dead ancestors, the king played a key role in maintaining the cosmic order
(Frankfort 1948; Silverman 1991: 56–71). Living kings, alone of human beings,
were referred to as gods (ntr) during their lifetimes (Hornung 1997: 301). It
was as a direct result of the supernatural power of kings that the enemies of
Egypt were defeated and the Nile River ﬂooded each year. Yet kings appear to
have been viewed as divine only in the sense that their bodies, like cult images
in the temples, were receptacles which various gods could enter. An individual
king became endowed with such power as a consequence of enthronement
rituals which involved his puriﬁcation, ritual rebirth, and crowning by the gods
(L. Bell 1997: 140; Goebs 1998: 340). As a consequence of these rituals, each
successive king represented the rebirth and earthly renewal of the previous
monarch (and ultimately of Horus), while dead kings were identiﬁed with
Osiris, the unchanging ruler of the realms of the dead. It may be as the earthly
incarnation of divine power that the reigning king was referred to as ntr nfr,
which is conventionally translated ‘beautiful god’ but may have meant ‘young’
or ‘reincarnated’ god (Hornung 1982: 138–42; Malek 1997: 227).
Egyptian Kings were believed to be so charged with supernatural power
that simply touching them or their regalia without taking ritual precautions
could cause serious injury. Yet, while they regulated the cosmos, they were not
expected to perform miracles. If a trusted adviser became ill, the king ordered
a royal physician to attend him. An elaborate funerary cult was maintained
for each dead king in the expectation that, as the unchanging (dt) form of
supernatural power, dead kings could bestow supernatural blessings on Egypt.
Despite many scholarly suggestions to the contrary, it is clear that even in the
Old Kingdom all dead human beings became dt forms, even if only very minor
ones. Thus the difference between dead commoners and dead kings was the
extent of their supernatural power rather than a difference in kind (O’Connor
and Silverman 1995).
Subjects of the Inka kings were taught that the king was a descendant
and earthly manifestation or counterpart of the sun god, Inti, and perhaps

Kingship
81
of the older creator god, Wiraqucha, as well. The sun was regarded as the
immediate source and repository of power for each Inka ruler. As in Egypt,
the cosmic order was thought to be re-created with each successive reign
(MacCormack 1991: 117). The transformation in the king’s nature that resulted
from his installation rituals required him to remarry his chief wife, who now
became his queen (quya [coya]), a practice that led many Spanish chroniclers
to believe that an Inka ruler married his chief wife only after becoming king
(MacCormack 1991: 125). Two hundred or more boys and girls were sacriﬁced
throughout the kingdom as part of the royal enthronement rituals (Kendall
1973: 197). If the king became ill at any time, four llamas and four children
were killed and large amounts of cloth burned to ensure his recovery (Murra
1980: 58).
Both living and dead Inka monarchs were viewed as playing key roles in
promoting agricultural fertility and military success, activities that were closely
linked in belief and ritual. Dead kings were believed to be reunited with
the sun, although their mummiﬁed bodies, which maintained their personal
identities, continued to be clothed and offered food as if they were alive.
Each dead king was a locus of supernatural power and an important source
of oracular pronouncements on political matters. Living and dead kings were
thus regarded, as was the sun itself, as a source of life and prosperity for their
descendants and for the Inka state as a whole (Gose 1996a). As in Egypt,
the dead ancestors of ordinary people also looked after the welfare of their
descendants; what distinguished dead kings in this regard was the source and
extent of the power.
In China, the Shang kings performed sacriﬁces to Shangdi. Whether the
god was the apical ancestor of the Shang royal clan as many experts believe,
as the senior living descendant of the royal ancestors – whose spirits alone
were able to communicate and intercede with Shangdi – the king was uniquely
qualiﬁed to manipulate supernatural power in order to promote the well-being
of the whole nation (K. Chang 1983). Kings referred to themselves as y¨u i ren
(I, the unique [foremost] man), using the status-neutral term applied to males
(ren) of any rank (Wheatley 1971: 52). Later Chinese kings, including those
of the Zhou Dynasty, did not claim divine status, although they bore the title
‘Son of Heaven’, tian (sky) having either replaced Shangdi or become a new
name for him (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 320–21). The spirits of dead kings were
regarded as extremely powerful and were consulted through divination. Their
cults were aligned with that of the ten different suns that were believed to
shine on the world on successive days in a ten-day cycle, each being identiﬁed
with a particular sun. Dead kings were offered human and animal sacriﬁces
just as were the spiritual forces inherent in the natural world.

82
Sociopolitical Organization
Among the other civilizations in our sample, which were composed of much
smaller states, there was considerable variation in the extent of deiﬁcation
ascribed to rulers. The Yoruba kings shared political authority with the title-
holders of powerful non-royal patrilineages. Yet kingship was regarded as a
divine ofﬁce, and kings were believed to possess extraordinary supernatural
powers that enabled them to ensure the fertility of their realm and the well-
being of its people (Bradbury 1973: 74). Kings were venerated as the vehicles
through which divine power was channelled into the human world, animat-
ing human beings as well as plants, animals, rivers, and the atmosphere. To
protect people from their supernatural powers, kings were ritually secluded
in their palaces. While each Yoruba state carefully remembered the names of
its successive individual rulers, royal power was viewed as a continuous pres-
ence. Each successive ruler was endowed with an unbroken continuity of such
power and spoke of what his royal predecessors had done as if their deeds
had been his own (K. Barber 1991: 51). An oba’s authority was described
as ‘unchallengeable’ and his power ‘like that of the gods’ (Pemberton and
Afolayan 1996: 1). In Benin asserting that the king performed human acts
such as eating, sleeping, washing, or dying was an offence punishable by death
(Bradbury 1957: 40).
Only Yoruba kings could perform the rituals that were crucial for the well-
being of their land and people. The powers of dead kings were transmitted
to their successors in rituals that involved the new king’s ingesting small por-
tions of his predecessor’s body. Nevertheless, individual kings who grew senile
or whose behaviour seriously displeased their councils might be slain. Many
Yoruba still believe that gods take possession of ordinary humans for brief peri-
ods and speak and act through them as ordinary worshippers enter into trance
in the course of rituals. Kings, it would seem, were believed, in the course
of their installation ceremonies, to become possessed of the power of various
deities, which remained with them for the rest of their lives or so long as they
remained healthy and ritually pure. These rituals were accompanied by human
sacriﬁces intended to increase the power of the king. While the spirits of all
dead Yoruba were venerated by their descendants, who sought to beneﬁt from
their supernatural protection and support, the spirits of rulers were the objects
of especially elaborate cults. Because their power beneﬁted the living ruler,
as did the power of cosmic deities, it helped to sustain the entire realm
(Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 73). The cult of royal ancestors was most
elaborate in Benin, where each dead king was provided with a separate ritual
compound (ugha) with its own altar (Bradbury 1957: 55). Yet here too royal
power, although supernatural in origin, tended to be quantitatively rather than
qualitatively different from that of other people.

Kingship
83
The Maya term for ‘ruler’ that was commonly used after a.d. 400, k’ul ahaw,
has been interpreted as signifying a leader with divine power or godlike status.
Maya rulers wore the costumes and attributes of various gods and bore names
that incorporated references to numerous deities. At Tikal these references
often were to Kawil, a god of fertility and dynastic continuity; at Naranjo they
were to Chak, the storm and rain god (Houston 2001; Martin and Grube 2000:
17). They may have been thought to receive supernatural powers in the course
of installation or heir-designation rituals. There is, however, no evidence that
they were believed to be gods. Dead rulers, in contrast, were identiﬁed with
ancestral heroes and major cosmic deities, apparently while retaining their
own personalities, and were worshipped in elaborate mortuary temples that
each king had erected for that purpose (Freidel and Schele 1988a; Houston
and Stuart 1996).
Finally, the Maya appear to have believed that, while rulers died, kingship
was eternal. The succession of Maya rulers resembled the periodic deaths and
rebirths of the gods who had presided over the universe in successive cycles
since the beginning of time. Every Maya king symbolically re-emerged from
the underworld at the time of his accession to direct the social order and passed
back into the underworld, as the sun did at the end of each day, at the time
of his death. The notion of royal sons’ giving rebirth to the fathers who had
engendered them has been described as the central mystery of ofﬁcial Maya
religion (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 281). Yet, by Late Classic times this
cyclical renewal was iconographically less important than chronicling the linear
succession of speciﬁc rulers in each Maya city-state. This was made possible
by the invention of the calendrical long count, which permitted short cycles of
time to be viewed as segments of an endless, ongoing series (A. Miller 1986).
The Aztec and the other inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico believed that
deities entered and possessed the bodies of their worshippers for varying
lengths of time. At the installation of new kings, elaborate rituals were per-
formed in the course of which the king was dressed in the regalia of major
cosmic deities. These rituals were intended to ensure that the powers of these
deities came to reside in the king and allowed him to ensure good harvests,
lead armies to victory, and govern the state wisely (Clendinnen 1991: 78–81;
Townsend 1989). The Aztec king was identiﬁed as the surrogate of Xiuhte-
cuhtli, the creator and ﬁre god, who, as a manifestation of Ometeotl, con-
trolled the central axis of the universe. Having this supreme ancestral deity
as his patron did not, however, prevent the Aztec king from identifying with
other major deities who were Xiuhtecuhtli’s progeny (Heyden 1989: 39–41).
In this manner Aztec kings became divine (teotl) even if they were not
regarded as gods. It was said that their lips and tongues became those of

84
Sociopolitical Organization
gods, since the gods spoke through them, and that they were the ears, eyes,
and fangs of the gods (Townsend 1992: 205; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 398–99).
Once installed, a monarch was expected to launch a military campaign that
would demonstrate his newly acquired powers and produce a large number
of prisoners for the sacriﬁce to the gods that would complete his installation.
At their funerals, Aztec kings were again dressed in the costumes of leading
cosmic deities, one on top of the other, in order to be identiﬁed with these gods
prior to cremation (Heyden 1989: 41). The human sacriﬁces that are reported
to have been made at regular intervals to strengthen King Mochtezuma II’s
tonali soul (the source of his vigour and rationality) may have been intended
to nourish the special divine powers dwelling within him (Clendinnen 1991:
82). While Aztec kings were treated with great reverence, there is no evidence
that they were thought to be different in essence from other members of the
hereditary nobility (Read 1994). Instead, they were men in whom supernatural
powers manifested themselves to a unique degree. Although the ashes of dead
kings were interred in the platform of the chief state temple, there was no
state cult of dead kings.
Mesopotamian concepts of kingship likewise were grounded in religion. The
Sumerians believed that the gods had invented kingship as the most effective
means for governing themselves and had then transmitted it to humans. Joan
Oates (1978: 476) argues that the position of king (en or ensi) had evolved from
a paramount male temple ritual ofﬁce most commonly associated with female
deities who were the patrons of city-states. In cities where the chief patron
deity was male and therefore the en priest was female, kingship passed into
the hands of a lugal (literally ‘big man’), whose ofﬁce may have been derived
from that of a part-time military leader. Only after the Early Dynastic period
did these titles begin to form a hierarchy in which lugal, now construed to
mean ‘hegemon’, took precedence over ensi, meaning ‘city ruler’ or ‘governor’
(Hallo 1957).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian rulers were viewed as human beings occu-
pying much the same position in relation to a city’s patron deity as the steward
or foreman of an estate owner. The power that a ruler enjoyed as a result of
the approval and support of the gods was symbolized by his being invested
with the divine emblems of kingship – a crown, the throne of life, the sceptre
of justice, and a mace to control the people – that were believed to have been
sent to earth with kingship itself (Postgate 1992: 261–63).
It was the duty of Mesopotamian kings to ensure that deities were well fed,
clothed, and housed. They risked divine punishment if they failed to carry out a
god’s wishes. A prudent king might, however, reasonably expect the favour and
protection of his city’s patron deity in return for his personal good behaviour

Kingship
85
and diligent conduct of his city’s affairs. Kings received divine revelations and
commands in dreams and visions. To avoid unwittingly offending the gods,
they constantly sought through divination to ascertain the will of deities. The
only inherently supernatural aspect of kingship was that kings, together with
female priests or women of the royal household, impersonated major deities
during the annual New Year’s rituals that were associated with fertility and
cosmic renewal. Presumably the power of these deities entered into the king
and other participants during this brief period (Postgate 1992: 265–66).
Ironically, Mesopotamia, the civilization whose kings were perceived as most
human, was the only one whose legends portrayed proud or impious kings
taunting and insulting deities (Pritchard 1955: 84). These tales, however, illus-
trated that it was impossible for even the most ambitious humans to oppose
the gods or acquire their powers. Mesopotamian rulers sometimes sought to
escape divine wrath when they learned about it through divination by tem-
porarily appointing a person of humble origin as a substitute king whose death
might assuage the anger of gods. Such a substitute was slain after the danger
had passed (Frankfort 1948: 262–65).
During the Akkadian dominance over Mesopotamia (2350–2190 b.c.) and
again in the Ur III period (2112–2004 b.c.), hegemonic kings attempted to
claim divine status. Their names were written after the classiﬁcatory sign
(taxogram) that indicated a god, they were shown wearing horned headdresses
like those of gods, and legal oaths had to be sworn in their names as well as
those of deities. Some of these kings also established elaborate mortuary cults.
It may have been in this context that some of the more celebrated rulers of
the Early Dynastic period, such as Gilgamesh, who was claimed as an ancestor
by the Ur III kings, began to be described as gods or demigods. Yet these
claims failed to win widespread acceptance, and later, more powerful kings
such as those of Assyria shunned such pretensions. Once the human status
of kings had been established, it was impossible even for the most successful
hegemons or hereditary rulers to transcend it (Engnell 1967; Frankfort 1948:
297–99; Postgate 1992: 266–67).
The rulers of early civilizations invariably claimed divine support, and most
of them were believed to be endowed with divine powers. The most far-
reaching claims were made in Egypt and among the Inka, both large states
in which rulers tended to be remote from their subjects, but even here the
human nature of the individual ruler was acknowledged. Strong claims of
divinity in rulers were made among the Yoruba, whose heads of state were rit-
ually secluded from their subjects. The weakest claims were found among the
Mesopotamians, who in Early Dynastic times had become the most urbanized
people in our sample and therefore the best able to observe their rulers at

86
Sociopolitical Organization
close range. The failure of Mesopotamian hegemons to achieve divine status
suggests that historical as well as functional factors helped to shape the image
of kings in these societies.
Kings also claimed to be the descendants of major cosmic deities. According
to one version of Egyptian cosmology, at the beginning of time Egypt had
been ruled by Atum or Re (the solar-creator deity), and he was followed in
succession by his son Shu (air), Shu’s son Geb (the earth), and Geb’s son
Osiris. Each of these deities had in turn withdrawn into a cosmic realm, leaving
Osiris’s son (or reincarnation) Horus to rule Egypt. All later Egyptian kings
were linear descendants of Horus, who, after death, became identiﬁed with
Osiris, the quintessential dead ruler (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 16–32).
The Inka kings maintained that the sun god was the divine ancestor of their
dynasty, his beams having engendered (either at Lake Titicaca or in the caves
of Paqariktambo, near Cuzco) four pairs of males and females from one of
which the Inka royal family was descended (Urton 1990). The Shang rulers
belonged to the senior descent line of the Zi clan, which, according to a legend
recorded at a later date, was descended from a mortal woman who had been
made pregnant by a black bird that may have been Shangdi and was perhaps
also identiﬁed with the sun (K. Chang 1976: 167). Yoruba kings each claimed
to be descended from one of the sixteen sons of Oduduwa, the god who had
lowered himself from the sky on an iron chain to create the world (Bascom
1969: 10–12). In Benin a descendant of Oduduwa replaced a previous dynasty
of ogiso (sky kings) that had been deposed for misrule (Ben-Amos and Rubin
1983: 21; Egharevba 1960: 1–6). The Aztec rulers and the nobility in the Valley
of Mexico traced their descent from an incarnation of the god Quetzalcoatl,
who had ruled at the ancient city of Tollan (M. E. Smith 1996: 37–38). Maya
rulers likewise traced their lineages back to one or more major deities of their
pantheon (Houston and Stuart 1996: 290). The blood of Maya kings and of the
descendants of kings was believed to be specially charged with supernatural
power. Only Mesopotamian kings did not normally claim descent from the
gods.
These claims established a genealogical afﬁnity between kings and cosmic
deities. They also implied that kings differed from commoners in origin and
nature. Myths of this sort did not, however, clearly distinguish kings from
hereditary nobles who were descended from earlier rulers. In the case of the
Aztec and Inka nobility or the Yoruba royal clans, these descendants might
be quite numerous. A Shang or Zhou king was further distinguished as the
highest-ranking member of the senior lineage of the royal clan, which en-
dowed him with indisputable genealogical superiority and ritual power. The
Egyptians claimed that individual kings were fathered by the sun god, Re, who

Kingship
87
had taken possession of the reigning king’s body at the time of their procreation.
While rulers such as the New Kingdom Pharaoh Ramesses II might boast that
their divine conception had set them apart from other humans even when
they were still in the womb, the only proof that they had been conceived in
a special manner was their eventual succession to the throne (Hornung 1982:
142). Claims like these generally emphasized not kings’ uniqueness but their
leadership roles, and they appear to have given kings powers that were greater
than but not inherently different from those possessed by other humans. It
was installation rituals that played the pivotal role in endowing kings with the
supernatural powers that set them apart from other people. In the course of
these rituals, which generally involved fasting, penance, and being invested
with diverse regalia associated with deities, kings were identifed with vari-
ous gods and acquired their divine powers. Egyptian and Yoruba rulers and
perhaps others also became reincarnations of their predecessors. The sacred
powers acquired in the course of these rituals were henceforth symbolized
by the veneration with which rulers were treated, by the distinctive costumes
they wore, and by the special regalia, such as crowns, staffs, and royal thrones
or stools, that they alone were permitted to use. Like the kings themselves,
these objects were often thought to be charged with supernatural power. While
Mesopotamian kings were normally not believed to possess supernatural pow-
ers in their own right, even they enjoyed the special protection and support
of the tutelary deities of their city-states. Installation rituals transformed kings
into intermediaries between the human and the divine.
As individuals, kings remained human and mortal, but as incumbents of a
sacred ofﬁce they were set apart from all other humans as the result of having
acquired unique supernatural powers. These powers enhanced their authority
but also tended to delimit the scope of what they could do (Postgate 1992:
274). Supreme political power was universally understood and expressed in
religious terms. Kings, like the cosmic gods, possessed powers to assist and
harm human beings. To their subjects these powers must have resembled the
immense forces that were inherent in the natural realm.
Some early civilizations emphasized possession of supernatural powers more
than others. Those that most stressed such powers tended to be ones in which
states were larger and kings more remote from most of their subjects. Yet the
failure of increasingly powerful Mesopotamian kings to achieve recognition for
claims to possess divine powers reveals that cultural traditions played a major
role in determining to what extent kings were regarded as divine. Neverthe-
less, in Mesopotamia no less than in other early civilizations, political power
was conceptualized in supernatural rather than simply political or economic
terms.

88
Sociopolitical Organization
retainer sacrifice
An interesting indication of how kings were viewed in early civilizations is the
extent to which retainers and other human victims, willingly or unwillingly,
were slain at the funerals of kings and high-ranking members of the nobility.
There is evidence of retainer sacriﬁce in the early phases of both Egyptian and
Mesopotamian civilizations. Hundreds of female and male servants, as well as
artisans, were slain and buried around the Egyptian royal funerary complexes
of the First Dynasty at Abydos and in smaller numbers around the tombs of the
highest-ranking ofﬁcials at Memphis (Edwards 1985: 23). Substantial numbers
of retainers were interred in what are generally considered to have been Early
Dynastic royal burials at Ur in Mesopotamia, although the female burials may
have been those of high-ranking en priestesses rather than queens (Pollock
1999: 211). Some memory of this practice may survive in later Mesopotamian
epic poetry, which speaks of servants’ accompanying deceased rulers to the
underworld (Kramer 1963: 130). Yet these sorts of killings do not appear to
have persisted for long in cultures in which human victims were not regularly
sacriﬁced to the gods.
Among the Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba, who regularly made human sacriﬁces
to deities, human victims were slain in the course of high-status funerals.
Human sacriﬁce was regularly part of the burial rituals of Yoruba and Benin
kings (S. Johnson 1921: 44, 55). At Benin members of the oba’s bodyguard were
among those slain. In addition, wives and slaves of rulers committed suicide
so that they could continue to serve them after death (Egharevba 1960: 76;
Lucas 1948: 256). Human victims were also periodically sacriﬁced as part of
the cult of deceased kings (Bradbury 1957: 39, 55).
The Shang interred up to several hundred humans in royal graves. While it
has been suggested that most of these victims were foreign captives, archaeo-
logical data indicate that they represented a cross-section of royal retainers –
women, ofﬁcials, guards, and servants – as well as some prisoners of war. The
latter were often decapitated or dismembered and had their hands tied behind
their backs at the time of death (Keightley 1969: 369–77). Human beings were
also sacriﬁced periodically, along with various domestic animals, and buried
around the graves and ancestral temples of deceased members of the royal
family. These practices appear never to have been extensive at the Zhou court,
even during the Shang period, and died out completely during the succeeding
Zhou Dynasty (Chˆeng 1960: 69–79; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 172).
It is reported that when an Inka king died, his favourite secondary wives,
servants, and some ofﬁcials were strangled, many of them voluntarily. In addi-
tion, one thousand boys and girls ﬁve to six years old, many of them children

Kingship
89
of the non-Inka provincial nobility (Betanzos 1996: 131–33), were assembled
and buried in pairs throughout the kingdom. Among the Shang and the Inka,
retainer sacriﬁce was practised on a much smaller scale at the burial of major
ofﬁcials.
Whatever the purposes served by the killing of humans in funerary contexts,
it is clear that it was not a unitary phenomenon. Some killings appear to have
been, like animal sacriﬁces, blood offerings intended to strengthen the soul
of the dead person with the victim’s life-force. This appears to have been the
case with the humblest Shang and Inka funerary killings. At least some Yoruba
human sacriﬁces made after the time of burial were charged with carrying
messages and requests for supernatural assistance to the deceased (Connah
1987: 145), but these sacriﬁces also appear to have been intended to nourish
and strengthen the spirit of the dead person. Sacriﬁces of this sort closely
resembled those made to cosmic deities. In other cases it seems that household
servants and ofﬁcials were buried with, or near, a dead king or member of the
upper class so that their souls might accompany and continue to serve that
person. The killing of people, whether to nourish or to serve the dead, was a
form of conspicuous consumption and thus a striking symbol of the deceased’s
high status, but its restriction to societies in which human beings as well as
animals were regularly sacriﬁced to the gods suggests that it was associated
with the equation of kings (including dead ones) with supernatural power. It is
also signiﬁcant that a more restrained form of retainer sacriﬁce was practised
by high ofﬁcials in societies where it was an attribute of royal burial practices,
Mesopotamia being the exception. While kings were publicly recognized as
being politically and symbolically unique, they were also identiﬁed in terms of
ritual treatment as members of the upper classes.
validating power
Kings everywhere validated their claims to both temporal and supernatural
power through their lavish lifestyles. Regardless of the extent of their power,
kings, high ofﬁcials, and their families lived in splendid palaces, wore magnif-
icent clothes and elaborate jewellery, and were served by a large number of
retainers. They also entertained lavishly and bestowed rare and valued presents
on their principal supporters. The style and customs of the royal court set a
standard that other people emulated to whatever extent they could afford and
the law permitted. The wealth of kings provided visible evidence of their high
social standing and the power of their kingdoms. At the same time kings were
assiduous in their public and private devotions to the supernatural: building
temples, making elaborate sacriﬁces to the gods, and presiding over lavish

90
Sociopolitical Organization
rituals that ensured the proper functioning of the universe and the welfare of
society.
They also had to guard their personal authority in their relations with others.
Their interactions with their subjects were heavily ritualized and governed by
special etiquette. Among the Inka, for example, even the highest ofﬁcials had
to wear simple clothes, go barefoot, and carry small sacks on their shoulders
when they were granted an audience with the king (Rowe 1944: 259). Among
the Aztec and elsewhere, making eye contact with the ruler was forbidden.
Kings tended to spend much of their time in the private apartments of their
palaces, to which few people other than their servants had access, granting
audiences to only a select few of their subjects and appearing in public only in
connection with major rituals and communal festivities. Royal seclusion was
carried farthest among the Yoruba, whose kings rarely left the inner quarters
of their palaces and appeared in public only with their faces hidden by the
beaded fringe of their crowns (Bascom 1969: 30–31).
To protect their supernatural powers and maintain their ability to com-
municate with and inﬂuence the supernatural, kings were expected to ob-
serve various taboos and penances. Major rituals sometimes required puriﬁ-
cation, fasting, sexual abstinence, and staying awake for long periods. Maya
rulers subjected themselves to painful blood-letting to induce trances that
facilitated communication with the supernatural (Schele and Miller 1986).
Mesopotamian kings had their faces ritually slapped once a year by the high
priest of their city’s patron deity to remind them of the need for humility in
their relations with the gods (Kuhrt 1987: 33).
Kings also had to be able to manage the political affairs of their kingdoms
effectively. Many kings led armies into battle, and their ability to defeat foreign
enemies both reﬂected and reinforced their political power. In centralized
states powerful kings could, if necessary, use force to maintain public order
and keep both ofﬁcials and subject peoples under control. Where power was
less centralized, kings had to rely more on their persuasive and diplomatic skills
(Apter 1992). The political role of kings in preindustrial states was summarized
in an observation that Arab writers attributed to the sixth-century-a.d. Persian
monarch Khosrow I. He is supposed to have remarked that a kingdom could
prosper only if its ruler had the skill to curb the rapacity of his ofﬁcials so
that agriculture and craft production might ﬂourish and support the taxation
system on which royal power depended (R. McC. Adams 1965: 71). Even an
astute Yoruba king could transcend the severe physical and political limitations
of his ofﬁce to curb mutually destructive competition among rival members of
the upper classes and enhance his own authority.

Kingship
91
Finally, it is we, not the people who lived in early civilizations, who differ-
entiate between political and sacred power. The Yoruba believed that a king
who channelled supernatural energy into the human realm played no less a
role in defeating foreign enemies than did the non-royal hereditary ofﬁcial
who led the state’s armies. The New Year’s rituals that played a major role in
Mesopotamian state religious observances, by reenacting and thus renewing
the creation of the world and the establishment of kingship among the gods,
afﬁrmed the parallelism between the earthly realm and that of the celestial
deities on which the prosperity of the earth depended (Hooke 1958). In Egypt
the same verb (h˘
ı) designated the appearance of a king in glory upon his throne
and the dawn, and the generational cycle by which a young king succeeded
an older one complemented the daily birth, death, and rebirth of the sun and
the annual Nile ﬂood. Royal succession was as essential as these natural cycles
because it renewed the cosmic power by which the gods and hence the uni-
verse, no less than Egypt itself, were maintained (Frankfort 1948: 148–61). In
a culture in which kingship was perceived to be ‘a power like that of the gods’
and essential for maintaining the cosmic order, such parallels embraced both
the central ideology and the practical role of kingship.

6 States: City and Territorial
A
state is a politically organized society that is regarded by those who
live in it as sovereign or politically independent and has leaders who
control its social, political, legal, economic, and cultural activities. Two sorts
of state appear to have been associated with early civilizations: city-states and
territorial states.
The term ‘city-state’ has long been employed to describe the polities of
Classical Greece, Renaissance Italy, and parts of ancient Southwest Asia
(Griffeth and Thomas 1981). J. Eric Thompson (1954: 81–82) designated Clas-
sic Maya polities as city-states in the mid-twentieth century. More recently,
city-states have been identiﬁed as the normal form of early state (Nichols and
Charlton 1997) or as one of two types of state that prevailed from antiquity
until the nineteenth century (Hansen 2000). City-states were relatively small
polities, each consisting of an urban core surrounded by farmland containing
smaller units of settlement. In territorial states a ruler governed a larger region
through a multilevelled hierarchy of provincial and local administrators in a
corresponding hierarchy of administrative centres. The distinction between
these two types of states, as they are associated with early civilizations, rests
not only on the size of territories but also on differences in the nature of their
urban centres and in their economic and political organization. Each of the
civilizations being studied consisted of city-states or territorial states but not
both.
The distinction was foreshadowed when Childe (1928; 1934) ﬁrst contrasted
the development of civilization in Egypt and in southern Mesopotamia. He
noted that in southern Mesopotamia monumental architecture, luxury crafts,
and writing had developed within a network of small city-states, while in Egypt
similar developments had occurred under the sponsorship of a single royal
court, all the tiny chiefdoms and early states that had evolved along the Nile
River north of Aswan during the late fourth millennium b.c. having been
92

States: City and Territorial
93
united under the enduring sovereignty of a divine monarch. He attributed this
difference to variations in natural settings and in the techniques devised to
extract surpluses from peasant producers. This distinction was adopted and
extended by Henri Frankfort (1956) and more recently by Charles Maisels
(1990).
Many anthropologists do not accept this dichotomy. The majority of these
see civilizations as evolving in a unilinear fashion from something resembling
ColinRenfrew’s(1975)early-statemoduleintocity-states,territorialstates,and
ﬁnally empires (Allchin 1995; Renfrew 1997; D. Wilson 1997; Yoffee 1997).
In this scheme, city-states and territorial states constitute successive stages
in the development of larger and more complex polities rather than alterna-
tive forms of political organization that occur at the same level of complexity.
Michael Mann (1986), who emphasizes the logistical problems inherent in con-
trolling preindustrial societies, argues that small city-states were of necessity
typical of early civilizations, although he acknowledges that ancient Egypt and
China developed larger and more unitary states at an early period. It has also
been argued that the hegemonic patterns in both Mesopotamia and the Valley
of Mexico provide examples of city-state systems evolving towards territorial
states (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 163).
Marcus (1998: 92) maintains, in contrast, that the ﬁrst states to appear in
any region were territorial states, most of which later broke apart to produce
clusters of city-states. She regards it as unlikely that a group of chiefdoms could
evolve directly into a set of city-states. The development of extremely large
urban centres at very early stages of civilizations such as Uruk in prehistoric
Mesopotamia, Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico, and El Mirador in the
Maya lowlands offers apparent support for this scenario. While much remains
to be learned about how the earliest civilizations developed, the long persis-
tence of both types in different regions of the world suggests that territorial
states and city-states are stable alternatives rather than sequential stages in the
development of more complex societies.
I agree that larger political entities must have evolved from small-scale
beginnings. Yet it appears that the rate at which greater size and complex-
ity developed differed signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another, as
did the relations among political and cultural variables. In trying to impose a
unilinear scheme on the development of Egyptian and Mesopotamian civiliza-
tions, Steward (1949) was forced, by the primary importance that he accorded
to political criteria, to equate the Late Predynastic period, which immediately
preceded the political uniﬁcation of Egypt, with the Early Dynastic period that
preceded political uniﬁcation in Mesopotamia. Yet in Egypt the Late Predynas-
tic period preceded the development of signiﬁcant monumental architecture

94
Sociopolitical Organization
or an elite art style, while in Mesopotamia these features were already present
long before the Early Dynastic period. Renfrew’s early-state module, a political
unit occupying approximately ﬁfteen hundred square kilometres with a popu-
lation averaging about ten thousand people and a principal settlement near the
centre, resembles a small early city-state, but it fails to capture the consider-
able variation in size and political organization that was exhibited by the early
states that European explorers encountered in places such as Buganda, South
Africa, Hawaii, and eastern North America (Claessen and Skaln´ık 1978; Cohen
and Service 1978; Haas 1982). The evidence suggests much greater diversity
in political organization than can be accounted for by a unilinear evolutionary
model. The distinction between city-states and territorial states is an attempt
to recognize that diversity.
city-states
Early city-state civilizations consisted of a network of adjacent, self-governing
city-states. City-states rarely occurred in geographical isolation in early civi-
lizations, although in later periods in the Middle East isolated cities such as
Petra and Palmyra developed along trade routes. The territory controlled by a
small city-state might be less than ten kilometres across, although exceptionally
wealthy or powerful city-states might exceed one hundred kilometres in diame-
ter. City-states also varied in the concentration of their settlement. Contrary to
Anthony Giddens’s (1981) claim that carefully delineated boundaries between
polities are associated only with modern nation-states, boundaries between
early city-states were clearly demarcated by natural features, artiﬁcial mark-
ers, or walled fortiﬁcations. Sentinels or armed guards were often stationed
at such frontiers (McAnany 1995: 85–89). Most city-states had populations
of between ﬁve thousand and twenty thousand people, but some hegemonic
city-states were considerably more populous.
In our sample there are four examples of city-state civilizations: south-
ern Mesopotamia, the Yoruba and Benin states of West Africa, the Valley of
Mexico, and the Classic Maya. Agricultural settlement is documented in south-
ernMesopotamiabyatleasttheﬁfthmillenniumb.c.(Redman1978)(Fig.6.1).
For the Uruk period, between 3500 and 3200 b.c., there is evidence of in-
creasing social stratiﬁcation, organized warfare, urban centres, and a city-state
system. There is also evidence of large public buildings, monumental art,
bronze-casting, cylinder seals, and the earliest record-keeping. By far the
largest city in southern Mesopotamia at this period was Uruk (Erech), which
in the Late Uruk period occupied one hundred hectares and by Early Dy-
nastic I times had expanded to four hundred hectares and may have had a

States: City and Territorial
95
50 E
45 E
40 E
50 E
45 E
40 E
35 N
30 N
35 N
30 N
Persian
Gulf
D
i
yal
a
R
i
v
e
r
Tigris
R
iv
er
E
u
p
h
r
a
t
e
s
R
i
v
e
r
see detailed
 map
0
100 km
50
Tig
ris
Ri
ver
E
u
ph
r
ates
Ri
ve
r
Babylon
Kish
Larak
Nippur
Abu
Salabikh
Isin
Adab
Shurupak
Umma
Girsu
Lagash
Larsa
Uruk
Ur
Eridu
Babylon
Ur
H
a
wr el Hammar
Some major city-states
of 3rd millennium B.C.
Southern
Mesopotamia
Southern
Mesopotamia
N
i
g
er
R
iv
er
Benin
5 E
5 E
5 N
5 N
10 N
10 N
Atlantic
Ocean
Yoruba Civilization
(Water courses modern)
Dzibilchaltun
Coba
Calakmul
Tikal
Naranjo
Seibal
Copan
Quirigua
Piedras
Negras
Tonina
Palenque
Palenque
Caracol
Caracol
20 N
15 N
20 N
15 N
105 W
100 W
95 W
90 W
105 W
100 W
95 W
90 W
Triple Alliance tributary
system and Classic Maya cities
Some Classic Maya centres
Tributary States
0
15 km
5
10
Cauauhtitlan
Xaltocan
Teotihuacan
Texcoco
Chalco
Colhuacan
Coyohuacan
Tlacopan
Azcapotzalco
Tenochtitlan
Lake
Texcoco
Detailed Map of Centre
of Basin of Mexico
Some other city-states
Chinampa zone
Major allied city-states
Causeway
Dyke
0
400
800 km
General Scale
Triple Alliance tributary
system and Classic Maya cities
Tenochtitlan
Colhuacan
Gulf of Mexico
Pacific Ocean
Tenayuca
see detailed
 map
Old Oyo
Ijebu
Owo
Ogbomoso
Ogbomoso
Egbe
Owo
Ife
Ijebu
Old Oyo
Some major cities
Oyo tributary
system ca. 1780
6.1. Maps of city-state civilizations at common scale (same scale as map 6.2).

96
Sociopolitical Organization
population of forty thousand to ﬁfty thousand people (R. McC. Adams 1981:
71, 85). The Uruk period thus witnessed the development of early civiliza-
tion in southern Mesopotamia. While there has been some linguistically based
speculation about ethnic changes prior to the Uruk period, there is striking
continuity in the culture of southern Mesopotamia from Uruk times into the
historical period. Yet archaeological data indicate that social and political or-
ganization may have altered radically at the end of the Uruk period, which
some scholars interpret as a time of severe political disruption (Pollock 1999;
Yoffee 1995: 286–88). A city-state system persisted in southern Mesopotamia
for over ﬁfteen hundred years, until lasting regional uniﬁcation was brought
about following the Old Babylonian dynasty.
Possibly beginning as early as the Uruk period, the inhabitants of some
thirty city-states recognized southern Mesopotamia as a region (kallam) that
possessed cultural unity, although it may already have been seen as divided
into a largely Sumerian-speaking region (kiengi) in the south and an Akkadian-
speaking region (kiuri) in the north. From early times the temple of Enlil in
Nippur, a city that marked the division between these two territories, may
have been, if not the centre of a league of city-states, at least a neutral location
where representatives of these city-states could meet to regulate their affairs
(Maisels 1999: 160–63; Postgate 1992: 34–38; Van De Mieroop 1999: 222–24).
Although the archaeological documentation is less extensive, Yoruba civiliza-
tion evolved from a West African village society based on a largely indigenous
agricultural complex. The origin of Ile Ife, which has remained the ritual cen-
tre of Yoruba civilization, appears to date at least from the ninth century a.d.
Ife was at the apogee of its political power and prosperity from the eleventh
to the ﬁfteenth centuries. About this time another city, Oba, ﬂourished to the
northwest, possibly at the site of Esie. By the ﬁfteenth century Owe rivalled Ife,
and for two hundred years it was the cultural link between Ife and the emerg-
ing state of Benin (Edo), which, although Ewe-speaking, became in terms of
its upper-class culture an integral part of the Yoruba sphere. In the sixteenth
century, the city-state of Oyo, in the northwest, became dominant, exerting its
power for the next two hundred years over Yoruba states to the south and east
of Ife but never seeking to control Ife itself. In the south, Ijebu Ode controlled
the coast between Benin and Lagos from the ﬁfteenth to the eighteenth cen-
tury (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 1–2). In the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, Oyo and Benin were the most powerful states. Thus civilization
has ﬂourished in the Yoruba region in the form of a series of city-states for
over one thousand years (Connah 1975; 1987; Ryder 1969; 1984; Shaw 1978;
Willett 1973). Some Yoruba urban centres have persisted throughout that pe-
riod, others have come into existence or disappeared, and still others have

States: City and Territorial
97
moved to safer locations. In historical times the Yoruba region had twenty or
more kings and more than one hundred subordinate rulers of towns or groups
of villages (R. Smith 1969: 8).
The pattern of city-states recorded in the Valley of Mexico in the early
sixteenth century was the most recent of a series of city-state conﬁgurations
beginning about 650 b.c. By that time the valley had a series of well-deﬁned
settlement hierarchies, the top level of which consisted of sites with several
thousand inhabitants and civic-ceremonial architecture. By 350 b.c. Cuicuilco,
in the southwestern quadrant of the valley, covered at least four hundred
hectares, had a population estimated to have been about twenty thousand,
and contained temple platforms up to twenty metres high. Teotihuacan, in
the northeast quadrant, probably equalled or exceeded Cuicuilco in size and
population. From this point on, periods in which one or a few powerful city-
states dominated regional settlement patterns alternated with periods in which
city-states tended to be more equal in size and power. Centralization was
characteristic of the period between a.d. 100 and 750, when Teotihuacan was
dominant, the period between 950 and 1150, when Tula was the leading centre,
and the Late period, when the Aztec and their Texcocan allies became the most
powerful and populous of some forty to sixty city-states in the valley (Charlton
and Nichols 1997b; Hodge 1984). While the Aztec state of Tenochtitlan may
have had a population of two hundred and ﬁfty thousand, most other states
had between ﬁve thousand and ﬁfty thousand inhabitants.
It is not clear how much ethnic continuity there was in the Valley of Mexico
over this two-thousand-year period. It is also unknown how long Nahuatl-
speaking people have lived in the region. Strong cultural continuity resulted
from new arrivals’ assimilating local cultural traditions. The Aztec’s own his-
tory of their city-state offers an ofﬁcial account of the evolution of Tenochtitlan
from the time when landless Nahuatl-speaking immigrants established it as a
semirural community in 1325 until it had become the dominant city-state in
the valley in the mid-ﬁfteenth century. While the Aztec claimed to have come
from the north, they quickly adopted local institutions and cultural patterns.
Similar but less detailed information is available concerning the older city-
state of Texcoco. Despite varying degrees of hegemony and efforts by rulers to
control and sometimes even to absorb neighbouring city-states, there is no ev-
idence in the Valley of Mexico, any more than among the Yoruba, of city-states’
being replaced by territorial ones. Nor does the extraordinary compression of
population into one major urban centre during the Teotihuacan period support
the idea that city-states developed from a primordial territorial state.
Classic Maya civilization grew out of a tradition of urbanism and monumen-
tal architecture that had become widespread in the Maya lowlands during the

98
Sociopolitical Organization
Late Preclassic period (400 b.c.–a.d. 250), but some of its most distinctive fea-
tures, such as its calendrical long count, stela complex, and increasing focus on
kingship, ﬁrst appeared in the Tikal area in the third century a.d. and gradually
spread from there. Among the Maya a state was identiﬁed by the presence of
a sacred king, but where an administrative centre lacks monumental art and
hence ofﬁcial texts there is no way to determine whether its head was a minor
king who lacked the resources or authority to erect stone monuments or a sub-
ordinate, non-royal ofﬁcial. Therefore it cannot be determined whether small
centres remained kingdoms and were merely rendered tributary to powerful
neighbours or whether they were organically incorporated into larger states.
(A similar uncertainty would apply to the Valley of Mexico in 1519 were it not
for extensive Spanish documentation.) In Late Preclassic times El Mirador
was the largest Maya urban centre. In the Classic period Tikal appears to have
been the most powerful city-state until a.d. 562, when it was encircled and
defeated by an alliance of Calakmul and other city-states, including Caracol.
Calakmul remained the most powerful state until a.d. 695, when it in turn was
defeated by Tikal. After a.d. 750 power appears to have been shared among
a growing number of smaller independent centres (Folan et al. 1995; Sharer
1996).
Assuming that each Maya site that had its own emblem glyph was a separate
state, Peter Mathews (1991: 29) argues that in Late Classic times there were
sixty or more Maya city-states, each controlling about twenty-ﬁve hundred
square kilometres. Any larger units took the form of short-lived tributary sys-
tems in which defeated states remained self-governing. Marcus (1976; 1992b;
1993) has suggested that only polities much larger than this would have been
true states, smaller ones having been de facto chiefdoms. While some Yoruba,
especially in the northeast, lived in chiefdoms, documentary evidence indi-
cates that many small political units, both among the Yoruba and in the Valley
of Mexico, were organized as states. Marcus also argues that the large num-
ber of Maya kingdoms documented after a.d. 750 indicates not that existing
kings were beginning to erect monuments but that the governors of outlying
provinces of large states were declaring their independence and becoming
kings in their own right.
R. E. W. Adams (1986: 437) has proposed that in Late Classic times there
wereonlyeightMayaregionalstates,eachextendingoveraboutthirtythousand
square kilometres. Other Mayanists have envisioned some thirty states, each
averaging about eight thousand square kilometres (Chase and Chase 1996:
805). Some of the largest of these states had at least two levels of regional
centres above that of villages. In the course of their development, dominant
centres appear to have subordinated neighbouring minor polities by removing

States: City and Territorial
99
their sacred rulers or preventing their emergence. Less complete integration
would have created states that were precarious unions of small polities whose
rulers continued to nurture hopes of independence. The extraordinary ﬂour-
ishing of major Maya centres suggests that more complete integration was
frequently achieved. This pattern was very different from the one associated
with the growth of Mesopotamian city-states, whereby the populations of most
surrounding communities were incorporated into evolving central urban com-
plexes (Adams and Nissen 1972). The largest Mayan state was probably Tikal,
which may have controlled 21,095 square kilometres prior to its defeat and
the loss of some of its dependencies in a.d. 562 (Chase and Chase 1996: 805).
This area may, however, have included some tributary states as well as the
subordinate centres that were an integral part of the Tikal polity.
Although larger Maya centres fought with each another and sometimes
reduced one another to tributary status, it seems that they did not try to in-
corporate each other to form still larger states. Instead they aimed to reduce
rival states to self-governing but tributary status for as long as possible. After
its defeat, Tikal, for example, continued to be ruled by its own sacred king.
This may explain why victorious kings only rarely recorded their successes on
monuments erected in the major polities they had defeated (Webster 1998:
317). The survival of sacred kings at centres such as Tikal during periods of
subordination to other centres and the relative ease with which such states
seem to have freed themselves from domination by powerful neighbours sug-
gest that the control of defeated states by their victorious neighbours remained
weak and indirect.
While Anne Pyburn (1997) is correct that, in terms of size, the distinction
between city-states and territorial states may be arbitrary, Maya polities appear
to fall into the general size range of city-states. They also resemble city-states
far more closely than they do territorial states in terms of social, economic, and
cultural criteria. Comparisons with other city-state systems are complicated
by the unusually dispersed nature of Maya rural and urban settlement and
by our very limited understanding of Maya administrative systems. In having
a more dispersed population and therefore more secondary centres, Maya
states resemble Yoruba ones more closely than they do the compactly settled
city-states of the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia.
Each city-state usually had a centrally located capital city. The central loca-
tion of the capital maximized the mutual accessibility of rulers and their sub-
jects, made the capital most easily accessible to rural dwellers, and offered the
city maximum protection against attacks from neighbouring city-states. Urban
centres contained 20 to 80 percent or more of the total population of a city-
state and ranged in size from a few thousand inhabitants to over one hundred

100
Sociopolitical Organization
thousand under exceptional circumstances. In some of the larger city-states
and those with more dispersed populations, the capitals were surrounded by
smaller administrative centres and both of these by numerous subordinate
farming villages or hamlets. Benin is reported to have been surrounded by
several hundred villages, some individually self-governing and others forming
small political groupings or belonging to subordinate chiefdoms (Bradbury
1957: 15). Robin Law (1977: 9) suggests that in the Oyo kingdom the farming
population had been more dispersed during the Old Oyo period than it was in
the nineteenth century, when escalating warfare led people to seek the safety
of the towns. As a result of this relocation, many areas of the countryside came
to be occupied only on a seasonal basis. Elizabeth Stone (1997: 24) has noted
the essentially urban character of the small communities that served as local
administrative centres within city-states.
Where warfare was endemic, a large portion of the farming population of
city-states lived in the main urban centres and worked land as close as possible
to these communities. In Mesopotamia the average city-state was probably
40 kilometres in diameter, about the same size as Renfrew’s early-state mod-
ule. The capitals of adjacent Mesopotamian city-states were often visible from
each other’s ramparts. In the Valley of Mexico, city-state capitals averaged only
7 kilometres apart. Among the Yoruba, the centres of larger city-states, espe-
cially in the more populous south, were located about 40 kilometres from
each other, but the centres of smaller polities (which were not always states)
were much closer together. There was great variation in the size of Yoruba
states. Stephen Houston (1993: 137–38) estimates that large Maya centres
were 40 to 67 kilometres apart and that the mean distance between capi-
tals and subordinate centres was 11.36 kilometres. He argues that city-states
required secondary administrative centres wherever substantial populations
were living more than a day’s walk from a capital and that size alone accounts
for the presence or absence of secondary centres within city-states. Hence,
where individual city-states occupied a small territory or the population was
clustered near the capital, there was no need for secondary centres. Thus, in
Mesopotamia and to a considerable extent in the Valley of Mexico, city-states
tended to consist of urban centres surrounded only by villages. Between 15
and 80 percent of the total population of city-states lived in urban centres.
Members of these societies identiﬁed with the city-state as a whole, not
just with its capital. The Yoruba term ilu, which is usually translated ‘city’,
included the surrounding farmland and designated the entire territory ruled
by an oba (Krapf-Askari 1969: 25–27). The Nahuatl term altepetl or huealtepetl
(big altepetl) likewise referred to an urban centre, its surrounding territory, and
its ruler (M. E. Smith 1996: 163). Sumerian scribes used one word (uru; Akk.

States: City and Territorial
101
¯alum) to designate ‘settlement’ or ‘city’, but many terms to refer to different
kinds of countryside (R. McC. Adams 1981: 137; Van De Mieroop 1999: 10).
The Mesopotamian urban centre and its surrounding farmland were believed
to constitute the estate of its patron deity. The basic geographical focus of
allegiance was the territory that was ruled over by a king or by a tutelary
deity.
Adjacent city-states were in regular contact with one another. While they
were usually self-sufﬁcient in food production, intercity trade was a regular
source of the exotic raw materials needed to manufacture luxury goods and
sometimes necessities and an important source of prestige items. The closer
city-states were to each other and the smaller they were, the more readily
regional economies emerged. Because of their proximity and economic in-
terdependence, city-states also tended to be culturally interdependent and to
share religious beliefs, artistic conventions, and symbolism, especially as these
related to upper-class culture. In Mesopotamia, the city-state of Nippur, which
never aspired to political hegemony, served as a neutral meeting place for rep-
resentatives from other city-states (Postgate 1992: 34). Ife, in its symbolic role
as the world’s ﬁrst city, served as a meeting place for people from all the Yoruba
states; portions of the bodies of dead kings from Benin were brought there for
burial in the place of origin of their divine ancestors (Egharevba 1960: 9). The
rulers and the upper classes of neighbouring city-states also tended to inter-
marry, although such alliances did not prevent warfare as the upper classes of
one city-state sought to enrich themselves at the expense of their neighbours.
Warfare was waged over agricultural land, water rights, and more direct ac-
cess to other resources but above all to force the rulers of weaker states to pay
tribute to the rulers of stronger ones. These varied contacts, which either took
place among the upper classes or were carried out for their beneﬁt, constitute
examples of what Colin Renfrew and John Cherry (1986) called peer-polity
interaction.
Despite their cultural similarities, the inhabitants of adjacent or even single
city-states did not always speak the same language. The Yoruba spoke a single
language that had various dialects (Adetugbo 1973), but Yoruba civilization
embraced the Ewe-speaking Edo people of Benin. The Classic Maya spoke
two closely related languages that are ancestral to Cholan and Yucatec Mayan,
currently spoken in the southern lowlands and the Yucatan Peninsula. These
languages became distinct from other Mayan languages prior to 1500 b.c., and
the southern lowlands appear to have been Cholan-speaking prior to a.d. 1000
(Henderson 1981: 50–52; Houston, Robertson, and Stuart 2000).
Nahuatl was the most widespread language in the Valley of Mexico in
the sixteenth century a.d., being spoken in the dominant city-states of

102
Sociopolitical Organization
Tenochtitlan and Texcoco and smaller neighbouring states in the southern
part of the valley. Other states were composed of Otomi-speakers. While
pejorative ethnic stereotypes abounded, wards of peoples speaking foreign
languages or belonging to different ethnic groups lived amicably alongside
the dominant local people in Tenochtitlan and many other highland Mexican
cities. These enclaves often consisted of families of skilled craft workers who
had been attracted to major centres by enhanced opportunities for obtaining
exotic raw materials and selling their wares. The local upper classes welcomed
such groups because of the special skills they brought with them (Brumﬁel
1994; van Zantwijk 1985: 132–34).
Both Sumerian- and Semitic (Akkadian)-speakers lived in southern
Mesopotamia during the earliest period from which readable records sur-
vive. In general, Akkadian appears to have been more commonly spoken in
the north and Sumerian in the south, but speakers of the two languages lived
alongside each other in most Mesopotamian city-states, with the linguistic mix
differing from one state to another. Some southern city-states had rulers with
Semitic names from earliest times (Postgate 1992: 35–38). The disappearance
of Sumerian as a spoken language by about 1800 b.c. (Crawford 1991: 10) has
been attributed to the gradual ecological decline of far-southern Mesopotamia,
where most Sumerian-speakers lived. It may also be related to the problems
that Sumerian-speakers encountered in reproducing themselves in the dense
and probably unhealthy urban centres that most of them seem to have inhab-
ited during the Early Dynastic period. Unlike the Akkadian-speaking urban
dwellers, who were surrounded by Semitic-speaking agricultural and pastoral
peoples to the north and east, the Sumerians do not appear to have been able
to recruit large numbers of people speaking their language from rural settings
(McNeill 1976: 55–57). The widespread presence of speakers of more than
one language in Mesopotamian and highland Mexican city-states indicates
that membership in a city-state was based primarily on loyalty to a ruler and
to civic and local religious institutions rather than on ethnic criteria. Yet, in
Mesopotamian mythology, the creation of different languages was one of the
means by which the gods weakened humans by sowing discord among them
(Kramer 1981: 357).
The more people lived in large urban centres, the greater was the incentive
to reduce bulk transportation costs by growing as much food as possible nearby.
When considerable numbers of full-time or part-time farmers lived in urban
centres, agricultural production was intensiﬁed on adjacent land in order to
reduce not only transport costs but also the time farmers spent travelling
between their homes and their ﬁelds. There was also a tendency for farmers
who maintained their principal residences in the city to live during periods of

States: City and Territorial
103
peak agricultural labour in temporary shelters or small houses near the ﬁelds
they were cultivating. In the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya food was
also grown within urban centres in kitchen gardens attached to residences.
Even the Maya upper classes had their dependents grow food in gardens that
surrounded their urban residences.
Full-time and part-time artisans tended to live in urban centres in order
to be as close as possible to a large clientele and to suppliers of the exotic
raw materials that many of them needed for their work. Potters, smiths, ﬂint
knappers, and practitioners of other crafts that were polluting or produced
much waste material sometimes lived and worked in nearby rural villages,
where the smoke associated with their activities was less bothersome, waste
was disposed of with less trouble, and fuel was easier to obtain. Even these
sorts of craft workers were, however, found in urban centres, especially if the
materials they worked, such as copper, tin, or obsidian, had to be obtained from
abroad or their products were intended mainly for a wealthy urban clientele
(Schwartz and Falconer 1994; Stone 1990; 1997).
The presence of large numbers of artisans in a single urban community
encouraged craft specialization. Urban markets expanded to facilitate the ex-
change of goods among craft workers, urban and rural farmers, and the urban
upper class. Such markets also facilitated trade among neighbouring city-states
and the exchange of locally manufactured goods for raw materials from less-
developed regions. Market exchange made the products of craft specialists
accessible to all who could afford them, except where sumptuary laws banned
the possession of certain types of luxury goods by the lower classes. Making
the products of craft specialization widely accessible encouraged further craft
specialization, and this in turn may have promoted technological efﬁciency by
making higher-quality implements more widely available.
City-states were generally small enough that all the leading people knew
one another personally. While each city-state was headed by a monarch, royal
powers varied widely from one civilization and one state to another. In general,
power tended to be shared to varying degrees among different institutions, as
well as among the heads of leading families and the wealthiest people, who
were often the same individuals. Policies were decided and issues resolved in
councils.
Thedivinepowersascribedtomonarchsweregenerallylessextensiveincity-
states than in territorial ones. Claims to possess such powers were heightened,
however, not only by the greater effective power of individual rulers but, as
among the Yoruba, by the extent to which rulers were secluded and therefore
unable to exercise power directly. In Mesopotamia, however, a ruler’s personal
strengths and weaknesses seem to have been familiar to everyone.

104
Sociopolitical Organization
territorial states
In other early civilizations territorial states developed at an early stage in the
evolution of social, economic, and cultural complexity (Fig. 6.2). Rather than
quickly disintegrating, as most early states did, they became the focus for the
development of civilizations marked by distinctive political and economic in-
stitutions and by a sharply demarcated upper-class lifestyle. Territorial states
had to construct elaborate administrative hierarchies which were subject to a
considerable degree of centralized control. Sometimes there was a close corre-
lation between a single territorial state and a distinctive civilization, especially
where the state had sharply deﬁned ecological boundaries, as was the case with
Egypt or the Andean highland core of the Inka kingdom. Where there were
no clear ecological boundaries, however, it was possible for several coexisting
territorial states to have generally similar cultures. This appears to have been
the case in northern China.
In the centuries preceding the political uniﬁcation of Egypt, a series of chief-
doms or small early states developed in the northern part of the Nile Valley.
The most important of these polities were located in southern Upper Egypt,
but there appear to have been others in Middle Egypt and the Delta. During
the Late Predynastic period, Egyptian society was characterized by increasing
social stratiﬁcation, economic expansion, and trade, as well as by the develop-
ment of rituals that would later play an important role in Egyptian kingship.
These early states, with their capitals about twenty-ﬁve kilometres apart, prob-
ably resembled in many respects the city-states that had begun to develop in
Mesopotamia in the Early Uruk period. Around 3100 b.c., however, the rulers
of This, one of the major centres in southern Egypt, brought the whole of
Egypt under their rule; a network of competing early states was replaced by
a centralized government which divided Egypt into a series of provinces for
purposes of local administration (T. Wilkinson 1996; 1999). Some unilinear
evolutionists have described the later Egyptian provinces as continuations of
predynastic city-states, but to call them city-states either before or after uni-
ﬁcation is misleading. Many provinces were created as administrative units
long after Egypt had become a territorial state, and the older ones were thor-
oughly transformed by the imposition on them of a higher-level bureaucratic
administration (Goelet 1994: 167).
If local ruling families survived uniﬁcation, they were soon dissociated from
their old territorial power bases and absorbed into the national upper classes.
By Old Kingdom times it was normal for ofﬁcials to hold ofﬁces sequentially
in different parts of the country, with the highest positions to which they
aspired being at the royal court. The only ofﬁces that may have remained

States: City and Territorial
105
0
400
800 km
General Scale
Hatun Colla
Vilcas Waman
Pachacamac
Inkawasi
Tumbez
Santiago
Cochabamba
Cuzco
Jauja
Huanuco
Pampa
Cajamarca
Tumipampa
Quito
Pacific
Ocean
Lake
Titicaca
80 W
20 S
30 S
0
15 S
25 S
5 S
20 S
30 S
15 S
25 S
10 S
0
5 S
75 W
70 W
65 W
Inka Kingdom
(Tawantinsuyu)
Capital
Some major 
administrative centres
Major roads
(after Hyslop 1984)
Frontier
40 N 
35 N
30 N
105 E
110 E
115 E
120 E
105 E
110 E
115 E
120 E
Anyang
Qishan
Zhengzhou
Shangqiu
H
uang
Riv
er
Hu
ai
Rive
r
Yellow
Sea
China
Possible extent of
Shang kingdom
Zhou homeland
Borders of Western Zhou state
Major Shang centres
Bahariya
Oasis
Dakhla
Oasis
Kharga
Oasis
Aswan
Thebes
Abydos
Fayum
Memphis
Pi-Ramesses
Heliopolis
Red
   Sea
Mediterranean Sea
25 N
30 N
35 E
30 E
25 E
25 N
30 N
35 E
30 E
Egypt
Some major 
centres
6.2. Maps of territorial states at common scale (same scale as map 6.1).

106
Sociopolitical Organization
hereditary were those of village headmen. The royal court became the focus for
the development of elaborate art, monumental architecture, literacy, and the
distinctive behavioural patterns that characterized the Egyptian ruling classes
(Frankfort 1956; Strudwick 1985). A common language appears to have been
spoken throughout Egypt prior to uniﬁcation, and this probably made it easier
to promote a sense of national identity.
In the Andean region, chiefdoms and small states had developed along the
Paciﬁc seaboard by at least the second millennium b.c. and in the highlands
somewhat later. More elaborate states were associated with the Moche civiliza-
tion that ﬂourished along the north coast of Peru during the ﬁrst millennium
a.d. The Chimu kingdom, which was centred in the Moche Valley, beginning
in the fourteenth century a.d. controlled most of the north coast of Peru until
it was conquered by the Inka in the 1460s. In the highlands, territorial states
appear to have been established around centres at Tiwanaku and Wari be-
tween a.d. 600 and 1000. These states are believed to have sought to control
mainly key resource areas and may not have been as complexly organized as
the Chimu kingdom (Keatinge 1988; Lumbreras 1974).
When the Inka state developed, probably in the early ﬁfteenth century,
there appear to have been no societies at more than the chiefdom level in
the Cuzco area or the central highlands of Peru. The Inka may have drawn
on surviving remnants of Wari administrative practices, such as their revenue
system (Keatinge 1988: 164), and on Chimu metallurgical technology and
political skills. Their stonework appears to have been inspired by ancient stone
buildings that Inka rulers had seen in the Tiwanaku area. Embarking on a fresh
cycle of Andean state-building in a region that appears to have had no previous
traditions of government on a large scale, the Inka quickly created not only the
largest but the most integrated state constructed by any indigenous people in
the Andean region.
The Inka imposed their administrative system over 984,000 square kilo-
metres and perhaps eight to twelve million people who lived in pockets of
arable land separated by mountains and deserts. They also created a new style
of monumental architecture which, while highly distinctive and imposing, dis-
playsampleevidenceofitsderivationfromtraditionalruralhouses.Inaddition,
they introduced their own distinctive style of urban planning. While the cen-
tral highland core of the Inka state, between Ecuador and Lake Titicaca, bears
the strong imprint of Inka culture, Inka cultural inﬂuence was less intrusive
in coastal regions of Peru, where the highly elaborated forms associated with
older cultures persisted, and in the far south, where only relatively simple
facilities were installed to exploit the mineral resources of thinly populated
regions (Earle 1994).

States: City and Territorial
107
While the highland core was ethnically and linguistically diverse, this was
the region that the Inka were most anxious to weld into a stable political
unit. Nevertheless, even peripheral entities such as the Chimu state were
radically transformed politically in the course of being absorbed into the Inka
administrative system. Ofﬁcials at all levels were required to use Quechua,
which may already have been a lingua franca in the central highlands when
the Inka rulers made it their administrative language (Carpenter 1992: 116–17;
Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 807–9). Hence, while the distinction between
core and periphery is of some heuristic value, the Inka were clearly seeking
to construct an integrated state that stretched from Ecuador as far south as
central Chile. They had been sufﬁciently successful that the Spanish scholar
Bernab´e Cobo (1979: 189), working with sixteenth-century written sources,
described the Inka kingdom as ‘a single republic’.
The Inka rulers divided the territories they conquered into more than eighty
provinces, each ruled by an Inka governor. To produce more or less standard-
sized provinces, they artiﬁcially combined small political groupings and divided
larger states, including the Chimu kingdom, into smaller units. It was not
difﬁcult to dismantle most large states, since chiefdoms that had been recently
incorporated into them had often preserved their sense of identity and were
happy to be liberated. The upper classes of conquered chiefdoms and small
states were co-opted into the new order by being recognized as ofﬁcials at
levels below that of Inka governor. For many of these leaders, the support
they received from the Inka rulers meant an increase in their revenues and
in the coercive power they could exert over their own people. For ordinary
men and women, becoming Inka subjects probably meant producing larger
surpluses than ever before. At the same time, especially in the highlands, the
Inkas’ suppression of local conﬂicts meant that people could often abandon
their hilltop forts and settle near richer valley bottoms, where a wider range
of crops could be grown (D’Altroy and Earle 1985).
In China, by the third millennium b.c. various Lungshanoid cultures of
the Yellow River Valley were characterized by wheel-made pottery, increasing
economic and political inequality, warfare, and the development of ritual prac-
tices such as human sacriﬁce and scapulimancy. Numerous towns surrounded
by stamped-earth walls appear to have dominated smaller settlements spread
across areas of several hundred square kilometres (Yan 1999). None of these
towns exceeded twenty hectares. This suggests the development of complex
chiefdoms or incipient states such as those of Predynastic Egypt or Early Uruk–
period Mesopotamia. Such entities may have had the potential to develop in
the direction of either one or more territorial states or a city-state system.
There is no evidence of royal palaces until the Erlitou phase (2100–1800 b.c.),

108
Sociopolitical Organization
which has been identiﬁed with either the Xia or the early Shang Dynasty of
recorded Chinese history. The oldest known bronze vessels date from this
period (G. Barnes 1993; K. Chang 1986a; 1999; Maisels 1999: 260–341).
The cultural development of the central plain was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by developments occurring to the north, east, and south. During the Erligang
period,contemporarywiththeShangoccupationofZhengzhou,auniformstyle
of bronze casting spread from the central plain over a huge area of northern
and central China and apparently well beyond the borders of any one city-
or territorial state. By the late Shang period, bronze industries very different
from those of the central plain had developed in the Middle Yangzi region,
Sichuan, and other parts of China (Bagley 1999: 208–21).
The Shang state has traditionally been described as a territorial state that
had imposed its rule over the chiefdoms and small states of the central plain,
but some scholars believe it to have been a city-state that had managed to
subdue and extract tribute from a large number of adjacent city-states or a
voluntary federation of city-states (Lewis 1990: 64; Stepugina 1991: 411; Yates
1997). It is possible that the frequent relocations of capitals ascribed to the Xia
and early Shang Dynasties may be a later attempt to construe as a single, linear
succession of kings various rulers who had held power simultaneously (Huber
1988: 75). We now know that later Mesopotamian king lists misinterpreted
the contemporary rulers of various Early Dynastic city-states as dynasties that
had ruled successively over the whole of southern Iraq (Postgate 1992: 26–32).
The later Zhou rulers’ allowing the descendants of the Shang royal family to
continue to hold ofﬁce as the dukes of Song so that they could offer sacriﬁces
to their royal ancestors also suggests a city-state system (Hsu and Linduff 1988:
186).
There is, however, substantial evidence that the Shang kingdom was a ter-
ritorial state that controlled about 230,000 square kilometres. One indication
is the simultaneous use of multiple capitals. It is assumed either that the late
Shang administrative capital was near Shangqiu, in eastern Henan Province,
and that Anyang, some 215 kilometres to the northwest, was a royal ritual and
burial centre (Keightley 1983b: 533; W. Watson 1979) or, as seems more likely
given its more strategic location and its late foundation, that Anyang was the
administrative centre and Shangqiu the ancestral cult site (K. Chang 1980:
210; Chˆeng 1960: 43; Li Chi 1977: 98–104). In either case the late Shang
kingdom clearly had two major centres a considerable distance apart. The
early Shang Dynasty also had two capitals, Bo and Xibo (West Bo), which some
have identiﬁed with the walled sites of Zhengzhou and Shixianggou in Henan
(Maisels 1999: 317–18). (Others have associated Shixiangguo with Tonggong,
another early Shang secondary capital [Zou 1999].) Zou Heng maintains that

States: City and Territorial
109
throughout the Shang Dynasty kings had a number of separate residences
which served as secondary capitals. This evidence suggests that the Shang
ruled over a territorial state that had a core area at least several hundred
kilometres across.
The late Shang rulers led a peripatetic life, travelling with their courts from
one part of their kingdom to another. In the course of their journeys, they
transacted business, sacriﬁced to local deities, hunted, feasted, and joined re-
gional ofﬁcials in putting down local rebellions and waging war against foreign
groups (Keightley 1983b: 552), behaviour typical of the rulers of territorial
states. Rulers of hegemonic city-states required the kings of tributary states
to attend their courts periodically but did not visit tributary states, which
they rightly regarded as dangerous enemy territory (Schele and Freidel 1990:
342). It also appears that writing, chariotry, and large-scale casting of magniﬁ-
cent ceremonial vessels ﬂourished most spectacularly around the Shang royal
capitals.
The oracle-bone evidence from Anyang and later historical records are gen-
erally interpreted as indicating that, until the rulers of a number of regional
states each assumed that title during the Warring States period (481–221 b.c.),
only one ruler was regarded as having the right to be called ‘wang’ (king). While
the Zhou monarchs appear to have called themselves wang prior to overthrow-
ing the Shang kings, this might indicate no more than that, as in Egypt, there
could be rival claimants to the position of universal ruler. In the Western Zhou
period various lords living in the Wei Valley referred to themselves as wang,
suggesting that this title may have been used differently in that region than
it had been in the Shang kingdom (Wang 1999: 242–43). Contemporaneous
Shang inscriptions refer to the same Zhou rulers as ‘hou’ or ‘bo’, which were
major titles but inferior to ‘wang’ in the Shang state.
It appears that, as new areas were incorporated, there was a tendency to
appoint members of the Shang royal clan or other leading Shang families to
rule over them. Populations from core areas were resettled in newly acquired
territories. The establishment of garrison settlements among non-Shang peo-
ples accords with a policy of policing and defending the borders of a territorial
state (Keightley 1979–80: 27). Settlement of border areas may have promoted
the linguistic as well as the cultural assimilation of these areas, resulting in the
spread of the Chinese language into regions where it had not previously been
spoken.
Evidence that Shang culture extended beyond the known borders of the
Shang kingdom does not pose insuperable problems for the notion that it was
a territorial state. In late Shang times, the predynastic Zhou rulers in the Wei
Valley were sometimes subject to the Shang kings and sometimes independent

110
Sociopolitical Organization
of them. They appear to have derived much of their upper-class material
culture from the Shang state and to have emulated the Shang rulers in many
ways. It was later reported that writing was introduced to the Zhou court when
Shang diviners defected there. Of the few sites that have yielded inscribed
oracle bones, all appear to have been associated with the Shang and Zhou royal
families (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 33–67; Rawson 1999: 375–97). This suggests
that these two dynastic lines may have been of special importance in north-
central China, much as later Chinese historians believed. If the Shang kings
hadruledoveraseriesofcity-states,eachstatewouldhavehaditsownking,and
he in turn would likely have had his own diviners. Nor is there stylistic or other
evidence that elaborate bronze vessels were being produced independently
at numerous city-state capitals throughout the Yellow River valley. Western
Zhou elite culture in particular displayed a high degree of uniformity at any
one period. It is unclear whether ritual bronzes were cast in a small number of
government workshops or produced in numerous secondary centres according
to detailed prescriptions (Chˆeng 1963; Kane 1974–75; Rawson 1999; Thorp
1985).
Like the Shang, the predynastic Zhou rulers had multiple capitals. Both
Shang and predynastic Zhou kings appear to have ruled over territorial states
that, after the Zhou rulers broke free of their tributary status, existed brieﬂy
alongside each other until the Zhou conquered their Shang neighbours. The
absence of sharp ecological boundaries to the south and west of the Shang
state allowed more territorial states, such as that of Chu, to develop in that
region. The evolution and functioning of both the Shang and the Western
Zhou polity appear to have resembled the pattern of ancient Egypt more than
that of ancient Mesopotamia. Northern and central China may in the second
millennium b.c. have contained a considerable number of territorial states
(Maisels 1999: 27, 312).
On the basis of the evidence from the early civilizations of Egypt, northern
China, and the Inka, it is possible to identify features that territorial states had
in common and that distinguished them from city-states. First, the total areas
controlled by territorial states tended to be larger than those occupied by city-
state systems. The Valley of Mexico, which was geographically and culturally
distinct from other areas occupied by city-states in highland Mexico, enclosed
some 7,000 square kilometres. Southern Mesopotamia, including both set-
tled areas (never more than 12,000 square kilometres) and adjacent winter
grasslands, covered about 120,000 square kilometres, while the Yoruba states,
together with Benin, occupied about 130,000 square kilometres. The lowland
Maya city-states were spread over 250,000 square kilometres, although most
of the Classic Maya ones were concentrated in the southern half of that area.

States: City and Territorial
111
In contrast, Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt controlled and utilized an area
of about 333,000 square kilometres, of which only 19,000 square kilometres
were not desert. The Shang state at its maximum may have controlled 320,000
square kilometres mainly of rich farmland, but its core was perhaps as small
as 132,000 square kilometres. Finally, the Inka kingdom embraced 980,000
square kilometres, most of which was uncultivable desert, bare rock, or cold
altiplano. Territorial states were able more effectively to control and exploit
non-agricultural land than were city-states.
Second, the cities of territorial states were considerably less populous than
those of city-states. Territorial states were held together by an upper class
whose top stratum consisted of the royal family and the leading families of
the core group that had created and governed the state. Lower-ranking func-
tionaries were recruited from less prestigious members of the core group and
by co-opting high-ranking members of conquered peoples. These rulers and
ofﬁcials, together with their retainers and craft workers, constituted the en-
tire population of urban centres. Because the central government maintained
order and defended the frontiers from external attack, there was no need for
farmers to seek protection there. There is also evidence that the upper classes
sought to isolate themselves geographically from farmers and the lower classes
generally.
Third, the rulers of territorial states had at their disposal much larger sur-
pluses than did those of city-states and were therefore able to create works of
art and architecture on a more massive scale. Egypt’s Great Pyramid was the
largest single construction of the preindustrial era. The Inka erected elabo-
rate stone building complexes at important provincial centres throughout the
twenty-four-hundredkilometre-longcoreoftheirstate.TheShangconstructed
massive, stamped-earth enclosure walls around royal residential complexes, as
well as large palaces. Highly skilled and specialized artisans attached to the
royal court crafted magniﬁcent luxury goods and symbols of authority – bronze
vessels in China, stone vessels and funerary sculpture among the Egyptians,
luxurious cloth and ornaments made of precious metals in Peru. Everywhere
luxury goods included valuable items of personal adornment. A monarch was
able to derive great prestige and reinforce loyalty by bestowing such gifts on
his relatives and ofﬁcials.
Fourth, in territorial states the exercise of royal power required maintaining
a considerable degree of centralized control over the economy. This included
accumulating the surpluses required to support the upper classes, administra-
tion, army, and major construction projects and the production and distribution
of the luxury goods that helped to ensure the loyalty of the king’s supporters.
The size of territorial states necessarily made central political control indirect,

112
Sociopolitical Organization
and therefore it could be challenged or subverted more easily than in city-
states. The Inka and Egyptian rulers controlled foreign trade as well as all
major mining and quarrying projects. While bronze tools were manufactured
in Inka provincial centres, gold objects could not be transported away from
the Cuzco area without ofﬁcial authorization. The central government also
guarded the borders of the kingdom not only against foreign attack but also to
stop dissidents from escaping and to control trade. The Inka, the Egyptian, and
possibly the Chinese rulers fortiﬁed the borders of their kingdoms to control
movement across them. In the early period of the Egyptian state its rulers also
depopulated the regions lying immediately beyond their southern, eastern,
and western borders, apparently resettling many of the foreign peoples who
had lived in these regions in Egypt (Hoffman 1979). The control of borders
‘caged’ the subject populations of early civilizations and made them easier to
control (Mann 1986: 38–40).
Fifth, there was much more continuity in agricultural life in territorial states.
There is archaeological evidence that the uniﬁcation of Egypt was accompa-
nied by signiﬁcant changes in settlement patterns, including the relocation of
many small communities. Some of this relocation may have occurred sponta-
neously as a response to the greater security that followed uniﬁcation; farming
populations that had clustered around major centers, such as Hierakonpo-
lis, may have dispersed, and many farmers may have moved, or been shifted,
north as the Memphis area became administratively important and the hitherto
sparsely populated western Delta was developed (T. Wilkinson 1999: 344–65).
In highland Peru the Inka rulers ordered populations living in fortiﬁed com-
munities on mountaintops to resettle in smaller, open settlements at lower
altitudes and near better agricultural land (Hastorf 1990). There is also ev-
idence of farming groups’ being resettled in Shang and Zhou China as new
lands became available. Because farmers continued to live in villages and close
to the land they worked, however, they remained economically self-sufﬁcient
to a much greater degree and probably preserved the traditions of prestate
village life to a much greater extent than urban-dwelling farmers in city-states
and had less opportunity to develop a desire for goods manufactured in urban
centres. While farmers were fully occupied with agricultural tasks during the
sowing and harvest seasons, they could use the less busy intervening periods
to manufacture the goods they needed (Weber 1976 [1896]: 108).
As a result, in territorial states there was a much larger economic gap be-
tween the upper classes and farmers. The upper classes used goods that were
made by highly skilled, full-time artisans, often from valuable, imported ma-
terials. The rural population continued to use goods that part-time craft work-
ers manufactured from traditional, locally available materials. These products

States: City and Territorial
113
were exchanged at local markets. The main economic transfers between farm-
ers and the upper classes were the taxes and rents that farmers paid to the
government and to landlords. Farmers had few reasons to visit urban centres
or means to obtain luxury goods, except as rewards and gifts from ofﬁcials and
upper-class patrons. They also had less access to new technologies than farmers
in city-states. Agricultural tasks were performed using wood and stone tools,
although artisans who worked for the government were supplied with metal
tools. By contrast, among the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians metal farming
implements became common at approximately the same time that metal tools
became available to full-time craft workers. It would also appear that, because
in territorial states urban centres were smaller, farmers did not have the in-
centive to practice intensive agriculture in their vicinity that they did around
major urban centres in city-state systems.
regional control
Since most of the arguments advanced against the distinction between terri-
torial and city-states turn on the nature of city-state systems, it is necessary to
examine more closely the political structures of such entities.
Confusion has been compounded by historians and political scientists ap-
plying the term ‘empire’ to two very different sorts of domination: integrated
(or direct) and hegemonic (or indirect). Later preindustrial polities sought to
administer conquered states directly, usually in order to exploit them more
ruthlessly. The most ambitious and politically successful of these empires
were eventually transformed into enduring regional states, while others ex-
panded and contracted according to the power of the dominant state. Hege-
monic empires ruled through indirect control, using a combination of force
and persuasion to gain compliance and exact tribute payments from subor-
dinate but still largely autonomous rulers (M. E. Smith 1996: 173–74). To
avoid conﬂating these two very different types of political structures and en-
couraging anachronistic views, I will refer to hegemonic ‘empires’ as tributary
systems.
Recent studies indicate signiﬁcant variations in the sizes and populations of
city-states within a city-state system as well as in particular city-states from one
period to another (Hodge 1984). City-state systems frequently produced one
or more city-states that dominated their neighbours militarily. These are often
referred to as hegemonic city-states. In extreme cases the reallocation of wealth
that such political domination brought about produced primate settlement
patterns that resemble those found in later regional states. Yet, because of the
differences in layout of the urban centres associated with them, such city-state

114
Sociopolitical Organization
systems can easily be distinguished archaeologically from the territorial states
found among early civilizations.
The Aztec, together with their Texcocan and Tlacopan allies, constituted
the so-called Triple Alliance, which they had established in the early 1400s. By
the early sixteenth century this military alliance had come to dominate about
450 city-states, spread over the whole of the Valley of Mexico and much of
central Mexico from the Gulf of Mexico to the Paciﬁc Ocean. Tlacopan was a
minor partner, perhaps included in the alliance primarily for ritual purposes
(Spath 1973), and over time the Aztec came to dominate their Texcocan allies.
Tributary payments were imposed on conquered city-states within the areas
controlled by each of these three states, and tributary rulers were required to
provision alliance armies passing through their territory and to convey trib-
ute from farther away through their domains to hegemonic capitals. Yet, in
general, the Aztec and their allies left local kings in place and intervened only
occasionally in the routine administration of conquered city-states. States lo-
cated beyond the Valley of Mexico tended to be governed internally as before.
If a local king was especially troublesome, the Aztec might replace him with a
more accommodating relative. Only rarely did they replace such a ruler with an
Aztec governor. Even when they did, kingship was usually restored to the local
ruling family as soon as an acceptable candidate, usually a son of the deposed
king, was old enough to rule. Only a few very intractable city-states, located
in crucial areas where alliances with powerful external enemies were possible,
were dismantled. The men and women were killed, their children distributed
for adoption among neighbouring city-states, and the emptied cities repopu-
lated with colonists from the Valley of Mexico under the leadership of lords
who were related to the Triple Alliance kings (Hassig 1988: 174–75, 207–8).
Despite historical accounts of such resettlements, little in the way of Aztec art
or cultural inﬂuence is evident beyond the Valley of Mexico. For the most part,
life continued as before in conquered city-states, except that commoners had
to either work harder to meet tribute payments or accept a lower standard of
living and that it was more difﬁcult to disobey local kings. The Aztec sought to
control distant tributary states by spying on them, mercilessly crushing overt
resistance, and imposing still heavier tribute upon reconquered states (Barlow
1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hicks 1994; Hodge and Smith 1994; M. E. Smith
1986).
Within the Valley of Mexico, the Aztec and their allies intervened to a greater
degree in the affairs of tributary city-states. They politically reorganized a few
smallerandweakerstatesinordertofacilitatetributecollection.Thesechanges
took the form of more effectively centralizing some states and amalgamating
others. The Texcocans went farther than the Aztec by appointing the rulers

States: City and Territorial
115
of nearby tributary city-states to Texcoco’s governing councils, including the
highest-ranking one, which advised the Texcocan tlatoani. This arrangement
did not, however, extinguish the formal independence of these states, which
continued to be ruled by their own kings (Offner 1983). To a greater extent
than outside the Valley of Mexico, the Aztec and Texcocan rulers married their
daughters and those of high-ranking nobles to the kings of subordinate city-
states. By doing so they ensured that eventually many of these rulers were
related to their hegemons. Subordinate kings were required to attend major
religiousrituals,includingcoronationsandvictorycelebrations,inTenochtitlan
and Texcoco. Land that was exchanged as wedding presents made rulers of
tributary city-states increasingly dependent on property located outside their
own city-states and therefore supportive of the larger order created by the
Triple Alliance. Rulers of nearby tributary states were frequently called upon
to supply soldiers for military campaigns outside the Valley of Mexico and
labour and materials for maintaining palaces and undertaking major public
construction projects in the Aztec and Texcocan capitals. The hegemonic states
also used their power to rearrange interstate market cycles and trading patterns
to their own advantage and turned much of the southern wetlands of the Valley
of Mexico into food-producing areas for Tenochtitlan and Texcoco (Brumﬁel
1983; Hodge 1984).
Yet the economic integration of the Valley of Mexico greatly outstripped its
political integration. The most extreme example of political incorporation was
the Aztec’s annexation of the neighbouring city-state of Tlatelolco in the late
ﬁfteenth century. The capitals of these two states had been located alongside
each other on the same island in Lake Texcoco, where both cities had expanded
until they had physically coalesced. Growing rivalry had resulted in the Aztec’s
conquering Tlatelolco and suppressing its ruling dynasty. Yet Tlatelolco re-
tained its civic centre and remained a highly prosperous ﬁfth administrative
division of the Aztec capital. The treatment of Tlatelolco suggests that groups
living in the Valley of Mexico were very reluctant to suppress existing states
(Charlton and Nichols 1997b: 203–4).
Events that occurred during the Spanish conquest demonstrate that even
the Valley of Mexico, which was more politically and economically consolidated
than the rest of the Aztec tributary system, still consisted of a series of city-
states, varying in size and subjected, with varying degrees of willingness, to
the Aztec and their allies. Kings of states located within a few kilometres
of Tenochtitlan allied themselves with the Spanish in order to stop paying
tribute to the Aztec. When the king of Texcoco died shortly before the Spanish
arrived, the Aztec pressured their Texcoco allies to make his young son by
the sister of the Aztec king their new monarch. This resulted in a civil war

116
Sociopolitical Organization
that divided Texcoco. An older half-brother of the new Texcocan king allied
himself with the Spanish in a bid to seize the throne (Offner 1983: 238–41). It is
thus clear that, while the Aztec interfered in the affairs of tributary and allied
states for various political and economic reasons, their ‘empire’ remained a
tributary system imposed on a large number of city-states that had remained
self-governing. Whatever manipulations went on, there does not appear to
have been any concerted plan to transform these states into a larger and more
consolidated political entity.
Like the Valley of Mexico prior to the hegemony of Tenochtitlan, the Yoruba
city-state system was dominated by a small number of powerful city-states.
In the early nineteenth century, Yoruba polities varied greatly in size and
power.Whenthemorepowerfulonesconqueredtheirneighbours,theydidnot
suppresstheirgovernmentsorremovetheirkings,mostofwhomwerebelieved
to be fraternally descended from a single divine ancestor and therefore related
to one another (R. Smith 1969: 109). They did, however, attempt to prevent
subordinate community leaders (bale) from assuming the title of oba or minor
obas from upgrading their status (Apter 1992: 21–22). In the Oyo tributary
system, subordinate obas were not allowed to wear a beaded crown (ade)
or to have eunuchs as retainers (Law 1977: 98–99). Yet, among the Yoruba,
hegemonic states did not interfere routinely in the internal government of
tributary states. Instead, they imposed tribute on their weaker neighbours and
rearranged long-distance trade routes that passed through such states to their
own advantage. Much of the wealth and power of the kingdom of Oyo was
ensured by its controlling trade passing through subject states to the south.
Hegemonic rulers installed ajele (agents) to observe and report the actions of
the kings and governing councils of tributary states. Oyo ajele were inducted
into the cult of Sango, the thunder god and son of Oduduwa, from whom the
Oyo kings traced their descent. Such agents could, in emergencies, become
possessed by Sango and, on that basis, claim supernatural authority superior
to that of the local oba and his councillors. These agents reported to the Otun
Iwefa, the chief Oyo palace eunuch in charge of religious matters, and to the
Sango cult through the ilari, palace messengers and Sango priests (Apter 1992:
20–21).
In the Early Dynastic period southern Mesopotamia was a network of city-
states, each with its own ruler. A number of city-states dominated all or most
of southern Mesopotamia at various times, but there were also periods in
which no single state dominated the region. Some states fought repeatedly
with one another and imposed tribute and heavy reparations on their defeated
neighbours, as well as making minor border adjustments. Hegemonic states
grew richer and more populous and their urban centres expanded as a result

States: City and Territorial
117
of the wealth they obtained in this fashion. There is no evidence, however, that
such states suppressed the governments of conquered city-states or interfered
with their routine internal administration.
EffortsatregionalcontrolwentmuchfartherinMesopotamiathantheywere
to do in the Valley of Mexico as successive hegemons adopted different policies
for maintaining long-term political and economic control. The ﬁrst regional
hegemony in Mesopotamia, apart from an early and perhaps mythologized
one by the kings of Kish (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 141–43; Steinkeller 1993),
occurred when Sargon of Akkad conquered the other southern Mesopotamian
states around 2350 b.c. He replaced their kings with his own followers and
installed Akkadian garrisons in conquered cities. Local ruling families were,
however, soon restored after the collapse of Akkadian power. A second (or
third) round of centralization occurred during the Ur III period. The Ur III
rulers subordinated or replaced rulers of conquered city-states, which they
attempted to control by means of a civilian government largely composed of
prominent local people and a military governor (ˇsagina) who was related to the
Ur royal family (Postgate 1992: 151–52). Building on Akkadian precedents, the
Ur III rulers reserved the title ensi, which in the past had signiﬁed indepen-
dent kingship, for the leader or governor of a subject city-state. These ensis,
appointed by the king, were not allowed to enter into alliances or wage war on
their own. Many of them were, however, former local rulers or close members
of their families, and their posts could be passed from father to son. A subor-
dinate city-state could construe the term ‘ensi’ as evidence of the continuity of
its kingship. A third period of centralized rule was initiated by the Babylonian
king Hammurabi around 1760 b.c. (Postgate 1992: 34–46, 151).
Cultural evolutionists have interpreted the recurrent cycles of uniﬁcation
that began in the Akkadian period as evidence of a transition from city-state
to territorial state, but this interpretation does not account for the strenu-
ous efforts by city-states to resist uniﬁcation. The Akkadian rulers constantly
had to suppress rebellions; the Ur III hegemony, although it was reinforced
by regional economic controls, collapsed quickly; and Hammurabi’s uniﬁca-
tion lasted for only two reigns (Yoffee 1991: 299–300). Elizabeth Stone (1997)
argues that one of the major factors maintaining a city-state form of gov-
ernment in Mesopotamia was the reluctance of those who lived in these
states to abandon a heterarchical pattern of political interaction. Norman
Yoffee (1995: 290–92) has suggested that the earliest tendencies towards po-
litical uniﬁcation were modelled on the tribal organization of society that pre-
vailed in the Semitic-speaking areas of central and northern Mesopotamia and
were resisted by the Sumerian-speaking city dwellers of the south. Elsewhere
(1997:258)heproposesthatMesopotamiancity-stateswere‘neversuccessfully

118
Sociopolitical Organization
absorbed into territorial states until non-Mesopotamian political systems and
non-Mesopotamian ideologies of governance reformulated the social and nat-
ural landscapes of the area’. Hegemony was viewed as a power that the gods
rotated from one city to another until Hammurabi claimed everlasting kingship
for his capital city of Babylon (Jacobsen 1976: 189). The regional kingdoms that
developed after the Old Babylonian period in Mesopotamia did not resem-
ble early territorial states; urban centres retained their identity, administrative
councils, and specialized economic functions within them (Maisels 1990: 172).
Although fewer farmers now had reason to live in cities, their demands for
manufactured goods and services continued to support large urban popula-
tions. Cities also retained numerous privileges and forms of self-government,
although they were now permanently under the control of regional kings. Thus
the cities of Babylonia during the ﬁrst millennium b.c. did not at all resemble
the administrative and court centres of early territorial states.
The longevity of city-state systems and their resistance to political uniﬁcation
is demonstrated by their persistence, despite hegemonic tendencies, for over
a millennium in highland Mexico, among the Maya, and in West Africa until
each of them was subjected to European colonization. In Mesopotamia, city-
states, after successfully resisting incorporation into larger political systems for
more than ﬁfteen hundred years, were not transformed into territorial states
but absorbed into regional kingdoms.
Unlike a hegemonic city-state system, the Inka ‘empire’ was organized as
a series of provinces ruled by the Inka upper class. Governorships were not
allowed to become hereditary. Provinces were governed from administrative
centres which were not loci of population and often were new foundations.
Local rulers, who in the central highlands were mostly descended from hered-
itary chiefs, administered largely rural populations. Their executive powers
were subject to the approval of the provincial governor. To reduce the power
of conquered groups, portions of large or potentially rebellious peoples were
sent as colonists to far-off regions of the Inka state and replaced by reliable set-
tlers from older parts of the kingdom (Patterson 1987). To construe as tributary
city-states even administrative units composed of as many as ten thousand fam-
ilies is unrealistic, since they lacked the key features of such polities, including
urban centres inhabited by craftsmen supplying a regional market.
While the Inka state was terminated by European conquest, the territorial
states in Egypt and northern China evolved into regional states that, as the
result of a process of convergence, shared many features with the urbanized
regional states that had developed out of a city-state system in Mesopotamia.
In Egypt this development began to occur in the late New Kingdom, when
the central government lost control over foreign trade and the production of

States: City and Territorial
119
luxury goods. Administrative centres were transformed into loci of indepen-
dent trade, manufacturing, and the exchange of manufactured goods with a
rural hinterland. As a result, the number of urban dwellers increased. Rulers
had to rely increasingly on the use of military force and develop the ability
to tax an economy that they no longer directly controlled to any signiﬁcant
degree. In China it took almost a millennium for a territorial state to evolve
into regional kingdoms in which monarchs ruled directly over family units
and land was privately owned. While farmers continued in their spare time to
manufacture most of the goods they required, large cities became centres of
upper-class life and specialized production (Shen 1994). In the fourth century
b.c., the various Chinese regional states were militarily united to form a single
imperial state. Whether urbanized regional kingdoms in various parts of the
world developed from city-states or territorial states, they had many features
in common and were signiﬁcantly different from both the city- and territorial
states that had preceded them.
In the chapters that follow, the distinction between city-states and territo-
rial states will provide an important framework for understanding functional
patterning as it relates to variation in forms of social organization, economic
behaviour, and culture in early civilizations. This distinction can help to explain
features of early civilizations that were neither common to all early civilizations
nor idiosyncratic.

7 Urbanism
U
rban centres were features of all early civilizations (Bairoch 1988:
1–70). Contrary to a once fashionable belief, there is no evidence of a
‘civilization without cities’ (J. Wilson 1960), and this includes early civilizations
in which, instead of cities, there were supposed to be ‘ceremonial centres’
inhabitedonlybyafewpriests,wherepeoplefromthesurroundingcountryside
assembled periodically for religious observances (J. Thompson 1954; Wheatley
1971). Nevertheless, the nature of their cities varied considerably.
Towns and cities were once deﬁned as communities of non-food-producers
with a minimum of 5,000 people or a population density of at least 386 people
per square kilometre (Burgess 1926: 118), but such deﬁnitions have been
abandoned. Some legally chartered ‘cities’ in medieval Europe had only a
few thousand inhabitants, while ‘farming villages’ in Eastern Europe and Italy
often had several times that number (Chisholm 1962: 60–61). In parts of China
and Indonesia rural population densities have long exceeded 386 people per
square kilometre (Cressey 1955: 15; Huntington 1956: 428). Finally, both in
early civilizations and in other preindustrial societies, considerable numbers
of farmers lived in urban centres. As recently as 1910, almost 10 percent of
the population of Cairo consisted of full-time cultivators (Abu-Lughod 1969:
164). The key deﬁning feature of an urban centre is that it performs specialized
functions in relation to a broader hinterland (Trigger 1972). The largest entities
of this sort in early civilizations were the capitals of city-states and the capitals
and provincial administrative centres of territorial states, which normally had
at least a few thousand inhabitants. Below these settlements were towns and
villages that performed a more restricted number of specialized functions for
smaller hinterlands. Yet cities, towns, and service villages are at best arbitrary
units of a continuum of size and function, not structurally or functionally dis-
tinct entities. Deﬁnitions based on arbitrary quantitative divisions appear to
bear little relation to concepts used in early civilizations and rarely contribute
120

Urbanism
121
to a better understanding of urban phenomena (Vining 1955: 169). I will refer
to relatively large, specialized settlements as ‘cities’, ‘towns’, ‘urban centres’,
or ‘administrative centres’.
Whatever else their function, cities were places where the upper classes of
early civilizations lived, along with most people who did not produce food.
They were the main locations of high-level political and administrative ac-
tivities, specialized craft production, marketing, long-distance trade, higher
education, artistic and cultural achievements, conspicuous display, court life,
and religious rituals. With rare exceptions, important temples, palaces, and
public buildings were located in urban centres. While these centres usually
depended on food produced in the surrounding countryside, they contained
all the institutions and produced everything that made the lives of the up-
per classes distinctive and worthwhile. Major cities impressed visitors by their
scale, richness, and architectural magniﬁcence and the grandeur of what went
on in them. These attributes stressed the insigniﬁcance of the ordinary person,
the power and legitimacy of the ruler, and the concentration of supernatural
power (Rapoport 1993). It is therefore not surprising that the development of
cities was strongly promoted by the upper classes, who used them to pursue
their personal and collective goals.
Attributing the origin of all the cities of early civilizations to their religious
functions (Wheatley 1971) is inconsistent with archaeological evidence, and
it is not particularly helpful to trichotomize all preindustrial urban centres
as regal-ritual, administrative, or mercantile (Fox 1977). The role of cities in
earlycivilizationswastoperformspecializedfunctionsinthecontextofalargely
agricultural and relatively undifferentiated hinterland (Mabogunje 1962: 3–4).
Concentrating a wide range of specialized functions in major centres made it
possible to achieve signiﬁcant economies of scale. If long-distance traders and
skilled metallurgists lived in the same community, it was easy for metallurgists
to obtain imported metal ingots and to sell or consign their surplus production
tomerchantsforexport.Metallurgistscouldalsohopetoﬁndincitiesthewidest
range of institutional and individual buyers for their products. Proximity was
convenient for the upper classes, since it facilitated access to all the goods
and services they required and enhanced their ability to monitor specialized
activities in ways that increased their power and well-being (Garner 1967).
The logistical and political considerations that encouraged the concentration
of specialized functions in urban centres were the exact opposite of those that,
under ideal circumstances, motivated subsistence farmers to live, dispersed in
small groups, as close as possible to the land they worked.
The largest community in each city-state was usually located near its centre.
Its central location minimized the cost of transportation and communication

122
Sociopolitical Organization
between it and the rest of the polity. Some city-states, especially if they were
small or highly nucleated, had only a single administrative centre. Larger city-
states and those with more dispersed settlement patterns had capital cities
encircled at a distance of perhaps ten kilometres by smaller secondary ad-
ministrative centres, each of which might in turn be surrounded by tertiary
centres. Territorial states had numerous centres in nested hierarchies, with the
larger ones being fewer and providing higher-level services for larger areas.
Higher-level centres also contained the largest buildings and were inhabited
by the most important people (Trigger 1972).
Major temples, palaces, and markets tended to be located in the centres
of cities. Population was usually denser in the core than towards the outer
limits, and the residences of prominent people tended to be concentrated
there. Servants and retainers lived close to the people for whom they worked,
which made the division of cities into different areas inhabited by rich and poor
less clear than it is in modern industrial cities. Messy and polluting activities
tended to be performed on the outskirts of cities if they were not banished to
the countryside.
All cities faced problems of provisioning and waste disposal that they
managed with varying degrees of rigour and success. In Egyptian and
Mesopotamian cities, water was drawn from rivers, canals, wells, and cisterns
and transported to homes that lacked their own wells either by hand or by
donkey (Van De Mieroop 1999: 158–61). The Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan,
located in the middle of a shallow saline lake, was supplied with fresh water by
aqueducts that ran along the causeways linking the city to the mainland. In the
Maya lowlands, where the porous limestone bedrock often left little surface
water available during the dry season, many Classic Maya communities were
forced to collect water and store it in underground cisterns (chultuns) and
large open reservoirs. Many reservoirs in the centres of cities were established
in abandoned quarries from which building material had been extracted. The
large buildings and plastered plazas that the Maya constructed in urban cen-
tres were designed to collect rainwater and channel it into these reservoirs
(Scarborough 1993).
Both the highland Mexicans and the Classic Maya recycled household or-
ganic waste onto garden plots near their houses, which they were able to
multicrop in perpetuity. The large gardens that Maya households cultivated
must have converted all their organic waste into fertilizer for their own use
(Fedick 1996a). The Aztec, having much smaller garden plots, collected sur-
plus household organic waste and conveyed it by canoe to agricultural areas
outside the city. The movement of goods was facilitated by a network of alter-
nating streets and canals that ran parallel to one another. Dwellings normally

Urbanism
123
opened onto a street while their gardens faced a canal. Each canal was ﬂanked
by low dykes that protected nearby homes against small rises in lake level
(Dur´an 1971: 231). The Maya appear to have collected inorganic waste near
their houses and transported it periodically to the inner cities, where it was
used for construction ﬁll (Moholy-Nagy 1997). Aztec ofﬁcials organized corv´ee
labour to keep city streets and public spaces clean, but in Egypt as late as the
New Kingdom garbage was dumped on vacant land between buildings (Kemp
1989: 300).
The dead were sometimes buried within communities. The Yoruba interred
family members inside house compounds and the Maya in house platforms.
In Mesopotamia major cemeteries sometimes were located in the central
precincts of cities, but the dead were also buried in vaults beneath their houses.
The Egyptians, Inka, and Shang Chinese normally interred their dead in ceme-
teries located outside their settlements.
Even in urban centres where attention was paid to hygiene, sanitary con-
ditions must have remained well below modern standards. This likely created
more serious health problems in larger cities than in smaller ones and more in
crowded urban centres than in communities where houses were more widely
separated. Many diseases, such as measles, rubella, smallpox, colds, and in-
ﬂuenza, require interactive populations of three hundred thousand to ﬁve
hundred thousand individuals to become endemic and therefore must have
ﬂourished in early civilizations as they had never done before (M. Cohen 1989:
49–50). Greater proximity to domestic animals enhanced the transmission of
serious infectious diseases in Old World civilizations by comparison with New
World ones (McNeill 1976: 45). Demographic data from selected Old World
urban centres and from Teotihuacan indicate a relatively short life expectancy
in both hemispheres (Storey 1985). While detailed demographic information
is not available, it is possible that in at least some of these early civilizations
large urban populations were unable to reproduce themselves – a situation
that prevailed in many urban centres until the advent of modern preventive
medicine (McNeill 1976: 55–57). Under these conditions, a continuing inﬂux
of rural people would have been essential.
urbanism in city-states
Each city-state normally had a single primary centre, which served as its capital.
The atypical city-state of Lagash in southern Mesopotamia had three large
centres: Lagash (El Hiba), Girsu (Telloh), and Nina (Zurghul), the ﬁrst two of
whichservedinturnasitscapitalduringtheEarlyDynasticperiod(Falkenstein
1974 [1954]: 6–7). Multiple urban centres of this sort presumably arose as the

124
Sociopolitical Organization
result of a federation of two or more neighbouring polities. The capitals of
city-states normally had from a few thousand to as many as ﬁfty thousand
inhabitants, although occasionally the capital of a hegemonic city-state might
have one hundred thousand or more residents.
In city-states a high proportion of the population tended to live in the main
urban centres. The extent of concentration varied from one early civilization
to another and according to the political and economic circumstances of indi-
vidual city-states. Because rural/urban boundaries tended to be fuzzy and the
boundaries of states are rarely known, it is difﬁcult to estimate what percent-
age of the population of any particular Maya state lived in urban centres. It
has been estimated that 15 to 35 percent of the population may have lived in
urban centres in most Maya city-states, although in some states this ﬁgure may
have been as high as 50 percent (Chase, Chase, and Haviland 1990). Sanders,
Parsons, and Santley (1979: 154, 162) have estimated that in most parts of the
Valley of Mexico 30 percent of the population lived in urban centres; however,
because of the large number of people living in Tenochtitlan and a few other
large centres, the overall ﬁgure was 50 percent.
Fifty percent or more of Yoruba are reported to have lived in capitals (ilu
alade, or ‘crowned settlements’), where an oba who wore a crown with a beaded
face-covering reigned, or in surrounding towns (ilu oloja, market towns) that
were sometimes ruled by a subordinate oba (who could not wear this sort
of crown). Most Yoruba extended families had their main residences in such
centres, although some members of each extended family spent all or part
of the time living in villages (ileto), hamlets (abule), or isolated homesteads
(ago, aba) producing food. The Yoruba clearly distinguished ‘town people’ (ara
ilu), who belonged to kin groups having rights of urban residence, from ‘farm
people’ (ara oko), who were regarded as culturally inferior (Lloyd 1974: 32).
Yet secondary towns, villages, and homesteads were all classiﬁed as ilu ereko
(settlements on the fringe of farmland) to distinguish them from the main
urban centres (Bascom 1969: 3–4; Krapf-Askari 1969: 25–28).
The highest concentrations of population in urban centres were achieved
in Early Dynastic southern Mesopotamia, where, depending on the region, 70
to 80 percent of the population lived in cities and towns, from which many
farmed the surrounding countryside (R. McC. Adams 1981: 90–94). At this
time there were few permanent settlements of any sort in this region apart
from city-state capitals. Although the rural population increased after the Early
Dynastic period, rural settlements were abandoned again as a result of Amorite
invasions around 2000 b.c. (Postgate 1992: 86).
The main reason so many people lived in urban centres was the greater pro-
tection these cities offered to houses and property where and when intercity

Urbanism
125
conﬂict was prevalent. Mesopotamian and Yoruba cities were normally walled
to protect them from attack. The mud-brick ramparts surrounding some
Mesopotamian cities appear to have been intended not just for practical de-
fense but to impress potential enemies with the strength and unity of the city
that had constructed them; in the Gilgamesh epic the walls of Uruk – 9.5 kilo-
metres in circumference, with bastions every 9 metres, and still 7 metres high
(Huot 1989: 227) – were celebrated in these terms (Jacobsen 1976: 196).
Despite endemic warfare among city-states, walled cities were much less
common in the Western Hemisphere (Sanders and Webster 1988). Tenochti-
tlan was approached by causeways with removable bridges, but most city-
state capitals in the Valley of Mexico had no physical barriers around their
perimeters. Guards appear to have been stationed on the frontiers of city-
states to monitor travel and watch for invaders, and rulers were reported to
have guarded their capitals day and night (Dur´an 1964: 61, 192). For the most
part, however, highland Mexicans built walls around their ritual centres, other
major buildings, and houses rather than around the city as a whole. Their
chief defence appears to have been to lure enemy forces into the city, where
they would be forced by the street pattern to break into smaller groups that
could be fought from rooftops and ramparts. The ﬁnal point of defence was
the major temple platform in the city centre. Setting ﬁre to the shrines atop
such platforms symbolized the defeat of a city by its attackers (Hassig 1988:
62–105).
At an early period in its history the Maya city of Tikal constructed earth
walls between swamps at its north and south ends, presumably as a form of
protection (Culbert, Levi, and Cruz 1990: 115). The approaches to some other
Maya cities were impeded by swamps and other difﬁcult terrain. While Maya
civic centres contained enclosed areas that could easily be defended, ordinary
house groups, which were arranged on low platforms constructed around three
or four sides of open courts, would have been relatively vulnerable to attack. A
log palisade was constructed around the central plaza of the city of Dos Pilos
during the ﬁnal years of its existence (Schele and Freidel 1990: 505).
Since individual farmers in the early civilizations were able to produce only
relatively small food surpluses, most people of necessity engaged in agricultural
production. Where urban centres contained more than 15 percent of a state’s
total population, they must have been home to some full-time farmers. As we
have seen, many Yoruba lived full-time in cities and worked land that their
families owned nearby. Early Dynastic Mesopotamian cities appear to have
housed the vast majority of full-time farmers; where 80 percent of the total
population lived in cities at least 75 percent of urban dwellers would have been
farmers.

126
Sociopolitical Organization
As for Tenochtitlan, some argue that its island core was occupied exclusively
by non-food producers, many of them craft specialists, fed by full-time agri-
culturalists from as far south as Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco (Calnek 1976;
Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 154–55, 177–78) and by tributary states
throughout the valley. Others maintain that many of its residents were full-
time farmers who grew crops on the fringes of the city centre (M. E. Smith
1996: 195–201). The large dykes that the Aztec constructed to regulate wa-
ter levels and reduce salinity in the area around Tenochtitlan would have had
as one of their goals to support such agriculture. Economic specialization on
the scale that would have been required for Tenochtitlan to have been a city
of non-food-producers is attested for no other early civilization in this study,
although it is known from some later preindustrial societies. Further, a pre-
dominance of craft specialists in Tenochtitlan is inconsistent with the extensive
craft production and exchange documented for other city-states in the valley. I
therefore tend to view Tenochtitlan as a city containing a considerable number
of full-time farmers.
The urban centres of city-states frequently contained extensive areas that
were not built over. I have already mentioned the kitchen gardens of Aztec
and Maya cities. Mesopotamian cities had orchards as well as gardens inside
the city walls, where fruit trees would have been safe from destruction by the
enemy. These plots appear to have been privately owned, and therefore not
everyone had access to their produce (Van De Mieroop 1999). Some Yoruba
cities had thick forests just inside their walls that aided in defence and could be
cleared to produce food in times of danger (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 24). Forests
were left standing within the grounds of royal palaces to supply the wild plants
that the obas needed to perform important rituals (Ojo 1966b: 22, 36).
The majority of full-time craft specialists tended to live and work in urban
centres, where they produced goods for the upper classes and for sale to each
other and to farmers living in the city and in the surrounding countryside.
Workers specializing in a particular craft sometimes lived adjacent to one
another in the same part of the city. Some urban farmers also worked on a
part-time basis as craft specialists. Craft workers and urban farmers together
constituted a large and easily mobilized pool of manpower for defending the
city and waging war against its enemies.
Both in the Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba, public markets located
in special open spaces near the centres of cities played a prominent role in
facilitating the exchange of goods. In Mesopotamia, shop-lined streets indicate
vigorous commercial activity involving large numbers of people, and retailing
there may have resembled the bazaars of modern Middle Eastern urban cen-
tres (Postgate 1992: 79). For the Maya, plazas may have provided market sites

Urbanism
127
when they were not being used for religious rituals, but the apparent self-
sufﬁciency of Maya urban families and upper-class control of access to exotic
goods may have reduced the need for large public markets.
The layouts of urban centres in different city-state civilizations reveal ﬂexible
combinations of planning and unregulated growth, as well as a mixture of
cross-culturally regular and culturally speciﬁc features. Mesopotamian cities
were built along rivers or large canals and from Early Dynastic times on were
surrounded with roughly oval walls of mud-brick. Sometimes branch canals ran
though the cities (Gibson 1977; Stone and Zimansky 1995). The main temples
were located near a city’s geographical centre, often within a rectangular or
oval enclosure wall. This temple quarter was called the uruku (sacred city)
(Jacobsen 1970: 379), and a broad, straight avenue sometimes connected it to
a principal city gate. Palaces were usually less centrally located than the main
temple complex. The rest of the built-up area of the city consisted of a network
of winding streets and alleys lined with one- or two-storey houses. Cities were
divided into wards (dagia; Akk. babtum) that were often separated from each
other by walls and had their own outer gates (Postgate 1992: 81–82). There
was little difference in overall wealth among these residential areas, which
seem to have been associated with ethnic or kinship groupings. Near the outer
wall of the city were harbour areas (kar; Akk. k¯arum), apparently walled off
from the rest of the city. These areas, which had their own administration,
accommodated foreign merchants and perhaps the local traders who dealt
with them (Fig. 7.1). Beyond the city walls were suburban areas containing
orchards, ﬁelds, and country houses belonging to people who lived in the
city (Stone 1990; 1997; Van De Mieroop 1999). During the periods of most
intense urbanization, Early Dynastic II and III, at least eight cities in southern
Mesopotamia occupied more than ﬁfty hectares each, and two more covered
more than four hundred hectares (Huot 1989: 158).
Yoruba cities and towns were surrounded by elaborate systems of earth
ramparts, often planted with thorn hedges, and ditches. In the centre of the
city was the walled aﬁn or royal palace, surrounded by one or more market
squares, the main shrines (both inside and outside the palace), and the house
compounds of the principal members of the governing council. A number of
streets, each about ﬁve metres wide, made their way from the centre of the
city to one of the city gates and on into the surrounding countryside. Each
of these streets tended to be associated with one of the wards (adugbo) into
which the city was divided. These wards, which varied in number depending
on the size of the city, were in turn composed of precincts (ogbon) inhabited
by patrilineal extended families. In normal states there was only one palace
in a city, but in smaller, less integrated communities several kings might reign

Ilesha road
Ife
Ibadan road
Ondo
 road
palace
Ifewara
road
18th and 19th
century walls
earlier walls
principal streets
0
1 km
General Scale
Euphrates
river
west
harbour
north harbour
city wall
river, canals, harbours
temple sector
excavated
habitation
areas
temple
Ur
north gate
temple sector
temple
Ur gate
city wall
watercourse
early dynastic areas of habitation
Uruk
a
b
c
7.1. Urban centres in Mesopotamia and among the Yoruba: (a) Uruk, the largest urban centre in early Mesopotamia; (b) Ur, the capital
of an important Mesopotamian city-state; (c) Yoruba city of Ife, showing walls of various periods and major streets. Sources: (a), (b) after
Strommenger & Hirmer 1964: 408, 410; (c) after Shaw 1978: 146, and Willett 1967: 16.

Urbanism
129
over their own portions of the town, each from his own palace. Each of the
lineages that took turns sharing the kingship of a whole community might have
its own palace. Individual Yoruba urban centres had from about ﬁve thousand
to perhaps seventy thousand inhabitants in precolonial times. Benin City had a
population of ﬁfty thousand. Then as now, the Yoruba were the most urbanized
indigenous people in sub-Saharan Africa (Bascom 1969: 29–30; Krapf-Askari
1969; Mabogunje 1962; Ojo 1966b).
The urban centres of the smaller city-states in the Valley of Mexico had at
theircentresmajortemples,palaces,andmarkets,aroundwhichwerearranged
wards inhabited by endogamous corporate groups called calpolli. Each calpolli
haditsowncentre,equippedwithtemples,meetingplaces,leaders’residences,
andschools(Hodge1984;M.E.Smith1996:187–96).Tenochtitlan,in1519the
largest city in the valley with some one hundred thousand inhabitants, had at
its centre a walled precinct containing the major temples and many other
religious buildings (Fig. 7.2). Adjoining this precinct was a palace complex and
a market area. From this central zone, four straight avenues stretched out in
the cardinal directions, dividing the city into four quarters. A generally similar
arrangement of public buildings and major streets had existed at Teotihuacan
over a thousand years earlier. Each of the quarters had its own central temple
and administrative complex, around which were arranged the many calpolli
that composed the population of the city. A rectilinear pattern of streets and
canals paralleled the main avenues, giving people access on foot and by water
to all parts of the city. The city of Tlatelolco constituted a de facto ﬁfth ward
to the north of Tenochtitlan. Its centre contained a large temple complex
and the main market that served the two cities (M. E. Smith 1996: 196–203;
van Zantwijk 1985). Other large cities appear to have have been more dispersed
and to have lacked Tenochtitlan’s gridlike layout. Texcoco, the second-largest
city, had a quadrilateral palace or ceremonial centre surrounded by a number
of detached neighbourhoods (Hodge 1997: 211).
Maya cities were much less compact. At their centres were complexes of
temples, palaces, paved plazas, and upper-class residences. Many of them had
complementary paired precincts: a group of ritual buildings, at least partly
devoted to the cults of dead kings, to the north and a royal palace complex
to the south, with a ball court between (Ashmore 1989: 274). Around the
centre of the city was a ring of moderately dense settlement which lacked
large monumental structures, and beyond that was a zone of still less dense
settlement. Throughout the urban zone, large multistructured residential com-
plexes were surrounded by smaller, less elaborate residential units. The larger
complexes appear to have belonged to powerful individuals or lineage leaders
who exercised authority over their neighbours. Since shrines or temples of

Lake Texcoco
Lake
Texcoco
Tlatelolco
Atzacualpa
Cuepopan
Moyotlan
Teopan
chinampa areas
ceremonial precinct
palaces
avenue or causeway
market
Tenochtitlan
0
1 km
0
1 km
urban centre
0
4 km
2
earthworks
swamps
area of  Tikal
Tenochtitlan- Tlatelolco
Tikal
Tikal
urban centre
Mendez
Causeway
North
Acropolis
Great Plaza
a
b
c

Urbanism
131
corresponding degrees of elaborateness were associated with all residential
complexes, a hierarchy of royal, upper-class, and commoner family cult cen-
tres extended throughout each city. In some urban centres, paved avenues
joined upper-class ritual and residential complexes directly with the central
parts of the city. Large Maya centres appear to have had from eight thousand
to sixty-ﬁve thousand inhabitants. The central area of Tikal covered sixteen
square kilometres and is estimated to have had a population of sixty-two thou-
sand people. Calakmul appears to have been equally large. Caracol may have
had thirty-ﬁve thousand to sixty thousand people living within three to four
kilometres of its centre, while Coba, far to the north, had ﬁfty-ﬁve thousand
inhabitants. Small secondary centres were often located about ten kilometres
from major urban centres (Andrews 1975; Ashmore 1981; Chase, Chase, and
Haviland 1990; Culbert et al. 1990; Culbert and Rice 1990; Folan, Kintz, and
Fletcher 1983; Folan et al. 1995; Pyburn 1997; Tate 1992; Webster 1997; Wilk
and Ashmore 1988).
In all four city-state civilizations, the central public buildings of urban cen-
tres symbolized the unity of the city and of the surrounding territory it con-
trolled. Mesopotamians and Yoruba used defensive walls to mark their cities’
boundaries. In Mesopotamia walls separated different groups living within a
city. Both in the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya, the marking of urban
boundaries seems to have been much less important; their quarters, districts,
and house complexes had at their centres ritual structures that expressed their
individual identity. While the Yoruba and Mespotamians utilized barriers to
demarcate cities and their subdivisions, Mesoamerican cultures used ranked
systems of well-deﬁned public buildings to identify such entities physically.
urbanism in territorial states
Territorial states developed hierarchies of administrative centres at the local,
district, provincial, and national levels, but the populations of those centres
tended to be of modest size. Even national capitals, with perhaps ﬁfty thousand
inhabitants, were no more populous than the capitals of substantial city-states,
although the populations that sustained them were many times larger. This was
because these centres were inhabited almost exclusively by the ruling class and
by administrators, craft specialists, and manual labourers who either worked
7.2. Urban centres in Mesoamerica: (a) Tenochtitlan-Tlatelolco in the early sixteenth century
a.d.; (b) central four square kilometres of Tikal, a large Maya city; (c) the boundaries of Tikal as
deﬁned by structure density and location of earthworks, shown in relation to adjacent swamps.
Sources: (a) after E. Calnek 1976: 293, and M. Smith 1996: 199; (b) after Blanton et al. 1981:
196; (c) after Culbert & Rice 1990: 118.

132
Sociopolitical Organization
for the state or served the residents. Because the government protected the
state as a whole against armed attack, farmers preferred for practical reasons
to live in dispersed homesteads and villages near their ﬁelds rather than in
urban centres. The houses of powerful ofﬁcials sometimes had ornamental
gardens, but these were mainly for enjoyment rather than to provide signiﬁcant
subsistence. Food was brought into the cities from the country estates of urban
dwellers or as taxes and rents from rural villages.
Large territorial states sometimes had multiple capitals, which might shift
location from one period to another. In Egypt the fortiﬁed palace and admin-
istrative centre founded, according to tradition, by Menes of the First Dynasty
grew into the city of Memphis, which remained the primary administrative
centre of Egypt throughout the Old and most of the Middle Kingdom. The
main royal residences and burial places were located in its general vicinity,
although the precise locations of both shifted from one reign to another. In
the New Kingdom Memphis remained an important centre of government
and court life but shared this role with Thebes, where the Egyptian kings
were buried and had their main cult centre. As relations with the Near East
became more crucial in the late New Kingdom, another royal residence was
established at Pi-Ramesses in the eastern Delta. The sprawling remains of
Akhenaton’s short-lived capital at Akhetaton, in Middle Egypt, indicate how
quickly a new capital could be constructed if a king wished to do so (Kemp
1989: 261–317). Equally signiﬁcant was the speed with which the kings who
united Egypt abandoned their original capital at This in Upper Egypt and the
ﬁrst ruler of the Twelfth Dynasty shifted his capital from Thebes to Memphis,
perhaps recognizing that, because of communication difﬁculties, it was almost
impossible to govern Egypt from a single capital located in the far south (Uphill
1988).
While the Inka regarded Cuzco as the cosmological centre of the world and
their family seat, kings who had to remain away from it for long periods wag-
ing war and inspecting provinces established ‘New Cuzcos’ where they could
perform essential state rituals. In these cities, as in major provincial capitals,
streets, hills, plazas, and major buildings bore the same names as their pro-
totypes in Cuzco, although they rarely closely resembled these prototypes in
appearance (Hyslop 1990: 140, 172–76, 304–6). There is evidence that in the
years preceding the Spanish conquest Inka rulers may have been deemphasiz-
ing Cuzco. Wayna Qhapaq, the last king to die before the Spanish conquest,
may have intended to establish his mortuary cult in the city of Tumipampa
(Tomebamba), in Ecuador, where he had resided for the last years of his reign,
and the later Inka rulers promoted creation myths that traced their divine
origin back to ancient ritual centres on Lake Titicaca (Urton 1990: 3).

Urbanism
133
While the frequent relocations of capitals historically recorded for the early
Shang Dynasty have raised questions about the accuracy of these sources,
they have generally been interpreted as motivated by military considerations
related to expanding the Shang kingdom or maintaining its unity. Yoffee (1993:
70) has suggested that the rulers of territorial states may have sought to disem-
bed political from social power by establishing new capitals where ‘a formal
separation from other elites allows for new policies to be implemented and
new dependents to be recruited for the new enterprises’. It is therefore pos-
sible that the frequent shifts of capital cities of early Shang times were efforts
to increase royal power.
In territorial states, kings spent much of their time travelling about their
domains. Egyptian kings moved regularly from one part of the country to
another inspecting provincial centres, collecting taxes, performing religious
ceremonies, and hunting. In addition to their large palaces in the main ad-
ministrative and ritual centres, they possessed a network of smaller residences
throughout Egypt where they could stay while moving about (Kemp 1989:
218–23). Some of these were important centres for producing cloth and other
goods for the court. The Inka kings travelled through their much larger king-
dom inspecting administrative centres, performing rituals, hunting, putting
down rebellions, and waging wars to extend or protect their frontiers (Kendall
1973: 67–68). They stayed in major provincial capitals and at rest stations along
the main roads, where elaborate buildings were erected and equipped for gov-
ernment use. David Keightley (1983b: 552) suggests that by travelling about
in their kingdom the Shang rulers renewed ‘religious and kin ties (ﬁctive or
not) that bound the state together’. Rulers in all three territorial states were
accompanied on these travels by armed escorts and large numbers of servants
and ofﬁcials.
Major urban centres took the form of dispersed settlements where rulers
and the upper classes lived in special enclaves around which administrative
and storage facilities, cult places, burial grounds, and settlements of lesser
functionaries, retainers, craft workers, and supporting farmers were arranged.
Elite enclaves, temples, and administrative centres were often enclosed by
formidable walls, which not only protected their inhabitants against robbery
and insurrection but also sheltered them from public view. Walled structures
were therefore symbols of power and exclusivity as well as secure areas. Urban
complexes in territorial states lacked outer defences, although entry to and exit
from the capital area were controlled by ofﬁcial patrols and checkpoints. The
dispersed nature of cities in territorial states was possible because there was
little danger of external attack. The Inka ‘fortress’ of Saqsawaman, which was
an imposing feature of the Cuzco landscape and a redoubt to which the upper

134
Sociopolitical Organization
classes and their supporters could retreat in time of rebellion or enemy attack,
served storage and ritual as well as military functions (Hyslop 1990: 51–55).
The original administrative centre that had been established at Memphis
came to symbolize the unity of Egypt. Its name, White Wall (Inb h
• d), signiﬁed
an Upper Egyptian (hence ‘white’) presence in Lower Egypt, near the point
where the two major administrative divisions of the country came together.
This enclosure persisted in the form of a major administrative palace where
the enthronement of Egyptian monarchs took place. For a king to circle this
palace’s outer walls symbolized taking possession of Egypt. Memphis’s palace
complex and the temple of Ptah to the south of it became the nucleus of a
settlement that endured throughout Egyptian history. Bureaucrats, craftsmen,
and others who worked for the state lived in the city, and high-ranking ofﬁcials
probably had ofﬁcial residences there as well (Fig. 7.3).
It appears, however, that the principal royal residence lay close to the pyra-
mid complex of the reigning monarch and therefore was frequently located
some distance north or south of Memphis. In the Old Kingdom, new royal
residences seem to have been established in almost every reign. During the
Middle Kingdom, the main royal residence appears to have remained at Itı
t3wy (The Rightful Possessor of the Two Lands) about thirty kilometres south
of Memphis. The palace of Djedkare-Isesi, a Fifth Dynasty ruler, is described
as a rectangular structure about 640 by 230 metres that was called the ‘Lotus
Blossom of Isesi’. Nearby service towns would have been inhabited by skilled
pyramid builders, palace servants, craftsmen, and later those who tended to the
cult of the dead king. The settlement closest to Khufu’s palace at Giza may have
covered two hundred hectares. Residential palaces that were vacated when the
court relocated may have been used for a time for administrative purposes,
such as collecting and distributing resources, before being abandoned (Lehner
1997: 230–32).
Many features of these arrangements appear to have been retained in better-
known New Kingdom capitals, such as Thebes and Akhetaton. On the east
bank at Thebes, temples, an ofﬁcial palace, and various government ofﬁces
were surrounded by the houses of ofﬁcials, bureaucrats, retainers, craftsmen,
and manual labourers. Only a few processional avenues imposed some de-
gree of central planning on this agglomeration. On the west bank, at the
edge of the ﬂoodplain, were a series of royal mortuary temples and the
tombs of ofﬁcials and kings. These were built and tended by workmen and
priests who lived in nearby villages. Between these establishments were ﬁelds
and a large number of farming villages, whose inhabitants probably worked
part time as labourers and priests in neighbouring government and temple
complexes. Kings appear to have located their main residential palaces on

Abu Sir lake
Weni lake
South Saqqara lakes
Nile River in Phar
aon
ic
ti
m
es
E
ar
ly
Dyn
astic
cou
rse
of Nile River
Early
      Dynastic
      Memphis ?
Early Dynastic
   burials of high officials
Gisr
el-Mudir
Sekhemkhet
Pyramid
Step
Pyramid
Mit Rahina
(Memphis)
Palace
compound ?
enclosure of
Ptah temple
Hu
at
an
a
y
River
Wakapata and
Cusipata squares
b
a
Tu
ll
u
m
ayo R.
road to
Chinchasuyu
road to
Antisuyu
road to
Collasuyu
road to
Cuntisuyu
Saqsawaman
(fortress)
scale
0
5 km
d
e
s
e
rt
pl
at
e
a
u
Hanan Cuzco
Hurin Cuzco
7.3. Urban centres in Egypt and the Inka kingdom: (a) the Egyptian Old Kingdom administra-
tive centre at Memphis and some nearby royal burial sites; (b) the royal residential and ritual
centre of the Inka capital at Cuzco – this area was surrounded by agricultural land and a ring of
settlements occupied by people of lower status. Sources: (a) after Baines & Malek 1980: 135;
(b) after Hyslop 1990: 30.
135

136
Sociopolitical Organization
the outskirts of the urban area. Akhetaton displayed a similar combination of
centrally located ofﬁcial palaces and temples and suburban residential palaces
(Lacovara 1997; O’Connor 1995; 1998).
The Inka rulers used the resources of their kingdom to reorganize and
transform the entire Cuzco Valley. At its centre was an urban zone of about
forty hectares occupied by palaces, state buildings, and temples. This area was
inhabited almost exclusively by members of royal lineages. Located on the site
of the original town of Cuzco, this zone had been completely redesigned and
rebuilt after a.d. 1438 by the Inka ruler Pachakutiq, who expelled all its non-
Inka residents. The built-up area stretched from the fortress of Saqsawaman
southeast between two small rivers, the Tullumayo and the Huatanay. Plans for
the eventual expansion of settlement south of the Huatanay went unrealized.
At the heart of this complex, marking the geographical and ritual centre of the
Inka kingdom, were two adjacent squares, Wakapata and Cusipata, that were
joined by wooden beams extending across the Huatanay River. Commoners
from nearby communities frequently assembled in these squares to participate
in major rituals and celebrations (J. Moore 1996). From these squares four
roads ran outward to the main divisions of the Inka state. The road heading
northeast divided Cuzco into upper (hanan) and lower (hurin) halves, which
corresponded to the moiety arrangement found in all highland communities.
The rest of the city was traversed by three or four narrow streets that ran par-
allel to the rivers and a larger number of short intersecting side streets. The re-
sulting roughly rectangular blocks, up to seventy-ﬁve metres long and forty-ﬁve
metres wide, were occupied by the palace compounds of the reigning king and
all the deceased ones. The dead kings’ mummiﬁed bodies continued to be at-
tended in their respective palaces as if they were alive. The palace compounds
were located according to moiety afﬁliation: those associated with the earliest
kings were located in Lower Cuzco and those of more recent kings in Upper
Cuzco. Two royal palaces, belonging to Wiraqucha Inka and Thupa Inka Yu-
panki,containedthetemplesofthecreatorgodWiraquchaandthethundergod
Illapa respectively (Kendall 1973: 115). Other compounds contained temples
or housed special religious personnel. Still other compounds may have been
used for administrative purposes. The main temple, the Qorikancha (House
of Gold), was located at the south end of this urban complex. It faced onto an-
other square where animals were sacriﬁced daily (Hyslop 1990: 36–47, 59–63;
Kendall 1973: 112–15).
Central Cuzco was surrounded by a belt of farmland beyond which was a
ring of planned settlements inhabited by ofﬁcials who did not belong to the
Inka royal family, provincial lords who were required to visit Cuzco periodi-
cally as proof of their loyalty, craft workers, permanent retainers who served

Urbanism
137
the Inka elite, and conscripted labourers summoned from remote areas to
work on government building projects in the Cuzco area. In this belt, as well
as at Saqsawaman and in the central area, were located major storehouses
for food, clothing, and other wealth belonging to the state. Representatives
of every ethnic group in the Inka kingdom were said to have lived in these
settlements, which were connected to central Cuzco by a radial set of trails
that supplemented the four main roads that ran beyond the valley. Still far-
ther from the centre, in the Cuzco and neighbouring Urubamba Valleys, were
farming communities, but there too were the private estates and rural palaces
of reigning and former kings and estates belonging to members of the nobility.
The Cuzco Valley was covered by a network of shrines, some of which played
a prominent role in state rituals. It has been estimated that ﬁfteen thousand to
twenty thousand people may have lived in central Cuzco, another ﬁfty thou-
sand in the surrounding ring of settlement, and a further ﬁfty thousand to one
hundred and ten thousand in other parts of the valley (Hyslop 1990: 64). Many
of the inhabitants of the central area did not reside there full-time, however,
and because numerous commoners lived and worked in different zones there
may have been duplication in recording the population of these three areas.
Thus the total ﬁgures estimated for the Cuzco Valley may be somewhat inﬂated
(Hyslop 1990: 48–58, 63–67; Kendall 1973: 116–17; Zuidema 1964; 1990).
The dispersed layouts of Shang major centres resemble the capitals of other
territorial states rather than those of city-states. At the Early Shang site of
Zhengzhou a massive rectangular wall of stamped earth about 22 metres thick,
1,870 metres long, and 1,690 metres wide has been interpreted as an elite
compound containing palaces and upper-class residences. Around this com-
pound have been found small, isolated settlements once inhabited by bronze,
bone, and pottery workers, an area of poorer houses, and various burial areas.
The bronze workers lived in stamped-earth houses built on platforms which
indicate a considerable level of afﬂuence. The compound appears to have been
surrounded by villages of craft workers and retainers who served the upper
classes living within its walls. Still farther away would have been agricultural
villages (An 1986; Bagley 1999: 165–68; K. Chang 1980: 263–88). The general
arrangement of Zhengzhou resembles that of Cuzco. Another walled com-
pound, about 2,150 metres square, has been identiﬁed just north of Anyang
and tentatively dated to the beginning of the Middle Shang period (Tang, Jin,
and Rapp 2000) (Fig. 7.4).
The late Shang royal centre at Anyang (Yinxi) has been described as a
network of separate settlements spread over an area measuring six by four
kilometres. Xiaotun, near the centre of the complex, contains a collection of
large halls and temples facing south and appears to have been a royal palace

Huanbei
Shang City
(Middle Shang)
B
C
B
C
B
C
H
u
a
n
R
i
v
e
r
Li
m
it
of Yin
xu
(L
ate Shang cap
it
a
l)
Xibeigang
(royal cemetery)
Xiaotun
(palace area)
enclosure
elite residences
commoner residences
mixed residences
elite burials
elite craft areas
C
B
K
C
W
B
C
C
C
palace
foundations
C
B
Chin-shu
i
R
iv
er
H
si
u
n
g-
er
h
Riv
e
r
enclosure
bronze workshops
pottery kilns
bone workshops
cemetery
C
B
W
K
0
5 km
a
b
dwellings
commoners'
dwellings
7.4. Urban centres in China: (a) Anyang, showing recently discovered Middle Shang adminis-
trative enclosure and major features of the Late Shang capital region to south; (b) Early Shang
administrative enclosure at Zhengzhou and some surrounding settlements. Sources: (a) after
Tang et al. 2000: 479; G. Barnes 1993: 128; (b) after K. Chang 1986a: 337.
138

Urbanism
139
complex. Around the major buildings were small houses probably inhabited
by royal servants. It is not clear whether this central complex was walled, al-
though the remains of an ancient ditch have been reported. There was another
elite residential area nearby, and to the north at Xibeigang a large cemetery
contained royal graves and evidence of ongoing mortuary rites. Interspersed
throughout the area were settlements housing a mixture of wealthy and poorer
individuals, sites inhabited exclusively by commoners, and various workshops
(G. Barnes 1993: 126–29; K. Chang 1980: 70–135; Li Chi 1977).
The capitals of territorial states tended to be less compact than those of
city-states, and their various components were often separated by areas of
farmland. At least in part these arrangements seem to have reﬂected the de-
sire of rulers to live in isolation from their subjects and perhaps even from most
ofﬁcials. While various central administrative and ritual structures were built
near the centres of such agglomerations, at least some royal residences were
located on the outskirts. By comparison with city-state capitals, the primary
cities of territorial states tended to lack clearly marked centres or boundaries.
While massive structures provided impressive displays of royal power, in terri-
torial states it was the king and his court, wherever they might be, rather than
any speciﬁc features of urban architecture that constituted the heart of the
state.
To draw a complete comparison between city-states and territorial states
with regard to urbanism, it is essential to consider the latter’s provincial ad-
ministrative centres as well as their capitals. In Egypt a network of admin-
istrative centres and government ofﬁces in smaller towns was necessary to
serve royal funerary cults, levy and collect taxes, and control the countryside.
Provincial centres would have required elite residences, ofﬁces, storehouses,
barracks for police, and workshops where, for example, boats could have been
built to transport surplus grain (David 1986; Wegner 2000). For the most part,
these centres were small ones. Moreover, during the Early Dynastic period
and the Old Kingdom, while the central government featured prominently in
the construction of walled enclosures and temples at key ritual centres such
as Abydos and Hierakonpolis, elsewhere most such construction appears to
have been carried out by local ofﬁcials. It was not until the Middle Kingdom
that the central government began to play a systematic role in building tem-
ples throughout Egypt (Kemp 1977; 1983: 96–104; 1989: 65–83; Seidlmayer
1996). During the Old Kingdom, the main construction projects of the Egyp-
tian state were focused on the Memphis area and in particular on royal tombs.
This centralized symbolic afﬁrmation of the unity of the Egyptian state would
have been optimally effective if, in the course of corv´ee labour, most Egyptian
men had seen and perhaps helped to build these monuments. Because they

140
Sociopolitical Organization
were also important regional cult centres, most of the provincial administrative
centres endured throughout Egyptian history.
Inka provincial centres in the highlands invariably contained Inka-style cut-
stone buildings constructed by local masons working to Inka speciﬁcations.
In the lowlands Inka embellishments were often added to buildings of lo-
cal styles. Administrative centres were established in every province, often
away from indigenous settlements, as residences for provincial governors and
places where food, clothing, and weapons could be supplied to government
ofﬁcials, soldiers, and farm labourers moving from one part of the kingdom
to another. These centres also contained barracks in which large numbers of
transient soldiers and labourers could eat and sleep. The full-time inhabitants
of these centres included state functionaries, women charged with brewing
beer, weaving cloth, and cooking for the state, and assistants attached to gov-
ernment ofﬁcials. Food and other materials were brought from throughout
each province to its administrative centre, where most of the bulk commodi-
ties were stored for government use. The workforces that built and maintained
such centres were recruited locally, usually as corv´ee labourers. In contrast to
the Egyptian kings, Inka rulers displayed their power not only in the capital
region but systematically throughout their kingdom (Hyslop 1990: 69–101;
Kendall 1973: 118–19; Morris and Thompson 1985).
Subsidiary centres of government in the Shang and Western Zhou kingdoms
appear to have been much smaller than capitals. Each centre consisted of a
walled enclosure containing the residence, ancestral temple, and other ofﬁcial
buildings of the local ruler, as well as housing for his household servants and
armed retainers. Both the words that later meant town (yi) and state (guo) ap-
pearinitiallytohavereferredtothesewalledresidences(HsuandLinduff1988:
268–69). Thus yi probably originally designated a walled administrative centre
rather than a more conventional town or city. The Chinese clearly viewed set-
tlements of this sort as proper locations for the exercise of aristocratic power.
There is no evidence that at this time secondary walled settlements were other
than the seats of dominant lineages and their retainers (G. Barnes 1993: 136;
K. Chang 1980: 158–83). This interpretation further calls into question the sug-
gestion that the Shang rulers were hegemons ruling over a series of city-states.
In more secure areas, walls may have mainly protected the privacy of the
local governing family, but in more exposed or unsettled territories they may
also have sheltered a garrison, possibly related by blood to the presiding ofﬁcial,
which cultivated land both inside and outside them. In times of enemy attack
or local rebellion, such centres would have provided places of refuge for those
in the region who supported the local ruler, together with their animals and
movable property. They may also have attracted craft workers seeking work

Urbanism
141
and protection. Thus these centres of regional government would have been
smaller and simpler versions of royal court centres.
sources of variation
Much of the variation in urbanism in the early civilizations is correlated with
the distinction between city- and territorial states. Some of this variation was
of a functional nature, such as the tendency for farmers to locate their homes
in urban centres in city-state systems, where local warfare was common, but to
live near their ﬁelds where a territorial state ensured their safety from attack.
At the same time, the dispersed nature of major urban centres in territorial
states suggests a pursuit of privacy on the part of the ruling class that, according
to Peter Wilson (1988), is everywhere an important technique for enhancing
the authority of rulers. In city-state capitals such privacy had to be ensured by
limiting access to upper-class residences rather than by geographically isolating
them. Whether or not different city-state systems constructed walls around
their capitals may have been a simple alternative in their defensive strategies
and the deployment of resources. It also gave rise to an Old World versus New
World and hence perhaps a historically derived dichotomy. This particular
differenceseemstohavebeenrelatedtoamoregeneraltendencytodistinguish
social units by emphasizing boundaries in some societies and centres in others.
In all early civilizations urban centres were viewed as exceptionally interesting
places in which to live. They were the physical embodiments of political power
and human achievement and the places in which humans came into closest
contact with the supernatural powers that made the universe function.

8 Class Systems and Social Mobility
I
n early civilizations and other complex preindustrial societies, inequality
was regarded as a normal condition and injustice as a personal misfortune
or even an individual’s just deserts rather than as a social evil (Weber 1976
[1896]: 258). Structures based on differential power were pervasive. Every
child was born into and socialized by a family that was internally hierarchized
in the image of the state. The subordination of children to their parents and, to
varying degrees, of wives to their husbands went unquestioned, as did corporal
punishment as a means of enforcing obedience and discipline (Trigger 1985b).
Young people were expected to obey older people, especially older men.
‘Father’, ‘king’, and ‘god’ were often synonyms and metaphors for power.
While most small farming communities were already hierarchized, they be-
came even more so with the development of more complex societies. The most
powerful and advantaged members of these communities strengthened their
positions by acting as intermediaries between their fellow villagers and the
state. The general pervasiveness of inequality ensured that its legitimacy went
unquestioned. If egalitarian social organization was known to people in early
civilizations, it was as a feature of small-scale and usually despised societies
beyond the pale.
In all early civilizations richer and more powerful people cultivated a dis-
tinctive lifestyle. They controlled the major public institutions and used this
control to protect and enhance their wealth and power. They also tended to
marry people of similar status and to restrict and control vertical social mobil-
ity. Nevertheless, there were signiﬁcant differences among early civilizations
in the extent to which distinctions between classes were formally demarcated.
Ian Morris (1997) contrasts Ernest Gellner’s (1983) model of ‘agro-literate
states’ (large preindustrial kingdoms) with the ideal class structure of a demo-
cratic Greek city-state (polis) of the Classical period. In agro-literate states,
horizontally segregated layers of the military, administrative, religious, and
142

Class Systems and Social Mobility
143
sometimes commercial upper classes were rigidly separated from laterally
insulated communities of agricultural producers (Gellner 1983: 9–11; 1998).
In democratic Greek city-states, male citizens were distinguished from female
citizens, foreigners, and slaves. Morris argues that after 500 b.c., despite con-
siderable real differences in wealth, the ideal of the equality of male citizens led
to the disappearance in Greek urban settings of rich graves, elaborate funerary
monuments, fancy houses, and elaborate clothes and jewellery (1997: 102–3).
No early civilization displayed that sort of ideologically driven symbolic
equality. Kings, not a mass of sovereign citizens, stood at the head of soci-
ety, and there were marked differences in way of life between the wealthy,
powerful, and leisured minority that controlled society and the much poorer,
hard-working, and ideally obedient mass of the population. Nevertheless,
Gellner’s and Morris’s models indicate the need to consider how class was
perceived and represented in early civilizations and to what extent differences
in class and status were symbolically accentuated or disguised by lifestyles.
In early civilizations there was a need not only to protect the reality of
power and authority from challenge and ridicule by the lower classes but
also to ensure that the symbols of status were not encroached on by those
of lower rank. Protecting the privileges and symbols of authority was one of
the responsibilities of the monarch. In some early civilizations, sumptuary
laws dictated what kinds of clothes, jewellery, and insignia could be worn
by different classes. Among the Aztec particular colours and patterns of cloth
were restricted to speciﬁc classes and ranks within classes. Every enemy soldier
capturedbyanAztecwarriorentitledthatwarriortowearadistinctivecostume,
ornaments, and hairstyle and to perform special honoriﬁc roles in public rituals.
The state could punish and even kill people for infractions of these sumptuary
laws (Clendinnen 1991: 120; Hassig 1988: 39–40; Soustelle 1961: 132–39).
The Inka government carefully regulated the kind and amount of goods that
members of different classes could own. Inka ofﬁcials distributed fancy clothes,
women, male servants, metal ware, land, and minor public ofﬁces as rewards
for service to the state. These gifts were carefully graduated to take account
of the recipient’s social rank. Rulers obliged individuals to wear their hair and
dress in a manner that was distinctive of their ethnic group. This not only
distinguished the ruling class from subject peoples but, when various ethnic
groups were resettled in different parts of the kingdom, also distinguished such
settlers from indigenous people. The Inka rulers were seeking not to create
ethnic homogeneity but to preserve ethnic diversity so that they could play
one subject group off against another. By carefully distinguishing hairstyles,
dress, and ornaments they emphasized differences in class, ethnicity, and the
favour of government ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 33, 178; Rowe 1944: 262).

144
Sociopolitical Organization
At the investiture ceremonies of regional ofﬁcials, Western Zhou kings pre-
sented them with clothing decorated with symbols of ofﬁce, special banners,
elaborately crafted chariots and weapons, and jade ornaments. Gradations in
these valuable presents reinforced an established hierarchy of privileges and
prestige (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 177–78).
The Benin rulers claimed ownership of all the red coral beads in their
kingdom. These beads were highly coveted royal honours. Kings assigned
collars made of them to ofﬁcials for their lifetimes, to be returned when the
recipients died. The collars were also periodically recalled to the palace, where
a slave was ritually sacriﬁced and his blood poured over them to renew their
power. Special clothes bearing distinctive patterns were woven in the royal
palace at Benin to be worn by the king and his major ofﬁcials. The power of
the king was displayed and reinforced by his ability to control luxury goods,
both by regulating their manufacture and by determining who might own or
use them (Bradbury 1957: 26, 46, 58). The aim of these regulations was to
keep such goods scarce and therefore useful as status markers.
Noneoftheearlycivilizationsweareconsideringhadorders–classesdeﬁned
primarily by the type of work that each group did. Whereas in medieval Europe
knights or professional warriors, priests, and manual workers constituted an
overriding hierarchical framework, as the brahmin (priest), ksatriya (warrior,
ruler), vaisya (trader, businessman), and sudra (farmer) orders (varna) still do
in India, in all seven early civilizations both the priesthood and the army cut
across class lines. The top levels of religious hierarchies were invariably occu-
pied by members of the royal family and the upper classes. Middle levels were
staffed by people drawn from the administrative class, while the physical labour
required to maintain temples was usually performed by low-ranking priests
drawn from craft workers and farmers. While major positions in religious hier-
archies were generally ﬁlled by full-time personnel and less prestigious ones on
a part-time basis, in Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt even high-ranking priests
were government ofﬁcials who took turns managing shrines and temples or
performing religious duties. Military leaders were likewise drawn from the up-
per classes, while ordinary soldiers and militia conscripts were recruited from
the lower classes. Full-time soldiers tended to be members of an intermediate
specialist class.
perception of class
In practice early civilizations appear to have had numerous social groupings –
most of them highly localized, others geographically dispersed – each of which
was aware of its social position in relation to other groups. Such units included

Class Systems and Social Mobility
145
families, localized occupational collectivities, and people who played speciﬁc
types of leadership roles. While, inevitably, elaborate formal or informal gra-
dations of status existed among these groups, there was also a tendency to
generalize these gradations to form a small number of hierarchical divisions.
Usuallythisinvolveddistinguishinganupperclass,freecommoners,andslaves.
Since slaves, if any, tended to be few, the bulk of the population was divided
into two groups: upper class and commoners. Divisions of this sort provided
a general framework for understanding the much more complicated relations
of authority and deference that characterized interaction among individuals
and collectivities. A dual distinction also reinforced the pretensions of the nu-
merically inferior upper class by pairing it in a simple hierarchy with the vastly
more numerous lower class.
While all early civilizations shared a general view of class hierarchy, the
criteria and clarity with which these broad classes were distinguished varied.
The Inka recognized an upper class that was entirely hereditary and divided
into three main ranks on the basis of members’ origins. The ancient Egyptians
distinguished the p‘t (hereditary nobility) from the rh˘ yt (defeated/subjected
ones) or nds (small people) (Baines 1995b: 133; Malek and Forman 1986: 34).
The hereditary nobles were, however, supplemented and increasingly eclipsed
by a non-hereditary upper class composed of ofﬁcials who held positions in the
higher echelons of the civil service hierarchy. Throughout the Valley of Mexico,
a hereditary upper class (pipiltin) traced their descent from the ruler of the
ancient city of Tollan, who was believed to be a descendant or manifestation of
the god Quetzalcoatl. Membership in that class could be acquired only through
one or both parents. Among the Classic Maya hereditary ahaw (nobles) may
have been differentiated from commoners (Freidel 1992: 130). In China a
hereditary nobility was distinguished from ordinary men (ren) and dependent
workers (zhong), and according to L´eon Vandermeersch (1980: 18) the upper
class was divided into two levels: zi (close relatives of the king) and chen
(retainers). Other major upper-class titles suggest intervening grades of nobles.
In each of these civilizations the upper classes, or at least their highest levels,
which traced their descent from former rulers, claimed a special supernatural
origin. While in Peru the second major rank of the nobility was composed
of ennobled commoners and in Egypt individuals of non-royal ancestry were
raised to the rank of the hereditary nobility, in the Valley of Mexico an ennobled
commoner could ensure that his descendants became hereditary nobles only
by marrying a female member of that group.
The early Mesopotamians do not appear to have had a hereditary nobility,
but their free population was divided into two groups with unequal political
power and unequal rights before the law. The higher-ranking of the two thus

146
Sociopolitical Organization
constituted a formally recognized upper class (Diakonoff 1987; Maisels 1990:
273–74). J. D. Y. Peel (1983: 46) has proposed that the closest thing to a domi-
nant class in Yoruba society was the entire body of male household heads.
Yet, in addition to the royal clans, some Yoruba patrilineages were larger and
more prosperous than others, and the most prominent male members of these
lineages shared substantial power with the king. While these men and their
families may not have constituted a formally recognized upper class, they
formed a de facto one.
In territorial states there was a tendency for the distinction between the
upper and commoner classes to be more overt, complex, and symbolically
marked than in city-states. The upper classes were also more likely to be
explicitly divided into multiple grades or ranks. This was done by means of
ranked subclasses in Inka Peru, by tracing deep and unequal genealogical
relations among descent groups in Shang China, and by using additional cri-
teria such as civil service rankings in Egypt. Because territorial states extended
over large areas, even members of the upper class could not all be expected
to know one another personally. Fixed ranks and special insignia facilitated
the recognition of authority that was essential for effective interaction among
members of the ruling group.
In city-states, where prominent people tended to know each other person-
ally, there was less need for a formal demarcation of status. There was also
a tendency for power to be shared among the leaders of various groups and
institutions, for the power of individuals and groups to be challenged, and for
there to be more ﬂuidity in which groups made various types of decisions.
Under these circumstances, it must have been strategically advantageous to
mute the expression of some types of social inequality in order to fend off
challenges and reduce political tensions. At the same time, public attention
had to be drawn to leading citizens to ensure that proper forms of deference
were maintained. These contradictory objectives were not handled in the same
way in all city-states. The peoples living in the Valley of Mexico and perhaps
the Classic Maya had hereditary upper classes. Both the Mesopotamians and
the Yoruba recognized general class divisions, but these divisions were not
hereditary or socially emphasized to the same degree.
There are important similarities in class structure in all the civilizations
in our sample, as well as similarities in the detailed criteria by which groups
were ranked. Whether or not these criteria were terminologically marked, they
appear to represent cross-culturally similar views concerning the appropriate
correlates of prestige and status. Even an early civilization organized on the
basis of orders such as that of Gangetic India would have conformed to this
arrangement.

Class Systems and Social Mobility
147
upper classes
While symbolically the king stood above and represented all of society, he was
also the leader of the upper classes. One of his most important functions was
to unite that group and protect and promote its social and political interests.
The upper classes in all early civilizations were small, amounting to no more
than a few percent of the total population, but they controlled much of the
surplus wealth of their societies and played key roles in decisions about policy
and administration. They used their power to protect their economic and
social privileges and reinforce their social position. Where the upper class was
hereditary, it was normally composed of the king and other members of the
royal family, collateral descendants of formerly independent rulers and leading
provincial families, and administrators and soldiers who had been ennobled as
a reward for their services to the state. Where the upper class was not formally
hereditary, it was made up of the leaders of prominent lineages or ethnic
groups, the administrators of major civic institutions, and wealthy landowners.
Even in these societies kingship tended to be hereditary, and other ofﬁces
were often controlled by the same families for long periods.
The luxurious lifestyle of the upper classes was supported by family or pri-
vate ownership of land, by state salaries, which sometimes involved revocable
assignments of land instead of actual payments, and by the opportunity to
become the beneﬁciaries of bribes, fees, military booty, and economic con-
trol. Some members of the upper classes enjoyed these privileges simply as
a result of belonging to upper-class families. They did little work, but their
status put inherited land and other forms of wealth at their disposal. Other
members played an active role in administering the state. The highest state
ofﬁcials belonged to the upper classes, and together with the king they made
all the most important decisions. Members of this group also commanded the
army and managed the major religious institutions. Less prestigious members
of the nobility were minor ofﬁcials, engineers, and sometimes high-ranking
artists.
The Inka upper class was composed at the highest level by the reigning
monarch, his immediate family, and the descendants of all previous Inka rulers.
The latter were organized as panaqas (royal descent groups) each of which
traced its origin to a particular king. Depending on how they were genealogi-
cally related to their founder, members of each panaqa (and perhaps also their
dependents) were divided into three ranked groups called qullana, payan, and
kayaw (Bauer 1998: 35–39). The members of a panaqa were collectively en-
dowed with the dead king’s palaces, personal wealth, and private land. Their
chief task was to manage these properties and to feed, clothe, and care for the

148
Sociopolitical Organization
mummiﬁed bodies of the dead king and his chief wife. These two individuals
were venerated as the founder deities of their panaqa, in the same manner as
minor nature deities were regarded as the founding ancestors of commoner
landowning groups (ayllu). Unlike ayllus, however, panaqas were not required
to be endogamous.
It is often assumed that each new Inka king had to acquire his own wealth,
everything that his predecessor had accumulated belonging to that king’s de-
scent group. This, it is argued, explains why each king strove to expand the
borders of the kingdom (Conrad and Demarest 1984). If, however, it is true that
the panaqa Qhapaq Ayllu always belonged to the reigning monarch, consid-
erable wealth would have passed from each monarch to his successor, leaving
only his palaces, personal lands, and private possessions to his other descen-
dants (I. Farrington 1992: 369–70). It also appears that the panaqas of at least
thirteen successive kings may have been assigned to only ten named divisions
of the Cuzco terrain. This suggests that descendants of later kings had to share
resources in the Cuzco area with descendants of much earlier rulers if their
panaqas were assigned the same estates.
Panaqas were important political entities in the Inka state. The oracular
pronouncements of each dead king, which his panaqa controlled, were an
important source of political power for its leaders. Panaqas participated in
policy-making and meddled in royal successions. Their leaders competed for
high state ofﬁces, which were granted as a result of winning the king’s favour,
and sought to enhance their power by marrying their close female relatives to
the king. The most recently formed panaqas appear to have been the richest.
This may have been because the older ones had never possessed much land
or wealth or because their wealth had had to be divided among a growing
number of descendants of the original king. It is also possible that many of
their resources had been reallocated to the panaqas of more recent rulers.
All the members of this highest level of the Inka upper class claimed descent
from the principal Inka deity, the sun god, Inti. Men drawn from this level
occupied the highest ofﬁces in the Inka state (Gose 1996a; Patterson 1991).
The second rank of Inka nobility consisted of Inka-by-privilege (ayllucusco),
who were organized into ten descent groups (ayllus). According to Inka tra-
ditions, they had originally lived in the Cuzco region, and their ancestors had
supported the early Inka kings. In return, the Inka rulers had ennobled them
when they found it necessary to recruit more administrators for their expand-
ing bureaucracy. Unlike the true Inka nobility, these groups were derived, like
ordinary humans, from minor supernatural forces, not from the sun god. The
Inka and the Inka-by-privilege shared posts in the administration of the king-
dom, although the latter generally occupied less important positions. Finally,

Class Systems and Social Mobility
149
conquered hereditary rulers and their descendants, down to the level of rulers
of one hundred families, were often allowed to retain their land and privileges
as members of the provincial nobility (Kendall 1973: 56, 101; Rowe 1944:
260–61). While their power was carefully circumscribed by Inka provincial
overseers, their control over their own people was frequently enhanced rather
than diminished by the political support they received from the Inka state.
In Egypt, the hereditary nobility were in theory descended from beings
who had lived when the creator gods still ruled directly over the terrestrial
realm (Morenz 1973: 47). They included descendants of kings and possibly
also of cooperative local rulers whose territories had been absorbed into the
Egyptian state at the time of its uniﬁcation. Ofﬁcials of commoner origin and
their descendants were raised to this rank as a reward for especially meritorious
service. Less prestigious honorary titles, such as h
• 3ty  (notable), smr wty
(unique friend of the king), smr (friend of the king), and h˘ tmt bıty (royal
sealer), were assigned to favoured ofﬁcials for their lifetimes (Allen 2000: 32).
The hereditary title ‘pt’ was meaningful so long as an individual commanded
sufﬁcient wealth to live in an appropriate fashion. Such wealth was derived
from administrative ofﬁces, land bestowed on individuals as gifts by the ruler,
inherited estates, and land that was purchased using wealth accumulated from
government stipends.
In contrast to members of Inka panaqas, the Egyptian hereditary nobility
did not constitute a formally organized group or series of groups that enjoyed
collective economic privileges or political advantages. Instead, individual title-
holders had to look after their own interests. The most important and ﬁnely
graduatedEgyptianmalestatushierarchyconsistedoftherankedpositionsthat
individuals might occupy in the state administrative system. These positions
were an important source of power and wealth. The formal role that individual
nobles played in relation to this hierarchy and in administering Egypt varied
from one period to another. During the Fourth Dynasty, many of the highest
state ofﬁces were occupied by sons and other close male relatives of the king.
Later in the Old Kingdom such individuals were for a time excluded from
these ofﬁces. Without private wealth or patronage and economic support from
the king, nobles were in danger of lacking sufﬁcient wealth to remain active
members of the upper class. Both the non-corporate nature of the hereditary
nobility and the role of the civil service ranking system in deﬁning status
reﬂected the importance of winning royal or ofﬁcial favour for preferment and
career advancement (Baer 1960; Strudwick 1985).
Strong emphasis was placed at all levels of Shang society on the ranking
of descent lines within clans and on birth order among siblings of the same
sex. Power and authority passed from a man to his eldest son or from older to

150
Sociopolitical Organization
younger brothers within a speciﬁc descent line. Supreme power was vested in
the senior line of the Zi clan. Males who were closely related to reigning or pre-
vious kings held important court ofﬁces or administered territories. Regional
ofﬁces tended to remain hereditary in the senior male line of their occupants.
As the state expanded, new territories were established where younger sons of
ofﬁcials might be installed. Thus ofﬁcials of higher genealogical status tended
to hold land closer to the centre of the state and participated in the function-
ing of the court while others lived farther away. As lineages expanded, it was
increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd positions for younger sons that would allow them
to maintain an upper-class lifestyle (Vandermeersch 1980: 81–122).
Territories were also assigned to leaders of clans that supported the Zi, while
some conquered rulers were allowed to govern all or part of their former
territories as Shang vassals. These ofﬁcials were permitted to marry female
members of the royal clan, and some of the most important of them married
women of the royal lineage. The Shang upper class thus became a network
of ofﬁcials related directly or indirectly to the king. Ofﬁcials who governed
administrative territories bore the titles hou (archer lord?), bo (patriarch?),
and tian or dian (ﬁeld lord). While these positions normally were hereditary,
successors, at least at the higher levels, had to be conﬁrmed by the king, who
could also promote or remove individuals from their ofﬁces (Chao 1972: 99–
111). Ofﬁcials who headed junior branches of a clan remained ritually and
socially subordinate to the leaders of the senior branches from which they had
split off, even when they lived far apart.
The Aztec nobility (pipiltin) traced their descent ultimately from the god
Quetzalcoatl through the male or the female line or preferably both. In the
centuries preceding the Spanish conquest, throughout the Valley of Mexico,
the pipiltin had replaced or absorbed local elites that could not claim divine
descent. According to tradition, all the Aztec had originally been commoners
who had migrated into the Valley of Mexico from the north. Acamapichtli,
the ﬁrst Aztec king, had been invited to Tenochtitlan from the neighbouring
city-state of Culhuacan, whose nobles claimed descent from the ruler of an-
cient Tollan. It was maintained that some of Quetzalcoatl’s descendants had
moved south to Culhuacan following the destruction of Tollan in the twelfth
century a.d.
The hereditary nobles of the Valley of Mexico were divided into two groups:
the tetecuhtin (lords), who were the king’s main advisers and military ofﬁcers,
and the pilli, descendants of tetecuhtin who had not inherited their fathers’
positions but served as government ofﬁcials of lesser rank. Tetecuhtin headed
teccalli (family groups) to which related, lower-ranked pipiltin belonged
(Berdan 1982: 52–54). Pipiltin wore cotton clothes, sandals, feather work,

Class Systems and Social Mobility
151
and jade ornaments, lived in two-storey stone houses, ate the ﬂesh of human
sacriﬁces, drank chocolate and fermented beverages (in moderation) in public,
kept concubines, entered the royal palace at will, could eat in the palace dining
hall, and performed special dances at public rituals. They did not pay taxes
(Clendinnen 1991: 120).
Because calpolli leaders were encouraged to marry the daughters of kings,
powerful commoner families were drawn into the nobility and their primary
loyalties transferred from their kinship and residence groups to the emerging
upper class. As a consequence, class divisions cut across calpollis. Individual
warriors who performed brave acts, especially those who captured at least four
enemy soldiers in battle, were raised to the status of quauhpilli (eagle noble).
Their position was not hereditary, but by marrying younger daughters of noble
parents or daughters of nobles by their secondary, commoner wives they could
ensure that their children inherited pilli status from their mothers.
The pipiltin appear to have been ranked in descending status according to
whether they were members of the royal descent group, members of other
prominent ofﬁce-holding families, descended from pipiltin through both par-
ents or only one, or had personally achieved that status. A noble’s rank was
further deﬁned by the state ofﬁces to which he was appointed and by the ﬁnely
graduated military honours that he won in recognition of his performance in
battle. The main terminological distinctions were drawn between nobles who
held high ofﬁce, ordinary nobles, and eagle nobles. While the pipiltin were
found throughout the Valley of Mexico, the difference between noble and
commoner lifestyles was probably less marked in small city-states than in large
and powerful centres such as Tenochtitlan and Texcoco.
Among the Maya, rulers and their families also appear to have belonged to
a hereditary lordly class. It is generally assumed that large patrilineal extended
families or clans played an important role in Maya social organization. These
families are believed to have been stratiﬁed both internally and in relation to
one another. Powerful ones may have increased in size and wealth by incor-
porating non-kin as low-status members or clients (Carmack 1973; 1981). It
is unclear, however, whether the title-holders of major patrilineages formed
a high-level governing group within each Maya city-state, as occurred among
the Yoruba, or the most powerful local ofﬁcials were consanguineal members
of the royal family, as in China. If noble status was restricted to the senior lines
of major patrilineal groupings, the situation was very different from that found
in the Valley of Mexico. Some Mayanists question the importance of large
patrilineal groupings in Classic Maya society or suggest that their importance
varied from one Maya region and one class level to another (Chase and Chase
1992b: 307–10; Haviland 1992; Wilk 1988).

152
Sociopolitical Organization
In each of the ﬁve early civilizations considered so far, there appears to
have been a hereditary upper class, although in Egypt the importance of that
group was eclipsed to a considerable degree by a ranking system based on
honorary titles bestowed on individuals and personally achieved positions in
the government administrative hierarchy. Insofar as these upper-class positions
were hereditary, it seems appropriate to refer to the non-royal segment of
the upper classes in these societies as a nobility or aristocracy. In two early
civilizations, however, Mesopotamia and that of the Yoruba, there was an upper
class but no hereditary nobility.
It is believed that in the initial stages of Mesopotamian civilization the lead-
ers of major landowning extended families, who were sometimes also leaders
of villages, wards, and ethnic groups, participated in the councils that governed
early city-states, possibly in conjunction with a king. By the Early Dynastic pe-
riod, kings, administrators of major temples, and important private landowners
shared power. Rich private landowners occupied seats on city councils, and
they and major temple ofﬁcials advised the king and helped him to govern
the state. Land that had once been owned collectively by patrilineal extended
families fell increasingly under the control of palaces, temples, and wealthy
families or individuals. As collectively owned land was transformed into insti-
tutionally and privately owned land, increasing numbers of ordinary people
were forced to become clients of palaces, temples, and landowners in order
to survive. This development accentuated the differences between a small
privileged group and a much larger dependent stratum in Mesopotamian so-
ciety. In the Old Babylonian period these two strata were designated awilum
and muˇskenum. The awilum embraced the families of major ofﬁce-holders
and landowners and leaders of groups that possessed land communally. The
muˇskenum were landless families under perpetual patriarchal authority or at
best working conditional landholdings (Diakonoff 1987: 2; Maisels 1990: 262–
74). Earlier the Sumerians appear to have drawn an analogous distinction be-
tween dumugi (property owners, citizens) and guruˇs (dependents). While both
groups believed themselves to be descended from the same human ancestors
and social mobility occurred, in the Early Babylonian period the two groups
were marked by an explicit legal distinction between property owners, who
were treated relatively leniently by the law, and poorer people, who were not.
ThereisnoevidenceofformalrankingwithintheMesopotamianupperclass.
Power was both shared and contested by kings, temple administrators, and
private and collective landowners. Only in a few hegemonic city-states and for
limited periods was royal authority preeminent. Yet economic developments
had produced deep economic and political inequality in Mesopotamian society.
While various privileged elements, both individual and institutional, resisted

Class Systems and Social Mobility
153
centralization and struggled to control various spheres of activity, these same
privileged groups cooperated in defending their privileges in opposition to
lower-class discontent.
TheYorubahadadefactoupperclasscomposedofmembersoftheroyalclan
in each city-state, ward chiefs, leaders of important ritual societies, and rich and
high-ranking members of the patrilineages that held seats on the state council.
The generic term applied to such men was olal´a (honoured) (Lloyd 1974: 49).
Prominent members of the leading patrilineages engaged in ﬁerce competition
for their ofﬁces and titles. These patrilineages were invariably more populous,
prosperous, and powerful than others. Their principal members owned many
slaves who grew large amounts of food, and this permitted them to attract
numerous clients, including soldiers who could capture more slaves for them
in warfare and intimidate their rivals. A position on the state council enabled
a man to share in the revenues of the kingdom and secure trading and other
privileges that greatly enhanced his prosperity and that of his patrilineage.
Over time titles might shift from one patrilineage to another, and the king
could create new titles and ofﬁces. Nevertheless, the ability of ofﬁce-holders
to exploit their privileged positions to create wealth for their families tended to
keep the upper class relatively stable. In Benin the kings had severely curbed
the power of these leading families and developed an elaborate system of titles
that rewarded individuals for their particular services to the monarch. Despite
their loss of power, the leading non-royal lineages of Benin continued to enjoy
afﬂuence and social and ritual precedence (Bradbury 1957: 35–36; R. Smith
1969: 110–16).
The upper classes in early civilizations had many features in common. They
controlled a disproportionate amount of the wealth of their societies, avoided
physical labour, enjoyed an opulent lifestyle, and indulged in conspicuous con-
sumption. They occupied the top administrative, military, and religious posts
and constituted the highest levels of decision making and administration, either
sharing power with the monarch or being the people most able to inﬂuence
him. These upper classes were not always hereditary, and where they were not
they might be deﬁned either formally or informally. In territorial states upper-
class status tended to be both hereditary and formally deﬁned. The presence
of hereditary nobilities in some but not all early civilizations refutes Charles-
Louis Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu’s (1689–1755) assumption that early
despotic societies lacked them (Isaac 1993: 432). Yet to preserve upper-class
status, individuals and families needed to maintain their wealth and access
to high ofﬁces. The ability to do that became impaired as families slipped
genealogically farther from major sources of power and ﬁxed wealth became
sub-divided over successive generations. An important way for members of

154
Sociopolitical Organization
the upper class to counter a loss of wealth and power was marriage into royal
or other leading families.
commoners
Commoners made up the vast bulk of the population in early civilizations,
often constituting 90 percent or more. They rarely owned land individually
and, if they did, only in small amounts. They depended for subsistence on the
sale of goods they produced, worked for the state or other patrons, or formed
collective landholding groups. Their political power was also severely limited.
The lowest-ranking and by far the most numerous of them were engaged in
agriculture. At the top of the commoner class were full-time specialists, more
numerous than the upper classes but also amounting to no more than a few
percent of the population. They are often claimed to have formed a ‘middle
class’, but they did not derive their income from ownership of commercial
and industrial enterprises within the context of a capitalist economy. Nor did
they correspond to the professional bourgeoisie, the ﬁrst form of the middle
class to establish a place for itself in Western society. Specialists lacked sig-
niﬁcant political power and independent sources of wealth. Some may have
owned small properties, but others either subsisted by selling their produce
or received rations or grants of land in exchange for their services.
Many members of this group depended on the state or on members of the
upper class for their positions and salaries. These might be called ‘dependent
specialists’. The principal exceptions were craftsmen and traders who made a
living by selling goods to anyone who wished to buy them. Hence the term
‘full-time specialists’ seems preferable as a generic designation of this class.
Specialists were divided into a number of different types of occupations of
varying prestige. These occupations tended to be hereditary, and most were
taught by father to son or learned through apprenticeship. In general, the less
highly regarded the type of occupation, the more people practised it.
The most prestigious group of specialists was the lesser ofﬁcials, who are of-
ten labelled ‘administrators’, ‘bureaucrats’, or ‘scribes’ (Egyptian sˇs, Sumerian
dubˇsar, Aztec tlacuilohqueh, Inka hampikamayoq). Their principal duties
were to see that the orders of upper-class ofﬁcials were carried out, make
the routine decisions required to do this (such as ascertaining how much tax
individual farmers should pay), and keep track of the wealth and property of
large institutions, rulers, and other members of the upper class. They were
trained to read and write or to use whatever recording devices were employed
by a particular civilization. In general, their work and style of life were more
similar to those of the less prestigious members of the upper class than to those

Class Systems and Social Mobility
155
of any other group. It has been suggested, on the basis of very fragmentary
surviving evidence, that among the Maya knowledge of writing may have been
conﬁned to certain members of the nobility (Fash 1991: 120). If so, those elite
administrators must have been assisted by lesser ofﬁcials who were not literate.
It is possible, however, that some Maya ofﬁcials of commoner rank were also
literate. Those who designed fancy ceramic vessels and stone sculpture, both
of which bore inscriptions, may have been the equivalents of master architects
and engineers, rather than of craft workers, in other early civilizations. The
Maya term ah ts’ ib appears to have designated a writer and draftsman but not
a painter or sculptor (Tate 1992: 20, 40–49).
The next rank of commoners consisted of full-time soldiers and police who
were not members of the upper classes. In general, they and their families
were well fed, housed, and rewarded for their services to the state. Their
main tasks included guarding upper-class people and property, maintaining
forts, and manning garrisons. In wartime they would be put in charge of other
commoners who had been conscripted for military duty. Professional soldiers
did not work with their hands, but their general deportment did not as closely
resemble that of the upper classes as did the behaviour of lesser ofﬁcials.
The third and lowest rank of specialists was full-time craft workers. They
laboured with their hands and therefore resembled farmers more than they did
soldiers or bureaucrats. Long-distance traders were part of this grouping. Craft
workers were valued for their skills. Some were self-employed, others worked
primarily for upper-class patrons, and still others were permanently attached
to institutions such as palaces and temples. The state and the upper classes
were the major consumers of the work produced by the most skillful artisans.
The servants of the upper classes formed an occupationally and socially
diverse group. They were secretaries, guards, hairdressers, and other personal
attendants, cooks and other types of skilled household staff, and unskilled
workers who ground grain, hauled water, and disposed of waste. All these tasks
were also performed by slaves, but skilled free staff would have been viewed as
dependent specialists, equivalent to craft workers, while free manual labourers
would have been equated with landless farm labourers.
The bulk of commoners, probably amounting to 80 percent or more of the
total population, were farmers. Some farmers had legal rights to land, either as
owners or renters; others were tied to land owned by others, while still others
were landless labourers. Less secure rights to land generally correlated with
lower social status.
Yoruba land was held collectively by patrilineal extended families, although
such land reverted to the community if an extended family died out or moved
away. In Inka society farmers belonged to ayllus, which were endogamous

156
Sociopolitical Organization
kinship and corporate landholding groups. In the Valley of Mexico, the mace-
hualtin (tax payers) belonged to similar landholding calpollis. While ayllus
and calpollis collectively owned their land, individual families could not per-
manently leave these groups without forfeiting their right to a share of it. In
Mesopotamia collective ownership of land by patrilineal descent groups may
have been widespread at an early period and private ownership of small plots
of land may have resulted from the gradual breakup of such groups. Yet, as
a result of growing debts, small farmers tended to lose their land. When this
occurred, landless farmers had either to rent or sharecrop land owned by
others or to work as hired labourers (guruˇs, erin). Some of these became de-
pendents of temple estates while others did whatever jobs were available.
Gangs of Mesopotamian labourers made their way north each spring helping
to harvest the crops as they ripened (R. McC. Adams 1981: 145). The only
other civilization for which free landless labourers are recorded is the Valley
of Mexico, but these latter appear to have been immigrants from the north
who were trying to insert themselves into local societies. Most appear to have
found employment as burden carriers.
Some farmers were bound to land that was owned or otherwise controlled
by the state or by members of the upper classes. These farmers did not pay
taxes, but most of the surplus food they produced went directly to those who
controlled the land; hence they were considerably less well off than landown-
ing farmers. In the Valley of Mexico, the mayeque, who may have made up
30 percent of the Aztec population (van Zantwijk 1985: 271), were farmers
who did not own land of their own or pay taxes, as the macehualtin did, but
worked land owned by the crown. The produce of some of this land was in-
tended for the upkeep of the palace, while other plots were assigned to the
king, other members of the royal family, and nobles, including ofﬁcials and
honoured warriors. The mayeque fought as soldiers during military campaigns
but do not appear to have been free to leave the estates on which they worked.
They also would have been landless had they done so (Berdan 1982: 59–60;
Hassig 1988: 30; Offner 1983: 133).
At least some Egyptian villagers appear to have possessed their own land,
but it is uncertain whether this land was communally or family-owned. The
Egyptian central government established large numbers of estates to support
the royal court, royal funerary cults, and various ofﬁcials. Most of these estates
were located in less densely settled parts of Middle Egypt and the Delta. An
estate consisted of farmers supervised by an ofﬁcial living in a large house that
was also an administrative and storage facility. It is unclear whether farmers
were legally attached to such estates or free men who had been attracted to
them by promises of lower taxes (Kemp 1983: 85–92).

Class Systems and Social Mobility
157
In China farmers belonged to corporate lineages whose members inhabited
a settlement and worked adjacent plots of land. It is unclear, however, whether
most agricultural land belonged to lineages or was assigned to government
ofﬁcials.
slaves
The conceptualization and practice of slavery differed signiﬁcantly among early
civilizations (J. Watson 1980b). It is often suggested that a continuum of lower-
class people lived in various states of servitude to the upper classes (Pollock
1999: 121), and extreme Marxists have argued that in these ‘slave societies’
all the lower classes were slaves. Being bound to the land or to a particular
workshop or patron did not, however, in itself cause a person to be regarded
as a chattel. Individuals who were forced to work for creditors until a debt had
been paid off were different from people sold into permanent and perhaps
hereditary slavery because of indebtedness; they were in effect indentured
labourers. Among the Aztec and Yoruba, temporary debt slaves often lived in
their own homes and worked part of the time for themselves. Moreover, differ-
ent members of a family often substituted for one another (Bascom 1969: 23).
Slaves were sometimes distinguished from the rest of the population by in-
delible brands or by distinctive clothing or hairstyles. They (and often their
descendants) could be bought, sold, or reassigned as their owners wished, and
they were generally excluded from membership in kinship groups. It was their
owners who were answerable to the rest of society for their behaviour. Cus-
tomary or statute law not only protected owners’ rights to control and exploit
slaves but also limited forms of mistreatment that might have provoked slaves
to rebel. Slaves worked, normally without payment, as retainers, household ser-
vants, artisans, miners, construction workers, and farm labourers. They were
not, however, called upon to undertake tasks that were not also performed by
lower-class corv´ee labourers. Some slaves became trusted advisers and assis-
tants of kings and high ofﬁcials and thus acquired considerable informal power.
Slaves in early civilizations tended to be few compared with those of Classical
Greece and Rome.
Those who were enslaved included prisoners of war, criminals who had
been punished by being deprived of their freedom, and individuals who had
been sold to repay debts. Among the Aztec the latter included men who
had bankrupted themselves as a result of gambling (Dur´an 1971: 281). Slaves
were sometimes imported from less developed areas as tribute or merchandise.
These slaves were usually ethnically different from their masters. The legal sta-
tuses of various categories of slaves differed, but these differences were never

158
Sociopolitical Organization
speciﬁed in as much detail as they were in ancient Athens (Westermann 1955).
Temporary debt slaves enjoyed the most rights.
The Aztec generally sacriﬁced male prisoners of war and slaves delivered to
them as tribute, since the high population density of the Valley of Mexico meant
that there was little demand for additional labour. They appear to have em-
ployed slaves mainly as household servants, business agents, and concubines
(Soustelle 1961: 74). The Shang rulers also appear to have sacriﬁced large
numbers of military prisoners. Here population density seems to have been
low, kept that way despite natural increase by expansion into enemy territory.
The Inka did not enslave captives taken in battle; instead, dangerous enemy
leaders were executed, while their followers, except for a few who were slain
as human sacriﬁces in Inka victory celebrations, were sent home or resettled
elsewhere in the kingdom (Rowe 1944: 279). In their wars with neighbouring
city-states, the Early Dynastic Mesopotamians appear to have executed many
male prisoners and blinded or castrated others before setting them to work
performing repetitive forms of manual labour, usually on palace estates. Blind-
ing was intended to make it more difﬁcult for slaves to escape to their nearby
city-states, while castration would have made it impossible for them to resume
a normal life if they had returned. Numerous women captured in intercity
wars were set to work as unpaid weavers for Mesopotamian temple and palace
estates. The generic designation for a male slave was arad. Female slaves
were called g´eme, but that term also designated a free but dependent female
labourer (equivalent to the male guruˇs) (R. McC. Adams 1966: 102; Gelb 1973;
Lerner 1986: 78–83; Maisels 1990: 156; Postgate 1992: 254–55; Siegel 1947).
Incontrast,theEgyptians,withtheirlowoverallpopulationdensity,enslaved
large numbers of foreign captives (sqrw ‘nh˘ ). Male prisoners were employed
as quarrymen, construction workers, household servants, and farmers, and
whole families were settled as agricultural labourers. The Yoruba, who also
had much surplus land, tended to employ large numbers of slaves, originally
acquired as prisoners of war, as agricultural labourers, although others were
used as household servants, tax collectors, and soldiers and bodyguards for
prominent men (Goody 1980: 34–36). They sacriﬁced only a small number of
slaves.
Buying and selling slaves was a signiﬁcant activity in several early civiliza-
tions. Individual Mesopotamians preferred to purchase individuals who had
been born as slaves and were therefore habituated to slavery or had been
imported from distant lands and would have nowhere to which to escape.
The word for ‘slave’ was written with the sign combination nita (man) + kur
(mountain), suggesting that many of them came, either as prisoners of war or
by trade, from the Zagros Mountains to the east (Goody 1980: 18; Postgate

Class Systems and Social Mobility
159
1992: 106–7). In the Valley of Mexico there were specially designated markets
in major urban centres where slaves could be purchased for human sacriﬁce
or domestic service (Clendinnen 1991: 99). Slaves of local origin could not be
sold for sacriﬁce unless they had ﬂagrantly disobeyed successive owners. The
exportation and sale of slaves captured in war was a major source of wealth for
Yoruba military leaders and traders.
The treatment of slaves varied. Many of those owned by public institutions
were little valued as individuals and were routinely overworked, underfed, and
poorly housed and therefore suffered high mortality. Among them were the
female slaves set to work in large weaving establishments attached to temples
and palaces in Mesopotamia (Wright 1996b) and the gangs of men employed
full-time in construction and mining projects by the Egyptian state. The latter
included not only prisoners of war but Egyptians who had been sentenced
to hard labour for evading corv´ee duty and other illegal acts (Hayes 1955;
Kemp 1983: 83). Among the Aztec, debt slaves could accumulate earnings,
own property, purchase their freedom, and marry, and their children were
born free. The descendants of prisoners of war remained slaves for three
generations and those of people enslaved as punishment for treason for four
(L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 402; Soustelle 1961: 74–78).
While there is no evidence of legal slavery among the Inka, there were two
categoriesofpeoplewhoresembledslavesinthatthestatetookthemfromtheir
ayllus as children and, if they were not soon slain as human sacriﬁces, assigned
them to the perpetual service of high-ranking individuals or state institutions.
The aqllakuna (chosen women) who were not distributed as concubines to
the king and to men the king wished to honour were conﬁned for the rest
of their lives to closed houses (aqllawasi). There, as women consecrated to the
service of the sun god, in addition to their religious duties they had to weave,
brew corn beer, and cook food for the state. They were probably better fed
and housed than most of the population but were forbidden to marry or to
have unsupervised contact with other people (Kendall 1973: 192–93). The boys
taken from their families became yanakuna (male servants), who worked for
the king or were permanently assigned by him to particular nobles as household
servants, craftsmen, or farmers. They could not be bought, sold, or given
away by those for whom they worked. They were allowed to marry, probably
initially being assigned young aqllakuna for this purpose, and their descendants
inherited their status. They were not subject to any form of taxation, and the
persons or institutions for whom they worked were responsible for seeing that
they and their families were properly fed, housed, and clothed. Yet everything
they produced belonged to their employers. The legal position of yanakuna
probably differed little from that of farmers bound to the land or craftsmen

160
Sociopolitical Organization
tied to the service of particular institutions in other early civilizations, but
their involuntary servitude in return for their keep resembled the economic
role elsewhere played by slaves (Murra 1980: 165–77).
Shang records identify, in addition to tax-paying farmers, usually called ren,
an inferior group of zhong who did not own land of their own. Their duties
included agricultural labour, tending animals, military service, and construct-
ing buildings – the same work that other commoners performed through the
corv´ee – but they appear to have worked full-time for the king. Men of the
same or analogous status were probably attached to aristocratic households. It
is unknown under what conditions the zhong lived (Keightley 1969: 66–144),
but it is not evident that they were slaves. In many ways they seem to have
resembled yanakuna. In China prisoners of war may have been put to work as
slaves until their fate was decided. Lin Chao (1972: 67–69) suggests that the
term chen originally designated a slave, possibly of foreign origin, who per-
sonally served the king and only gradually came to mean a civil servant. David
Keightley (1969: 357–79), however, ﬁnds no conclusive evidence of slavery in
Shang China.
In Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, foreign prisoners of war and tax default-
ers became government slaves (h
• mw nswt), and some of them were assigned
to high-ranking individuals. Yet in Egypt slaves were not numerous. There
appears to have been relatively little private buying or selling of slaves or en-
slavement of individuals for debt. The terms h
• m and b3k, which later meant
‘slave’, appear originally to have designated free servants and retainers respec-
tively (Wenke 1997: 47). Government slaves and their children seem to have
been absorbed over a few generations into the commoner class. At the same
time, many commoners were bound as agricultural and non-agricultural work-
ers (mrt) to the service of nobles and ofﬁcials (Loprieno 1997; Moreno Garc´ıa
1998). Thus in the three early civilizations where slavery was entirely absent
or limited in extent, the bonding of commoners to the service of upper-class
people appears to have placed some free persons in an analogous situation of
servitude. All three civilizations in which this happened were territorial states.
social mobility
Social mobility was limited in early civilizations by the slowness of technolog-
ical and social change and by a general lack of opportunity to gain access to
knowledge from outside the social group into which a person was born. Most
technical knowledge was transmitted from one generation to the next within
such groups. In addition, in most early civilizations upward mobility either
was regulated by the state or required recognition by the upper classes. This

Class Systems and Social Mobility
161
permitted members of the upper classes to dictate the terms on which their
privileges and powers might be shared with others. The Yoruba positively val-
ued social competition and, at least during the colonial era, expected families
to rotate through cycles of commoner and upper-class status (Stone 1997). Yet
their leaders tried to reinforce their own privileged positions and control social
climbing. Leo Frobenius (1913, 1: 174–75) reports that in precolonial times
the Ogboni society, to which all town and palace title-holders were expected
to belong, could through divination justify judicially killing or offering up as
human sacriﬁces individuals who were in the process of acquiring slaves and
wealth. Such persons were charged with treason, and after they were executed
their possessions were divided among the Ogboni and other ofﬁcials. Frobe-
nius noted, however, that such treatment was meted out only to upstarts who
lacked inﬂuential relatives to protect them. This was therefore an effective
way to restrict upper-class privileges to a small number of already powerful
lineages. To consolidate their higher social standing, vertically mobile Yoruba
also had to acquire titles that were controlled by the king.
Vertical mobility was most common in states that were expanding geograph-
ically or economically, where the need for more decision-makers and adminis-
trators resulted in the recruitment of new members to the upper and adminis-
trative classes. As the Inka state expanded, for example, the Inka rulers turned
their earliest supporters into Inka-by-privilege, giving them hereditary upper-
class status and making them junior partners in governing the kingdom. Up-
ward mobility was most restricted in conquered states and chiefdoms, where
resources were more limited than they might otherwise have been because of
the need to pay tribute to a hegemonic power.
The Aztec illustrate the vertical mobility that occurred in a hegemonic city-
state. As we have seen, warriors who captured four prisoners became eagle
nobles. The state supplied them with food rations or the produce of a plot of
land worked by mayeque, which allowed them to live as pipiltin, and when
they married noble women their children by these women became hereditary
nobles. Some young male commoners who displayed talents that would make
them effective high-level priests or administrators were sent to the special
schools (calmecac) where the sons of nobles were educated. As adults, they
too were absorbed into the nobility. Inﬂuential nobles sought to have their
sons by commoner secondary wives and concubines made pages at the royal
court, where they would receive special training and make contacts that would
help them achieve access to high ofﬁce (Dur´an 1964: 222–23).
By the reign of Mochtezuma II, the Aztec tributary system was no longer
expanding rapidly, and the king had adopted a policy of drawing the sons
of favoured subject rulers from nearby city-states into the administrative

162
Sociopolitical Organization
hierarchy in order to establish Aztec hegemony, at least within the Valley
of Mexico, on a broader, more cooperative basis. To accomplish this goal,
Mochtezuma forbade sons of Aztec nobles to become pages unless their moth-
ers as well as their fathers had been hereditary nobles. This decree debarred
sons by secondary marriages, as well as the sons of eagle nobles, from high
public ofﬁce. It also created a major cleavage within the nobility by distin-
guishing an inferior rank of nobles, descended from only one noble parent,
from a superior rank, descended from two. Mochtezuma is said to have dis-
missed and even executed nobles who were assigned to this new, lower status
but had received high ofﬁces during previous reigns (Dur´an 1964: 223). In
order to emphasize military achievement as the principal service to the state,
from earliest times the Aztec had denied ofﬁcial ofﬁces to the sons of wealthy
merchants and had not allowed them to marry noble women.
Requiring formal recognition for advancement was not, however, the only
way of limiting vertical mobility. Beginning in the Old Kingdom, Egyptian
writings extolled the ideal of the man who achieved success by winning the
favour of his superiors because of his ability and hard work. Egyptian wis-
dom literature emphasized the importance of honouring such men for their
achievements and not despising their humble origins (Lichtheim 1973: 66).
Yet these same wisdom texts took the form of instructions prepared by an
aged ofﬁcial for the beneﬁt of his son and eventual successor. Even though
each ofﬁcial had to work his way up through a series of lesser ofﬁces before
taking over his father’s position or a higher one, inheritance of high ofﬁces
was regarded as normal. While the image of the self-made man expressed
the ofﬁcial ideal of a royal bureaucracy, in reality positions tended to be
inherited.
Another signiﬁcant way to restrict vertical mobility was by strengthening
class endogamy. Sometimes this involved discouraging or explicitly forbidding
marriages between the upper and lower classes. Upper-class men were gen-
erally expected to marry within their own class, and primary marriages with
lower-class women were thought inappropriate. In societies where it was ac-
cepted that lower-class women might be secondary wives or concubines of
upper-class men, the children of these marriages were often subjected to so-
cial disabilities such as those imposed on them by Mochtezuma II. To an even
greater extent, however, vertical mobility was restricted by various forms of
personal self-interest favouring strategic intermarriage within both the upper
and the lower classes.
In general, farmers who collectively possessed land sought to prevent its
alienation by practicing endogamy within units such as ayllus or calpollis. While
the patrilineal Yoruba did not do this, their laws forbade husbands and wives

Class Systems and Social Mobility
163
to inherit from one another in order to ensure that landholdings remained
within the same patrilineage (Ajisafe 1924: 8). Farmers and craft workers
each had their own local interests and, even if their lineages or communities
were exogamous, preferred to contract marriages with groups of similar status
that were close at hand. In this way, such groups could assure themselves of
maximum local support in times of difﬁculty. Aztec who practised a particular
craft, such as metalworking or feather working, belonged to a single calpolli.
The children of Egyptian skilled workers who lived in the same community
frequently married each other. Chinese crafts were generally lineage-based,
but artisans belonging to different clans living close to each other probably
intermarried.
Members of the upper class married over a much wider area than did the
lower classes. In city-state systems, the royal families of different states fre-
quently intermarried to reinforce political alliances. The Aztec kings married
theirdaughtersorthoseofleadingnoblestomajortributaryrulerstoencourage
their allegiance and provide heirs to the thrones of these subordinate states
who were close relatives (Hodge 1984: 138–39). Maya kings married their
daughters to rulers of less powerful neighbouring states in the hope of creat-
ing enduring alliances that would be to their advantage (Schele and Mathews
1991: 245). In Shang China the king appears to have married the daughters
of numerous subordinate lords and in turn used his daughters to consolidate a
network of marital alliances with his more powerful subjects (Vandermeersch
1977: 275–77).
The ultimate assertion of political power was for a ruler to reject marital
ties and hence obligations to other groups. Egyptian and Inka rulers married
their sisters and half-sisters and, in the case of some New Kingdom pharaohs,
their daughters and took female members of high-ranking families as sec-
ondarywives.WiththeInka,thesewomenusuallycamefrompowerfulpanaqas
(Patterson 1991). Yet, because of the transcendant status of Egyptian kings,
relatives of royal wives did not refer in inscriptions to the special relations to
kings that such marriages created (Robins 1993: 28). Daughters of Egyptian
kings also married members of the high nobility. From a male point of view
these marriages had the disadvantage that a husband was expected to defer to
his royal wife. In New Kingdom Egypt, Egyptian rulers married the daughters
of foreign kings but refused, as a sign of their exclusive status, to allow their
daughters to marry foreign kings (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986: 58; Robins
1993: 28, 32).
Marriages were also a way to construct networks of alliances uniting upper-
class families. While in city-state systems such marriages, except at the highest
rank, tended to be within state borders, marriage alliances joined high-level

164
Sociopolitical Organization
upper-class families over large areas. Lower-class alliances rarely extended
beyond a single ward, community, or district. Especially in territorial states,
this gave the upper class a considerable advantage in its efforts to control the
lower classes despite its numerical inferiority.
Rulers and high ofﬁcials often had children by numerous wives and concu-
bines. If all of them had been able to claim a share of family privileges and
resources, it could have undermined the power of the upper classes; hence
it was desirable to prevent the undue expansion of the upper classes. Yoruba
kings possessed large estates and numerous slaves, but these were inherited
with the ofﬁce rather than by their children. Obas’ children could inherit
only the wealth that their fathers and mothers had acquired personally in the
course of their lifetimes. Hence those sons and grandsons of a king who had
little hope of ever becoming kings themselves tried to insert themselves into
their mothers’ patrilineages and claim a share of their resources (Lloyd 1962:
44; Peel 1983: 59). As a result, after a few generations a Yoruba king had few
identiﬁable descendants. The children of Inka kings other than their royal suc-
cessors formed corporate descent groups that had to preserve their wealth and
power by continuing to marry into the royal family and supporting successful
candidates for the throne. In Egypt members of the hereditary nobility had to
struggle as individuals to hold onto lucrative state ofﬁces, and those who were
unsuccessful slipped into the scribal class. In China, where access to high ofﬁce
was channelled by kinship relations, junior branches of noble families likewise
tended to move downward from a governing role to a lower administrative level
(Vandermeersch 1980: 162). On occasion, as with the changes introduced by
Mochtezuma II, the state intervened to debar lesser members of the nobility
from access to major ofﬁces. While few of these actions prevented individuals
from inheriting noble status, they did deprive junior or less successful individ-
uals of the means to realize what was regarded as an appropriate lifestyle. As
upper-class individuals declined into the lower administrative class, this pro-
cess simultaneously forged closer bonds and some antagonism between the
upper-class and administrative levels.
In Mesopotamia and elsewhere the children of purchased slaves belonged to
their owners, but there appear to have been relatively few impediments to the
absorption of slaves into the commoner class. Household slaves, for the most
part, could earn or purchase their freedom, and their children were sometimes
born free. Around a.d. 1505, the Aztec and Texcocans abolished hereditary
slavery except for the descendants of prisoners of war and traitors (Offner 1983:
309; Soustelle 1961: 76–77). Egyptians frequently freed household slaves, and
prosperous farmers and dependent specialists who were childless sometimes
adopted their freed slaves and even arranged for them to marry into their

Class Systems and Social Mobility
165
families in order to ensure that they would care for their former owners in
their old age (Robins 1993: 77). In Early Dynastic III Mesopotamian city-
states, debt slaves were periodically freed in connection with general debt
amnesties (Zagarell 1986: 416). Yoruba extended families also frequently freed
slaves and adopted them as low-ranking lineage members who worked as farm-
ers or professional soldiers (Akintoye 1971: 39–40, 52). In the early civilizations
the upper classes relied principally on the productive capacity of free farmers,
using slaves only as an auxiliary source of labour. Under these circumstances,
the best way to control and motivate slaves was to keep their expectations of
freedom relatively high. It is the limited utility of slaves as a source of labour
that accounts for their frequent manumission and relatively small numbers.
Class systems in early civilizations were characterized by limited vertical
mobility. Class membership was determined mainly by birth and, while verti-
cal mobility did occur (especially in societies that were expanding politically
or economically), promotion in the social hierarchy was decided in the ﬁnal
instance not by personal achievement but by royal or upper-class recognition,
the criteria for which varied from one early civilization to another.
similarities and differences
All early civilizations had class systems. Yet, among early civilizations, there
were signiﬁcant variations in the extent to which class replaced kinship as
the framework of social relations. In some early civilizations kinship relations
occurred only within classes. In others, class divisions cut across functioning
kinship networks. There were also variations in the extent to which the upper
classes were formally delineated and membership in them was hereditary.
Where both of these features were present, it is possible to speak of the upper
classes as a nobility. Slavery, while not of major economic importance in any
early civilization, appears to have been more prominent in city-state systems
than in territorial states. There is no clear evidence of its presence in Inka Peru
or Shang China.
In general, class divisions other than slavery appear to have been formally
delineated more consistently in territorial states than in city-states. In highland
Mesoamerica and probably among the Maya, class differences were heredi-
tary; in Mesopotamia classes were legally distinguished but individuals had to
achieve and maintain upper-class membership. Among the Yoruba, the upper
class was deﬁned by royally conferred titles and ofﬁces that certain kin groups
sought to retain. In all these cases, the upper classes, for political and eco-
nomic reasons, placed more emphasis on solidarity with unrelated members
of their own class than with the lower-class members of the clans and lineage

166
Sociopolitical Organization
groups to which they belonged and whose support they frequently needed.
Especially in territorial states, upper-class solidarity was much more extensive
geographically than lower-class solidarity, which normally manifested itself at
a local level.
Thecross-culturalsimilaritiesinclassstructureweretheexpressionofafairly
speciﬁc set of beliefs about the nature of status that were shared by all the early
civilizations. It was agreed that giving orders was more prestigious than having
to obey orders, that not having to work was superior to having to perform
manual labour, that possessing specialized knowledge and skills was better
than not possessing them, that wealth was superior to poverty, that having
land was preferable to not having it, and that being free was better than being
owned. Finally, although it was accompanied by greater risk of incurring
the displeasure of the upper class or being unduly exploited by it, ordinary
people saw more opportunities for bettering themselves in geographical and
social proximity to the powerful than in remoteness from them. It was these
propositions, which reﬂect considerable uniformity in human thinking about
the nature of inequality in complex societies, that generated the multilayered
social structures just outlined.

9 Family Organization and
Gender Roles
M
any different forms of kin relations were associated with early civi-
lizations. While these relations were intimately connected with fam-
ily life, residence patterns, marital practices, and the nurturing of children,
they were also associated with broader sociocultural practices such as land-
holding, agricultural production, craft organization, inheritance of property,
political and economic activities, value systems, and religious beliefs. They
also constituted the primary sphere in which gender roles were deﬁned, al-
though class differences also affected these roles. Lower-class women in all
early civilizations cooked, cleaned houses, cared for children, and spun and
wove to provide clothing for their families, but the division of domestic labour
among them varied according to the number of women who lived together and
how they allocated household tasks among themselves. The division of labour
and relations of authority between men and women also varied signiﬁcantly
from one civilization to another and according to class.
The seven early civilizations provide examples of kinship systems charac-
terized by patrilineal descent groups (Shang and Zhou China, Yoruba-Benin,
Classic Maya, Mesopotamia), endogamous descent groups or demes (Valley
of Mexico, Inka), and non-corporate descent (ancient Egypt). The Egyptians
did not have, beyond the nuclear family, any kinship unit that possessed land,
political power, or a sense of corporate identity. In no two early civilizations
was family organization precisely the same.
kin and gender relations
Family life in Shang China was structured by patrilineal descent. Each corpo-
rate descent group (zu) inhabited a single community, and its male members
worked a tract of land or practised a particular craft. Among the upper classes,
two or more generations of a family belonging to a corporate descent group
167

168
Sociopolitical Organization
lived, under the authority of its senior male member, in a house composed
of living rooms, shrines, reception halls, and work areas arranged around a
series of open courts. Commoners appear to have lived in smaller, possibly
nuclear-family houses, but married sons remained subject to the authority
of their fathers and uncles. Each corporate descent group traced its origin
to a single male ancestor who was venerated by all his male descendants.
Within the descent group patrilineal descent lines were hierarchically orga-
nized, with descent from elder brothers invariably ranking higher than descent
from younger brothers. The oldest member of the senior line (da zong) was
the group’s leader and the sole person who could perform rituals honouring
the group’s deceased founder and chief guardian spirit. When a group had
expanded until it contained over one hundred nuclear families (this was esti-
mated to take seven generations), it split into two and the junior branch moved
off to establish a new group.
It is generally assumed that already in Shang times all the patrilineal descent
groups that could trace themselves back to a common ancestor shared a sur-
name and constituted an exogamous clan (xing). Clans took the form of large
ramages, which meant that their various descent lines (zu, shi) were ranked in
terms of their genealogical proximity to the clan’s founder. The descent groups
which belonged to the same clan were often geographically widely separated
from one another (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 148–50). The leading clan on the
central plain of northern China during the Shang period was the Zi, and its
senior branch (wang zu) supplied the Shang kings.
While this sort of clan organization was indisputably the basis of society
in the Western Zhou period, L´eon Vandermeersch (1977: 203) argues that,
apart from the Zi clan, there is no evidence of clan organization in the Shang
period. He maintains that only individual patrilineal descent groups existed and
that the king alone practised an ancestral cult. Vandermeersch refers to high-
ranking patrilineal descent groups as ‘territorial houses’. Most scholars assume,
however, that it is the documentation for clans rather than clans themselves
that is lacking for the Shang period. Attempts by Kwang-chih Chang and Liu
Binxiong to demonstrate that each Shang clan was divided into ten sections
held together by cross-cousin marriage remain unsubstantiated (K. Chang
1978; Vandermeersch 1977: 284–93).
Shang rules of exogamy allowed marriage only between different descent
groups and probably only between different clans. Commonly, two families
appear to have been united over many generations by men’s marrying cousins
fromtheirmothers’families,ideallymothers’brothers’daughters(Granet1958
[1930]: 156–57). Women were not only required to live with their husbands’
families but upon marriage forfeited membership in the lineage groups into

Family Organization and Gender Roles
169
which they had been born and joined their husbands’ clans and ancestral cults.
Thus a woman’s position in Chinese society was determined in turn by that of
her father, her husband, and her son. Women nevertheless played an important
role alongside their husbands in the ancestral cult and other religious rituals
of the family into which they had married. Moreover, women who bore sons
couldexpecttobeveneratedafterdeathintheancestralcultsoftheirhusbands’
families.
Most lower-class Shang Chinese were monogamous. To ensure the birth of
sons, who would perpetuate their lineage, upper-class men frequently acquired
secondary wives. In Zhou times these were often younger sisters or other close
relatives of a chief wife who came with her as part of her marriage suite. If the
chief wife died, one of her female relatives would replace her, thus maintaining
the family alliance (Vandermeersch 1977: 311–12). The male heir of a man’s
position was normally the eldest son of his ﬁrst chief wife.
Shang kings appear to have married many women, thus forging or renew-
ing links between the royal family and leading lineages throughout the Shang
kingdom. There is also evidence of royal endogamy within the Zi clan, to which
both King Wu Ding and his consort Fu Hao appear to have belonged (P. Chang
1986: 130). In addition to bearing children, these women, and perhaps the
wives of princes and other ladies living at the royal court, assisted the male
relatives of the royal family in the work of administering the kingdom. They
announced royal decrees, delivered formal messages, performed ancestral rit-
uals and other religious rites, organized agricultural production, supervised
the collection of taxes, raised troops, and on rare occasions led armies. Most
important, they conducted royal business with their parental families and the
regions where they had been born. They may have been the most effective
links between the monarch and powerful families living in various parts of
the Shang kingdom. Thus they performed many of the same court duties as
were later performed by eunuchs, which are not reported before the Zhou
period (Creel 1937: 293). In Zhou times one of the two chief royal stewards
(zai) still had to receive instructions from and report to the queen (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 255). This practice may have been a vestige of the important
administrative roles formerly played by women at the royal court. Mark Lewis
(1990: 73) points out that in the Eastern Zhou period Chinese royal ofﬁcials
were regarded as having the same subordinate position in relation to the king
as royal wives and concubines and treated these women as potential rivals. At
least at the royal court, women appear to have played a different and more
important role during the Shang period than in later times.
In southern Mesopotamia, a father and some of his sons or several broth-
ers, together with their wives and young children, often formed a patrilineal

0
10 m
0
40 m
0
10 m
0
10 m
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
court
0
10 m
0
50 m
garden
(no scale supplied)
(no scale supplied)

Family Organization and Gender Roles
171
extended family. These domestic units, as well as larger temple or palace es-
tates, were called ´e in Sumerian and bˆıtum in Akkadian, words meaning both
‘house’ and ‘household’ (Pollock 1999: 117–18). In the countryside, a num-
ber of rooms, which housed nuclear families or were used for storage, were
loosely arranged around an open compound. In urban centres, houses were
arranged more compactly, with rooms opening off one or more interior court-
yards (Fig. 9.1). In general, extended families appear to have been composed
of fewer nuclear families in urban centres than in the countryside. Extended
households in cities also seem to have diminished in size over time. Fam-
ilies that were patrilineally related sometimes lived in adjacent houses, but
there is no evidence that city wards were kinship units. The governing of these
wards by mayors and councils made up of the heads of leading households
suggests that most of them were not (Crawford 1991: 93–95; Postgate 1992:
82–94, 310; Stone 1987; Van De Mieroop 1999: 104–6). Akkadian-speaking
Mesopotamians seem to have formed larger kin groups than Sumerians, and
wards of Semitic-speakers may have consisted largely of patrilineally related
kin more often than was the case among Sumerian-speakers.
Sons inherited from their fathers land, houses, furniture, animals, slaves, and
temple positions. Joint ownership of family property became less common over
time, the normal practice being for brothers to divide their father’s estate after
his death. Either this division was into equal shares or the eldest brother was
awarded between 10 and 100 percent more than the rest. In return, eldest
sons were expected to care for parents in their old age and make offerings to
their spirits after they died. The idea of extended families’ holding property in
common persisted to the extent that individuals wishing to sell their share of
a house or family land had ﬁrst to offer it to family members and obtain their
approval (Postgate 1992: 94–101).
9.1. Houses in early civilizations: (a) plan of a large Middle Kingdom Egyptian ofﬁcial’s res-
idence at Kahun; (b) an ordinary house from Kahun – Kahun was established to house the
mortuary priests of King Senwosret II; (c) elevation and plan of a Mesopotamian private house
at Ur, from the Isin-Larsa period; (d) reconstruction of such a house; (e) street plan of a small
section of Ur during the Old Babylonian period; (f) lower-class Classic Maya house group;
(g) upper-class house from Chiconauhtla, near Texcoco, in the Valley of Mexico; (h) an Inka
double-kancha enclosure at Ollantaytambo – while these particular structures were constructed
by the government, it is unknown what class of people inhabited them (illustrations not to
common scale). Sources: (a), (b) after Kemp 1989: 152, 158; (c), (d) after L. Woolley, The
Sumerians (Oxford, 1928): ﬁgs. 26, 27; (e) after J. Hawkes & L. Woolley, History of Mankind,
Vol. 1 (New York, 1963): 425; (f) after Wilk & Ashmore 1988: 133; (g) after G. Kubler, The
Art and Architecture of Ancient America (Harmondsworth, 1962): 55; (h) after Gasparini &
Margolies 1980: 190.

172
Sociopolitical Organization
Daughters did not inherit property as such, but in any division of a man’s
estate land and property had to be set aside to provide dowries for unmarried
daughters. Rich men often installed one or more of their daughters as priests in
elitereligiousinstitutions.InOldBabyloniantimessomeofthesenaditumlived
as celibates in walled cloisters (gagˆum) attached to major temples (Postgate
1992: 130–31). This arrangement required an endowment, equivalent to a
dowry, for their support, but it was anticipated that these endowments would
return to their brothers after they died. Thus making it impossible for some
daughters to marry was a way of avoiding the alienation of family property.
Women were legally subject to their husbands, who were designated as their
owners (bˆelu) (Bott´ero 1992: 186). In records they are often referred to not by
their names but as the wife (dam), mother (amma), sister (nia), or daughter
(dumu, munus) of their male kin (Glassner 1989: 82–83). Although women
were not conﬁned to their homes and appeared as witnesses and plaintiffs
in lawsuits (Lerner 1986: 104), any property that married women possessed
(mainly in the form of dowries) was controlled by their husbands, fathers, or
brothers. Respectable women were required to avoid all extramarital sexual re-
lations, while men were free to engage in them provided their female partners
were adults and unmarried (Rohrlich 1980).
Marriages tended to occur among families of equivalent social standing and
were arranged by adult males of these families, normally either the groom or
his father and the bride’s father. Upper-class families used daughters to create
and strengthen economically and politically advantageous alliances. Girls were
frequently betrothed in infancy but continued to live with their parents until
their marriage. They sometimes began to have sexual relations with their future
spouses prior to marriage. The groom was required to provide betrothal
and bridal gifts and the bride’s father a dowry, which could be substantial.
The dowry was managed by the bride’s husband and returned to her on his
death (Lerner 1986: 107–13). With the approval of legal authorities, men were
able to divorce wives they found difﬁcult to live with. A divorced woman’s
dowry had to be returned to her unless she chose to continue to live in her
former husband’s home. When a woman died, her dowry passed to her sons
or, if there were none, to her father or brother. Marriage contracts, written or
verbal, could specify special terms for mutual separation, preclude wives from
being enslaved for debts their husbands had incurred prior to marriage, and
specify special property rights (107).
Marriage was predominantly monogamous. Only a few well-to-do men had
secondary spouses (aˇsˇsatu) or slave concubines (esertu). Such women were
often supplied by a principal wife (h˘ ˆırtu) who was unable to bear a child. Sec-
ondary wives or concubines were also provided for their husbands by certain

Family Organization and Gender Roles
173
high-ranking female priests, who were permitted to marry but required to
abstain from sexual intercourse. In all these situations the principal wife was
recognized as the female head of the family (Bott´ero 1992: 186).
A king normally had a single wife and ﬁve to eight children. Some rulers
of the Ur III Dynasty had more than ﬁfty offspring, many of them apparently
by royal concubines. The seclusion of royal women and the use of eunuchs
to guard them appear to have begun in the Ur III period. Kings’ wives and
daughters were often educated and performed various political and economic
administrative duties. Royal wives managed estates belonging to the palace
and to temples, supervised various economic activities, and sometimes acted
as regents and representatives of rulers. They frequently exchanged presents
just as kings did (Lerner 1986: 61–69; Postgate 1992: 148–49; Silver 1986: 41–
42). Although kings sometimes appointed daughters to be the high priests of
city gods in an attempt to expand royal control over major temples (Postgate
1992: 26), their wives do not appear to have played a major role in state
religious rituals, nor are they represented alongside their husbands in art. In
state rituals the female counterpart of the king appears to have been a female
priest. While kings sometimes married the daughters of foreign rulers, most
royal wives were of local origin, perhaps reﬂecting the pressing need for most
kings to consolidate alliances within their own city-states.
Other upper-class women played various public roles, mainly religious in
nature. Where the principal city deity was male, the top-ranking cult priest
was normally a woman (Oates 1978: 476). Such women were appointed by a
male ofﬁcial (usually the king) and ofﬁciated in temples managed by males.
There were other religious roles for women from wealthy families, such as
high-status temple devotees, whose duties in Old Babylonian times included
presenting offerings to deities on special occasions and tending to their sanc-
tuaries (R. Harris 1975: 307–9). All these women, whether or not they led
cloistered lives, were required to remain celibate. They could engage in busi-
ness dealings, which augmented the endowments that supported them (Silver
1986: 42–44), and possessed their own seals. Other women, apparently of lower
social status, worked for temples in less prestigious ritual capacities. Some of
them joined associations of prostitutes that were connected to temples of the
fertility goddess, Inanna (R. Harris 1989: 149). These associations included
married women who had abandoned their husbands and women who had
joined them as children (Bott´ero 1992: 189–90).
WhilethelegalrightsofSumerianwomenwerelimited,atleastsomewomen
from well-to-do families held administrative posts, owned and bought prop-
erty, engaged in business, and testiﬁed at legal hearings (Glassner 1989: 83;
Oates 1978: 478; Van De Mieroop 1989). From Old Babylonian times there is

174
Sociopolitical Organization
mention of female scribes’ serving cloistered female priests (R. Harris 1975:
196; 1989). At the lower end of the social spectrum, women ran taverns, en-
gagedinfreelanceprostitution,anddabbledinwitchcraft,livingonthemargins
of society both socially and geographically. Many of them resided and carried
on business in isolated locations near the city walls. Lacking families or protec-
tors, they provided examples of an improper female lifestyle and were often
brutally treated. It was maintained that prostitutes made poor wives because
they were untrained and not disposed to look after a home and family (Bott´ero
1992: 195). Also badly treated because they lacked male protectors were the
single women, probably slaves of foreign origin, who worked alongside female
members of debtor families in cloth factories belonging to palaces and temples.
The women at the bottom of Mesopotamian society provided object lessons
that to be secure and respected a woman needed a father, husband, brother, or
son who was willing and able to protect her and defend her interests (Bott´ero
1992: 193–98).
The Yoruba were organized as patrilineal extended families (idile) that
owned residential property in a town or city and farmland in the surround-
ing countryside. In the southern Yoruba states, located in the tropical-forest
zone, extended families tended to live in clusters of small multigenerational
houses. On the savanna to the north, where there was greater need for formal
military organization, entire extended families lived in single large compounds
(ile) surrounded by stamped-earth walls more than two metres high (Lloyd
1962). More than two hundred people sometimes occupied a single com-
pound. Within such a unit individual adults had single rooms of their own ar-
ranged around a series of open courtyards. These compounds also contained
shrines, storerooms, reception rooms, and sometimes even a prison where
family members could be conﬁned.
Clans made up of a number of extended families (agbo ile, many com-
pounds) that traced descent from a still more remote male ancestor (orisun,
spring) sometimes lived adjacent to one another and formed wards or localities
within a community. These groupings were also called idile. Each clan had its
own oral history (itan), and its members shared distinctive personal names
(orile), greetings, hairstyles, facial scars, food taboos, customs, and tutelary
deities.
Every Yoruba extended family had as its head (bale) its eldest competent
male member, regardless of his genealogical relation to his predecessor. Within
theextendedfamily,malesenioritywasreckonedbydateofbirthandfemalese-
niority by the length of time spent with the husband’s relatives. The head of the
idile was usually not one of the extended-family members who held the idile’s
town and palace titles. The bale was responsible for worshipping the extended

Family Organization and Gender Roles
175
family’s gods and ancestors and for preparing supernatural ‘medicines’ that
kept family members healthy and harmonious. He also dealt with government
ofﬁcials on behalf of the extended family and was responsible to them for his
family’s good behaviour. The bale had the power to punish members of his
extended family for various forms of misbehaviour. This power was exercised
by a court composed of the bale, elderly members of the family, and its titled
ofﬁce-holders (Bascom 1944; 1969: 42–45; Lloyd 1955).
Yoruba patrilineages were exogamous, and marriage was forbidden with ma-
ternal kinsmen over at least seven generations. Membership in an extended
familywaslimitedtothechildrenofitsmalemembers(omoile)andpeoplewho
had been formally adopted into it. Wives (aya ile) remained members of their
fathers’ patrilineage, as did ara ile, strangers who were allowed to live in a com-
pound but had not been adopted into its patrilineage (Bascom 1969: 43–44).
Edo (Benin) patrilineages were less elaborate than Yoruba ones. Only those
of high-ranking families were more than two or three generations deep. Land
tended to belong to communities rather than to kin groups, and titles were
inherited by eldest sons if they were inherited at all. Edo families lived in both
nuclear and extended-family residences (Bradbury 1957: 27–31).
The majority of older Yoruba men appear to have had more than one wife,
the number varying according to a man’s personal wealth. Multiple marriages
were generally agreeable to ﬁrst wives, who enjoyed seniority over junior wives
and were relieved by them of many household chores. Women normally mar-
ried only once, widows being inherited by their husbands’ brothers or sons
by other wives. Marriages were viewed as alliances between patrilineages and
constituted a means by which such groups could secure allies for factional com-
petition, trade, and warfare. Hence they were normally contracted between
families of roughly equal social status. Women from the highest-ranking fam-
ilies married either the king (who had many wives) or men from families of
equivalent status to their own (K. Barber 1991: 272), thereby reinforcing sol-
idarity among the most powerful men in each city-state. Class endogamy was
further encouraged by the increase in the bride-price with the status of the
bride’s family (Ajisafe 1924: 53; Lloyd 1974: 34).
Women married in their twenties and most men in their thirties, usually after
a long period spent working for their fathers; however, if a man were wealthy
his son might marry earlier. Girls were often betrothed in their infancy or even
before birth but remained in their fathers’ houses until they were married.
For the betrothal of an adult woman her own consent was required. Marriage
involved both a bride-price, normally paid in three installments by the groom
or his father, and in ordinary families a period of labour service by the groom
which compensated the bride’s family for the loss of her labour. A husband

176
Sociopolitical Organization
had to provide his wife with a room of her own for herself and her children,
adequate food and clothing, and some capital to begin trading. Divorce was
rare but could be obtained on grounds of a wife’s insanity, chronic illness, or
infertility and a husband’s laziness, indebtedness, or cruelty. A Yoruba woman
could own property in her own name and manage it even if she were married
(Bascom 1969: 59–65). Unmarried Yoruba women who became rich as traders
might marry other women, whose children became their heirs (Denzer 1994:
18). As part of their continuing afﬁliation with their natal patrilineages, women
regularly participated in religious rituals and celebrations at their fathers’ com-
pounds and were buried there (Bascom 1969: 60).
Use-rights to land, houses, and any other possessions of a patrilineage could
be transmitted permanently only to a man’s sons or, if he had none, to his
surviving brothers. Yoruba spouses were forbidden to inherit from one another.
This arrangement protected the collective possessions of a patrilineage against
alienation. A woman had access to her family’s agricultural land, houses, cult
places, and ﬁnancial help during her lifetime. Both men and women were able
to pass along to their children the wealth they had earned personally. A man’s
property was divided in equal shares among the children of each of his wives
rather than being bequeathed equally to each child (Lloyd 1962: 27, 292–307).
Women performed household chores under the supervision of the oldest
woman in the compound. They also had the right to engage in business out-
side the home. This was done especially by older women or by senior wives
in polygynous families, who could arrange for their children to be cared for
by their husbands’ younger wives. Many women engaged in local trade, sell-
ing family farm produce, crafts, and cooked food in the marketplaces. Other
women engaged in long-distance trade, and the most successful of them came
to own plantations and numerous slaves and even private armies. By being
able to lend food, weapons, and soldiers to military leaders, some of them also
became politically inﬂuential (W. Clarke 1972: 47, 86). They were rarely able,
however, to convert their economic inﬂuence into political power for them-
selves and were often accused of witchcraft by rivals of men whose political
careers they supported (K. Barber 1991: 232–35). Women also had a monopoly
on producing certain types of manufactured goods, such as pottery, dyed cloth,
palm and other vegetable oils, soap, mats, and beer (Denzer 1994: 7). Women
who manufactured these products tended to organize themselves in commu-
nity craft guilds. Some women fashioned inﬂuential roles as professional praise
singers and leaders of religious cults (K. Barber 1991). Female palace ofﬁcials,
who were appointed from among the inﬂuential women in the community,
helped to select and install new kings and were among their ofﬁcial advis-
ers and agents. Some of them undertook diplomatic missions to other states

Family Organization and Gender Roles
177
on behalf of the ruler. They also conducted rituals for both living and dead
kings. They had their own hierarchy of titles, and their public duties included
supervising the marketplaces. At Ife and Benin high-ranking women were rep-
resented in royal art, though less commonly than kings. Most of the domestic
labour within the palace was performed by less important female members of
the king’s household (Denzer 1994).
Royal wives were mostly of local origin. In Oyo new members of the state
council (Oyo Mesi) gave a daughter in marriage to the king. The king also
occasionally married royal women from non-Yoruba states such as Nupe and
Dahomey (R. Smith 1969: 112). Yoruba and Benin rulers strengthened al-
liances by sending some of their children to live with neighbouring kings
(Barnes and Ben-Amos 1989: 51). A king’s many wives were able to engage in
long-distance trade without having to pay the taxes that were normally imposed
on the movement of goods. Their savings provided an inheritance for their chil-
dren, who were unable to inherit land from their father because his ofﬁcial
estates passed intact to his successor, usually not his son. An oba could transmit
to his descendants only wealth that he had acquired prior to becoming king.
Maya families are generally assumed to have been patrilineal and patrilocal.
Extended families spanning two or three generations appear to have lived in
nuclear-family dwellings arranged around three or four sides of a courtyard.
Poor families lived in houses constructed of wattle and daub, top-ranking
ones in stone houses with poorer dwellings located nearby (Haviland 1968;
Tourtellot 1988). Each such residential group had its own cult centre, and
dead members were buried in the low earth platforms on which the main
buildings were erected. Patrilineal extended families appear to have been
exogamous, and immovable property and political ofﬁces were inherited pa-
trilineally (Abrams 1994; McAnany 1995; Wilk and Ashmore 1988). It has been
argued that patrilineal extended families were less important in major urban
centres such as Tikal than in smaller urban centres or the countryside. It is
unclear to what extent those who lived in a house cluster were members of
a single extended family; the poorer residents may have been dependents or
slaves (Gillespie 2000; Haviland 1988; 1992; Wilk 1988).
Upper-class women appear to have been of considerable importance, at least
ritually and symbolically. Children inherited their status and names from both
their fathers’ and their mothers’ patrilineages. This made marrying daughters
to the rulers of smaller, neighbouring states or communities a potent means
for a king to build political alliances. Female rulers, or at least regents, are
recorded at various times. Royal mothers appear to feature more prominently
thankings’wivesinMayaiconography.Royalwomenaredepictedparticipating
alongside kings and royal heirs in religious rites, especially the accession rituals

178
Sociopolitical Organization
that stressed the continuity and importance of royal dynasties (Graham 1991;
Joyce 1992; 2000: 54–89).
The Aztec emphasized patrilineal descent and had a kin terminology that
stretched over seven generations, but, as did the Maya, they derived signiﬁ-
cant social status from their mothers’ families. Ordinary Aztec families were
monogamous, but wealthy nobles often had secondary wives and concubines,
some of the latter having been acquired before marriage. Mochtezuma II was
reported to have had two wives and many concubines, by whom he had a total
of 150 children (Soustelle 1961: 178). The king of Texcoco was said to have had
more than two thousand ‘wives’ by whom he had had 144 children, 11 born of
his chief wife (Berdan 1982: 68).
Ordinary Aztec lived in extended-family houses constructed of stamped
earth. These houses, which normally housed two to six patrilineally or
bilaterally related nuclear families, had rooms arranged around two to four
sides of a courtyard in which many domestic activities occurred. There also
appear to have been special communal work areas for the women of the fam-
ily. Each nuclear family had its own room or suite of rooms. Noble families
lived in larger, often multistorey stone versions of such houses. In the coun-
tryside, extended-family houses were smaller, and there may also have been
small, detached nuclear-family dwellings (Calnek 1972: 109–11; 1976: 298–
300; Clendinnen 1991: 58).
Adjacent households belonged to the same calpolli or ward, each of which
had from a few hundred to several thousand members. In more remote and
rural parts of the valley calpollis tended to be small, were largely run by con-
sensus, and had commoners as leaders. In urban locations they were larger and
more hierarchical and their leaders had been co-opted into the hereditary no-
bility, with the result that they had access to additional land and resources from
outside their kinship groups. Calpollis were endogamous, collective landown-
ing groups. At least the larger ones had their own stone temples, commoner
schools, and governing hierarchies. The Aztec believed that it was hard for
persons to remain healthy if they remained for a long time out of sight of their
calpolli temple (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 409). Because calpollis were endog-
amous, patrilineal descent did not play a particularly important role in reg-
ulating inheritance. This made marriage patterns of little consequence from
the point of view of conserving communal property. Elderly women acted as
go-betweens in arranging marriages between families. It appears that, even
within calpollis, parents preferred marriages between families of equivalent
rank and status. Both celibacy and divorce were discouraged, but men were
allowed to divorce women who failed to produce children. Widows generally
married one of their husbands’ brothers. Men inherited their fathers’ personal

Family Organization and Gender Roles
179
possessions and women their mothers’. Subject to some form of consent by
calpolli members, public ofﬁces, including the leadership of calpollis, were in-
herited patrilineally, either from father to son or from elder to younger brother
(M. E. Smith 1996: 145–51; Spath 1973).
Aztec women were expected to be virgins when they married and, while
women were believed to continue to enjoy sex in old age more than men
did, to remain faithful to their husbands (Clendinnen 1991: 166). They were,
however, permitted to move about freely, engage in various part-time pro-
fessions, and spend their earnings as they pleased. Many women were active
in marketing, selling cooked food and cloth and the vegetables and hand-
icrafts produced by their male relatives or retailing goods purchased from
long-distance traders. In feather-working families women specialized in dy-
ing feathers. Other women embroidered cloth for temples, rich patrons, and
market sale. Still others catered parties for their neighbours (Clendinnen 1991:
161–63). Wives of long-distance traders managed their husbands’ business
from home while the latter were absent and may have engaged by proxy in
intercity trade (Clendinnen 1991: 135). Other women worked part-time as
midwives, curers, and diviners, perhaps possessing knowledge that was not
available to male physicians (Kellogg 1995).
Women also served as priests in local temples. Most of them did so on a
part-time basis, but some remained celibate and functioned full-time for long
periods as did many higher-ranking male priests. They never occupied the
highest levels of priestly hierarchies, however, and they depended for their
appointments on men (Kellogg 1995). For a woman to remain respectable she
either had to be married or, in the case of celibate female priests, remain part of
her birth family. Women who did not enjoy such protection were often forced
into prostitution. Captive women were kept in state-controlled ‘Houses of Joy’,
where they provided sexual entertainment for unmarried young warriors who
had captured enemy prisoners. Aztec women who did not have families might
work as prostitutes either on their own or under the supervision of a female
protector, usually plying their trade in public marketplaces (Clendinnen 1991:
163–65). Although women played a signiﬁcant role in Aztec military life by
preparing the food that soldiers carried with them on campaigns, the state
granted conquered land and tribute to male ofﬁcials and successful warriors
and not to women. Therefore women were unable to beneﬁt directly from the
vertical mobility that the development of tributary networks made possible
(Nash 1978).
Aztec kings married the daughters of high-ranking Aztec nobles and rulers of
friendly neighbouring states while bestowing their own daughters in marriage
on such men. Land owned by royal families was exchanged as part of the

180
Sociopolitical Organization
dowries associated with interstate marriages, but it was managed by women’s
husbands and sons, not by themselves (Hodge 1984: 138–39). Royal women
played no public roles in Aztec political and religious life, nor are they reported
tohaveappearedinpublicwiththeirhusbandsonanyofﬁcialoccasion.Regents
were appointed from the top ranks of hereditary male ofﬁcials. Nevertheless,
upper-class women played active roles in the political intrigues within and
among the royal and noble families of city-states (Joyce 2000: 133–75; van
Zantwijk 1994).
Most highland Andean nuclear families occupied one-room houses built of
adobe or rough ﬁeld stones. A small number of closely related nuclear fam-
ilies shared an enclosed compound (kancha), their individual houses being
arranged around the inside of the wall (Kendall 1973: 123–27). A number
of these extended families formed an ayllu or endogamous landholding group
consisting of a few hundred people or more. It is debated whether ayllus were a
primordial feature of Andean social organization or arose early in the Christian
era as a form of resistance against developing state structures (Isbell 1997).
Among the Inka and many other Central Andean highland groups descent was
patrilineal, but in some other highland groups it was matrilineal. Inka kin terms
reveal both patrilineal (Omaha) and matrilineal (Crow) tendencies, which may
indicate an underlying pattern of parallel descent (Lounsbury 1986; Zuidema
1977). It has also been argued that the Inka had parallel inheritance, with
some ofﬁces and property passing from fathers to sons and some from moth-
ers to daughters. Supporters of this theory argue that noble women inherited
ﬁelds from their mothers and female commoners inherited rights to ayllu land
which they surrendered upon marriage (Silverblatt 1987: 7, 219). Yet ayllu
land was assigned not to individuals but to nuclear families, and both land and
herds were regularly redistributed in accordance with the changing number
of children and other dependents that a couple had to support. In fact noth-
ing was inherited except the right to a share of ayllu property. The ofﬁce of
queen was not inherited matrilineally but bestowed on the woman chosen to
be the principal wife of the king. Finally, the endogamy of peasant groups en-
sured that marriage did not alienate property however it was inherited. These
observations call into question the practical signiﬁcance of parallel descent.
Each ayllu in a district belonged to one of two moieties, often designated
hanan (upper) and hurin (lower). Ayllus belonging to the same moiety strongly
supported each other economically and socially, while those belonging to op-
posite moieties cooperated politically and ritually. While each moiety had its
own leader, it was agreed that the leader of the lower moiety was the helper
of the leader of the upper one, who alone had the right to speak for both
groups in their dealings with outsiders. Upper moieties frequently claimed

Family Organization and Gender Roles
181
to be descended from pastoralist invaders who had conquered the indige-
nous agricultural lower moiety. In reality, both moieties engaged in agricul-
ture and pastoralism. In Cuzco the upper moiety embraced the descendants
of recent rulers who had expanded the Inka kingdom, while the lower moiety
embraced the decendants of earlier and apparently more peaceful kings (Gose
1996b).
To become an adult member of a community, each male commoner (hatun
runa, ‘big man’) had to have celebrated a coming-of-age (or breech-cloth)
ritual in which he received the name he would keep for the rest of his life.
He also had to be married. Although ordinary people or their families no
doubt decided among themselves who should marry one another, marriage
was obligatory under Inka rule and was solemnized by rituals that government
ofﬁcials performed annually in each community for women between the ages
of sixteen and twenty and men before they were twenty-ﬁve years old. This
ritual symbolized the Inka king’s control over the reproductive capacity of all
subject women (Gose 2000). Since only able-bodied married couples were
taxpayers, it was in the state’s interest to ensure that all young adults were
married. The king personally performed marriage rituals for members of the
royal lineages at Cuzco. The next day royal ofﬁcials married all other people of
appropriate age in the Cuzco area. Ayllu members elsewhere were married
by local leaders, in the presence of Inka administrators. The state provided
each noble married couple with a home, while each ayllu built houses for its
commoner newlyweds (Kendall 1973: 82–83).
The lower classes were monogamous, but a man could be given a second
wife (normally from outside the community) as a reward for his services to the
state. Upper-class males tended to be polygamous. A man’s principal wife was
a woman of his own class, but he also received from the king women captured
in war and young aqllakuna as secondary wives or concubines. If a principal
wife died a man could remarry, but none of his secondary wives was allowed
to become his chief wife. The highest-ranking nobles were allowed to marry
their half-sisters (Rowe 1944: 251–52).
Inka kings are reported to have had hundreds of secondary wives and con-
cubines, who, unlike the quya or queen, were kept in seclusion. Provincial
nobles regarded it as an honour for the king to take their daughters as sec-
ondary wives. These women and their daughters were often referred to by
the name of the province from which the mother had come. Royal concu-
bines were selected from among the young aqllakuna. The queen might be
the king’s sister or half-sister, although some were more remote relatives from
powerful panaqas. Kingship was normally inherited by a son of the quya or,
failing a suitable individual in that category, by the son of a secondary wife who

182
Sociopolitical Organization
belonged to the Inka nobility. A king often had older sons by concubines or
secondary wives who came from the provincial nobility (Kendall 1973: 63–64,
72, 90; Silverblatt 1987: 87, 92).
It has been suggested that there was greater recognition of gender com-
plementarity in Peru than in most other early civilizations. In agriculture this
complementarity took the form of men’s digging ﬁelds and women’s plant-
ing tubers and seeds. It was manifested in mythology by the belief that men
were descended from the sun and women from the moon, both of whom
were children or manifestations of the creator deity, Wiraqucha (Kendall 1973:
182–83). Yet, even if it was the case in terms of ritual and ideology that the
Inka queen ruled all women as the king ruled all men (Rostworowski 1960:
420), the administrative and military hierarchies of the Inka state were staffed
exclusively by men.
Women were important in Inka religious observances but played different
roles at different social levels. At the local level, elderly women as well as men
presided over the cults of ayllu deities. The state cloistered large numbers of
women, selected as children and ranked according to their social status, beauty,
and skills, in houses of chosen women located in Cuzco and the provincial ad-
ministrative centres. The high-ranking women among them, the yuraq (white)
aqllakuna, became mamakuna and were in charge of other aqllakuna. Most
aqllakuna, however, came from non-Inka ayllus, and those who were not sac-
riﬁced to deities, selected as concubines by the king, or bestowed by the king
on lords and honoured commoners as concubines and secondary wives were
classiﬁed as yana (worker) aqllakuna and remained cloistered for the rest of
their lives. Because they were regarded as wives or concubines of the sun god,
they were killed if they became pregnant or were discovered to have had sexual
intercourse (Silverblatt 1987: 81–85). The creation of a substantial group of
celibate women may have helped to limit population growth in areas of high
population density.
Mamakuna were equal in rank to all but the most important male priests
and played major roles in state cults. They presided over the worship of female
deities and heard confessions of sins from other women but also participated in
the worship of male deities. The aqllakuna from humbler backgrounds assisted
them, cooking and brewing the beer that was offered to deities and to the men
and women who participated in state-sponsored rituals and corv´ee labour and
weaving qumpi, the elaborate and highly valued form of cloth that was burned
as sacriﬁces to the gods, worn by the king and nobility, and distributed as
rewards to commoners. Unlike the enslaved female weavers in Mesopotamia,
the aqllakuna were socially revered and better housed and fed than most
commoners.

Family Organization and Gender Roles
183
Queens helped their husbands to govern the Inka state. They often travelled
with the king, and the decision to create yanakuna was attributed to advice a
queen gave her husband in the course of such travels (Murra 1980: 166). Alter-
natively, queens carried out royal duties in Cuzco during the king’s absence and
acted as regents for their young sons. They also participated in rituals alongside
the king and alone presided over the celebration of a major state festival, Quya
Raymi, which marked the beginning of the agricultural year in late September
(Silverblatt 1987: 60–66). These ritual and political roles were validated by
the Inka creation myth, which claimed that the Inka royal family had begun
with four supernatural brothers and their four sister-wives; three of the broth-
ers were transformed into wakas, natural embodiments of spiritual power,
while the fourth and his divine wife became the ﬁrst Inka king and queen
(Urton 1990). Inka queens had their own palaces and farms. Metal statues
of them appear to have been venerated alongside those of their husbands, and
after death they were mummiﬁed and treated as deities just as kings were.
Along with queen mothers and other prominent female members of the lead-
ing royal panaqas, they provided vital political links among the various branches
of the nobility (Patterson 1991). Yet, despite all this, their positions in society
were derived from and clearly subordinate to those of their husbands.
Although the ancient Egyptians kept track of lineal descent and recognized
informal family groupings such as 3bt (kindred?) and mhwt (household?), there
were no formal corporate kin-based units apart from the nuclear family. There
were no primary kin terms other than those which referred to the nuclear
family – no speciﬁc designations for aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, cousin, or
even grandparents and grandchildren. Grandparents and other lineal ances-
tors all were referred to as ıt (father) and mwt (mother), children and all other
lineal descendants as s3 (son) and s3t (daughter), while all collateral relatives
were called sn (brother) and snt (sister). In the New Kingdom even the terms
for husband (hy, h3y) and wife (h
• mt) were largely replaced by sn and snt.
These extensions of nuclear-family terms suggest little interest in distinguish-
ing between immediate and more remote ancestors or descendants or between
maternal and paternal relatives. Such usages accorded with a kinship system
that was focused on the individual (O’Connor 1990: 6–11).
The clear distinction that was drawn between lineal descent and collat-
eral relations was accompanied by an emphasis in Egyptian mythology on
rivalry between a man and his male collateral relatives (brothers, nephews,
and uncles). The most celebrated rivalries were those between the god Seth
and his brother Osiris and later between Seth and Osiris’s son Horus for the
kingship. The ideal of individuals’ being free of institutionalized family en-
cumbrances also accorded with a state ideology that envisioned individuals as

184
Sociopolitical Organization
relating primarily to the bureaucractic hierarchy of the state. In everyday life,
however, Egyptians identiﬁed closely with the villages and towns where they
had been born or lived. Great emphasis was placed on achieving high social
standing within such a community by performing generous acts, while people
from other communities were viewed with suspicion and even hostility (Eyre
1999: 38–39; Janssen and Janssen 1990; 1996).
Ordinary Egyptian houses tended to be small, and it has been suggested, on
the basis of New Kingdom evidence, that their public rooms were centres of
female activity (Meskell 1998a). The homes of high-ranking people contained
complexes of ofﬁces and storerooms, but at the centre was a courtyard off
which opened spacious reception rooms and a series of living and sleeping
rooms for the owner of the house and members of his family (Kemp 1989:
151–55). The Egyptian ideal was neolocal residence; a common expression for
marriage was grg pr (to establish a house) (Watterson 1991: 60). Often, how-
ever, widowed parents, unmarried siblings, adult children, or even a married
son and his family might occupy a house in addition to the owner, his wife, and
their young children (Kemp 1989: 157–58).
Boys generally married between the ages of sixteen and seventeen and
girls between twelve and fourteen. Families arranged marriages, but young
people looked about for suitable spouses and romantic love was idealized.
Male suitors sought to win the approval of a girl’s mother prior to asking both
her parents for permission to marry her. The vast majority of marriages were
monogamous. Wealthier men, including some artisans, possessed concubines
(h
• b syt) in addition to a wife, and some higher ofﬁcials may have been married
to two or more women although this is not certain (Allam 1981; Robins 1993:
60–62; Simpson 1974). Kings had one or more wives simultaneously, as well as
many concubines. They could and did marry their sisters, but doing so was not
essential to inherit the throne. In the New Kingdom kings also married their
daughters, but this seems to have taken place only after the Sed rejuvenation
ritual, which was usually ﬁrst performed in the thirtieth year of a king’s reign.
This ceremony, which involved the ritual rebirth of the king, would have placed
him in the same generation as his daughters, thus making father-daughter
marriages equivalent to brother-sister ones (Troy 1986).
Egyptian men were supposed to love their wives and mothers and treat
them well, but women were regarded as secondary to men (Robins 1993:
107, 191). Family homes were owned by the husband, although a wife was
referred to as the nbt pr (mistress of the house) and it was her responsibility to
care for and manage the house while her husband attended to other business
(92). Also, with the exception of royalty, wives were normally buried in their
husbands’ tombs, where they were accompanied by fewer grave goods and

Family Organization and Gender Roles
185
ones of poorer quality than those buried with their husbands (Meskell 1998b).
In the decoration of tomb chapels, women were represented less frequently
and often on a smaller scale than their husbands. Nevertheless, individual
royal and upper-class women were depicted more frequently in ancient Egypt
than in any other early civilization (Robins 1993: 165–75). Kingship normally
descended from father to son, and Egyptian religious beliefs indicated that
only men could truly be monarchs.
Although the average Egyptian woman possessed less property than her hus-
band, women were not conﬁned to their homes or private quarters (ıpt) and
were fully recognized as legal entities. They could inherit, purchase, adminis-
ter, and sell land, goods, and slaves in their own names. They could sign their
own marriage contracts, make their own wills, and adopt their own heirs. They
kept their own property after marriage, served as witnesses in court hearings,
and initiated lawsuits against other people, including their own husbands and
children. They could divorce a husband for impotence, adultery, or mistreat-
ment. A widow had the legal right to one-third of her husband’s estate, while
her children inherited the rest. Yet, unlike her husband, a married woman
was free to bequeath her own property to whomever she wished and could
disinherit even her own children (Allam 1981; Leprohon 1999; Wenig 1969:
11–13). Women were required to provide corv´ee labour for the state, but this
may have applied only to women who owned property (Robins 1993: 122).
Royal women derived their position and primary titles from their roles as a
king’s daughter, sister, wife, or mother. Some royal princesses accumulated all
four titles. Royal wives performed rituals which usually complemented those
of the king. Queen mothers sometimes acted as regents for their young sons
(Troy 1986). Wives and daughters of nobles and ofﬁcials who were present at
the royal court bore the title hkryt nswt (royal ornament) and nfrt (beauty),
according to whether or not they were married (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986:
77, 81; Robins 1993: 117). In the Old Kingdom many upper-class women,
including queens, served as chief priests of major female deities, especially
Hathor and Neith.
In addition to attending to or overseeing household chores, many women
whose families belonged to the specialist class derived proﬁt from performing
various types of work outside their homes. In the Old Kingdom, female stew-
ards, overseers, scribes, and physicians attended the wives of high ofﬁcials
and managed various aspects of their estates. Royal women may have been
attended solely by female servants and ofﬁcials. The wife of the Sixth Dynasty
vizier Mereruka had a female staff consisting of a steward, inspector of trea-
sure, overseer of ornaments, and overseer of cloth. Female singers, dancers,
and acrobats worked in the royal palace, and women also served as mortuary

186
Sociopolitical Organization
priests (Robins 1993: 116). Some of these tasks required literacy (Desroches-
Noblecourt 1986: 189–93; Robins 1993: 111–13). In general, however, women
only oversaw other women, while males supervised subordinates of either sex.
The mother of King Khufu was an exception; she served as the overseer of the
butchers who prepared the meat offerings for her dead husband (Feucht 1997:
336–37). In the Middle Kingdom a few women may have continued to work as
scribes and to oversee household tasks, but the administration of people and
property had become almost exclusively male (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986:
192; Robins 1993: 116; Ward 1989). It is unclear to what extent in the Old
Kingdom, professional women, such as scribes, worked full- or part-time and
whether they were married.
Lower-class women derived incomes from a variety of part-time occu-
pations, such as weaving, singing, dancing, playing musical instruments,
midwifery, and professional mourning (Robins 1993: 119–20). While women
were active as market traders in the New Kingdom, Old Kingdom scenes
show men doing most of the selling (Kemp 1989: 255). There is no way to
know to what extent this artistic convention reﬂected social norms. In the
Third Dynasty, male and female millers, weavers, and washers worked in sep-
arate establishments in the royal palace, the women probably under female
overseers. Women and men worked together baking bread and brewing beer
in the palace kitchens, although it appears that only men cooked ﬁsh and
meat (Feucht 1997: 336; Fischer 1989). Both married and unmarried women
appear to have earned income as prostitutes. Men were warned against con-
sorting with unknown prostitutes or promiscuous women so that they would
not inadvertently become involved in quarrels with their husbands or fathers
(Robins 1993: 69).
gender roles
The kinship systems of early civilizations have long been thought to display
a patrilineal bias, and Victorian anthropologists viewed this an evolutionary
advance over the matrilineal societies that they believed had preceded them;
however, the bias of family organization in all the early civilizations was mas-
culine but not always patrilineal. There is also no obvious correlation between
their different forms of kinship organization and either territorial or city-states.
Initially I hypothesized that the variations reﬂected the forms of kinship that
prevailed in different regions prior to the rise of states. Important parallels have
been noted between Inka kinship organization and that found among tribal
peoples in central and eastern Brazil (Lounsbury 1986). Highland Mexican
calpollis and Peruvian ayllus may have developed from some early form of

Family Organization and Gender Roles
187
endogamous kinship that was widespread in Central and South America, but
if such an institution existed it does not appear to have been shared by the
Maya. Cross-cultural ethnographic evidence indicates that considerably more
variation in kinship systems existed at a prestate level, both on a regional basis
and in relation to different types of economies, than is found in our admittedly
small sample of early civilizations (Hallpike 1986: 141; Murdock 1949). While
this difference could simply reﬂect sampling error, it suggests that kinship sys-
tems may have shifted in a particular direction as a result of the development
of new and more convergent forms of social organization. Support for such a
shift may be found in the kinship terminologies of early civilizations, which
generally do not display a strong patrilineal bias. Those of the Yoruba, Inka,
Maya, and Aztec appear to have employed a Hawaiian kinship terminology
for designating cousins: both parallel-cousins and cross-cousins were referred
to by terms that were identical or very similar to those used to designate sib-
lings. According to George P. Murdock (1959a; 1959b: 29) such usage is found
in ‘bilateral societies with extended families or corporate kin groups but can
also result from an incompletely assimilated shift from one rule of descent
to another’. This interpretation suggests that not all these societies had been
strongly patrilineal for a long time.
The degree and precise expression of a masculine bias varied from one early
civilization to another, no doubt depending to some extent on the sort of social
organizationthathadexistedpriortothedevelopmentofcivilizationinaregion.
The Asante state, in what is now Ghana, was of recent origin when it was ﬁrst
encountered by Europeans in the eighteenth century. Although Asante society
was based on matrilineal descent, its rulers were already seeking to marry in
ways that would ensure that male descendants would eventually inherit their
ofﬁces (Wilks 1975: 371). The most important factor sanctioning a masculine
bias appears to have been the growing importance of male-dominated political
relations as these societies grew more complex.
Gender is commonly acknowledged to be a ubiquitous and fundamental
component of social identity. It is also generally agreed that, while beliefs con-
cerning masculinity and femininity are culturally constructed, prior to modern
times all gender systems were based on the belief that men and women had
different roles and responsibilities in social reproduction and maintenance.
Men and women in every society dressed and behaved differently from each
other (R. Wright 1996a), and in all preindustrial societies, crafts, or individual
processes within crafts, tended to be segregated according to gender (Costin
1996; Murdock and Provost 1973). There is much evidence that women’s inter-
ests were expressed primarily in relation to their families while men’s concerns
were expressed in relation to the broader sociopolitical sphere. Such focusing

188
Sociopolitical Organization
of expression does not signify that women or men did not exhibit a holistic
interest in the forces that were affecting their lives.
Csilla Dallos (1997) has argued that, as individual identity had to be for-
mulated in more communal and hierarchical terms as societies grew more
complex, both men and women were forced to sacriﬁce their personal auton-
omy to serve the interests of the domestic group that was increasingly being
pressured by society and the state. For men broad political considerations and
for women the welfare of their families acquired increasing precedence over
personal interests. It was as a result of these trends that the household and the
nuclear family came to be viewed as a miniature kingdom, with its male head
as its ruler and women, children, and dependents as his subjects. Under these
conditions, gender relations grew increasingly unequal, and female identity
was subordinated to complementing male gender roles.
One effect of this development was the separation of women in all early civi-
lizations into two classes: those who were respectable and those who were not.
To be respectable a woman had to be honourably attached to a parental family,
husband, or appropriate institution, such as a Mesopotamian temple cloister
or an Inka aqllawasi. Freelance prostitutes, innkeepers, and self-proclaimed
witches were viewed as lacking honour and posing a threat to the moral or-
der. Slave women held in Mesopotamian weaving establishments attached to
palaces and temples were regarded as lacking anyone to protect their honour
and appear to have been subjected to sexual abuse as well as harsh treatment
(R.Wright1996b).ThecaptivewomenwhomtheAzteckeptasstateprostitutes
for the entertainment of young warriors likewise existed outside the normal
moral constraints of society. Women who lacked the protection of male kin
or responsible male ofﬁcials were easy targets for robbery, intimidation, rape,
and other forms of abusive treatment. Although such women were invariably
few, their wretched lives, unsavoury reputations, and lack of legitimate redress
stressed the importance of women’s remaining respectable by continuing to
depend on their male relatives. They also provided a negative example against
which the behaviour of respectable women could be measured (Lerner 1986:
212–16).
Despite their general subordination to men and evidence of widespread
resistance to such subordination in both the family and society in general, the
position of women varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another
(Nelson 1991; Silverblatt 1988a; 1991). Although little is known about the
treatment of ordinary women in Shang and Western Zhou China, they appear
to have been greatly disfavoured, both legally and economically, as a result of
being fully absorbed into their husbands’ patrilineages. The most favourably
positioned women appear to have been those in the Yoruba kingdoms and in

Family Organization and Gender Roles
189
ancient Egypt. Yoruba women remained afﬁliated with their fathers’ descent
groups and therefore could rely on the ongoing active support of blood kin.
The Yoruba also admired individual competitiveness and allowed that it could
occur between men and women. Egyptian society had no lineage structure and
even more strongly stressed individual achievement. In all early civilizations
women as well as men participated in ritual activities. In general, however, the
top positions in religious hierarchies were occupied by males. While men told
women of equal or inferior social status what to do, women gave orders only
to men who were clearly inferior to themselves. Yoruba, Aztec, and Egyptian
women were active in market trade, though in Egypt it involved only the circu-
lation of locally produced goods among the lower classes (Kemp 1989: 253–55).
In territorial states the need for loyal administrators and advisers to assist the
king led to the involvement of upper-class women in administrative activities.
Thus class dominated gender to the extent that upper-class women might give
orders to lower-ranking men as well as women. Yet their administrative roles,
like their roles in the economic and religious spheres, were largely restricted
to assisting their husbands. In other spheres they tended to be limited to di-
recting other women and male domestic servants. In city-state civilizations
royal wives were often selected from leading families within the state, thus
helping to forge alliances between the king and potential sources of signiﬁ-
cant internal opposition. Sometimes they were drawn from the royal families
of neighbouring city-states, such marriages creating or reinforcing interstate
alliances. Maya queens, perhaps most often queen mothers, were depicted
playing important roles in royal and state rituals. Some Mesopotamian queens
owned and seem to have managed their own and temple estates, but major
ritual roles were played by female priests. Aztec and Yoruba royal wives seem
to have been ritually and politically invisible. In these societies public rituals
were performed by female ofﬁce-holders who were not necessarily related to
the king.
Where the documentation is sufﬁcient, there is evidence that the status of
women declined in early civilizations. Female rulers are mentioned for early
times in the later traditions of the Yoruba and in Mesopotamia, but there
is no contemporary evidence for these rulers, and no speciﬁc female rulers
are attested for later and better recorded periods. It is therefore impossible
to determine whether there really had been female rulers in the formative
periods of these civilizations or they were later mythological creations that
ascribed to earlier times practices that were different from those of the present.
June Nash (1978) has indicated that among the Aztec the position of women
declined as a combined result of increasing male specialization, an ideology
that gloriﬁed warfare and male domination, and the beneﬁts that the state

190
Sociopolitical Organization
showered on successful warriors and on men generally. Ofﬁcial Aztec myths
stressed the ideological subordination of women, but life-sustaining goddesses
continued to be honoured by commoners and the community as they had been
in earlier times (Brumﬁel 1996; Kellogg 1995; Nash 1978). The Aztec and their
neighbours used women’s tools as metaphors for subordination and humility;
sendingapresentofrawcotton(usedforspinning)toaforeignrulerconstituted
a gross affront (Nash 1978: 356).
Among the Inka, the growth of political power, which was primarily asso-
ciated with males, reduced gender symmetry and enhanced the patriarchal
character of society (Silverblatt 1987). In Egypt the gradual disappearance of
female bureaucrats and chief priests, even if they had mainly served female
members of the royal family and female deities, represented the removal of
women from the political and administrative spheres and their conﬁnement to
the local economic realm and to subordinate ritual roles. The important roles
played by royal women in Shang society eventually came to be performed by
royal eunuchs, and women were conﬁned to playing subordinate roles in sac-
riﬁcing to their husband’s ancestors. Yet, despite these growing restrictions,
women in early civilizations do not appear to have been as disadvantaged as
they became in some later preindustrial civilizations, such as those of Classical
Greece and Rome.
same-sex relations
What is known about male homosexual behaviour in early civilizations is mainly
normative information that probably reﬂects the views of literate males, whose
opinions may or may not have been congruent with those of other sections of
society. Homosexuality in early civilizations was regarded as a kind of behaviour
rather than the deﬁning characteristic of a particular type of person (Somerville
1997). However, various distinctions relating to morality and character were
drawn according to the circumstances in which individuals engaged in same-
sex behaviour and the extent to which such behaviour precluded other forms
of sexual activity.
In general, people in early civilizations considered reproduction the primary
goal of sexual activity. Where lineages were important or property, power, and
position regularly passed from one generation to the next, it was highly desir-
able to have descendants. It was also believed that only biological descendants
could or would make appropriate offerings to the souls of dead family mem-
bers. Further, people depended on their children to take care of them in their
old age, and the domestic division of labour provided a strong incentive for
both men and women to marry.

Family Organization and Gender Roles
191
The state and the upper classes also had strong reasons to encourage a re-
productively oriented sexuality among commoners. Larger populations meant
increased tax revenues and more corv´ee labourers and soldiers. Therefore pop-
ulation growth became an upper-class ideal even where population density was
high and where the lower classes did not share this ideal. The upper classes
did not necessarily desire to expand their own ranks; rich Mesopotamian fam-
ilies sought to curb the division of landholdings and other family wealth by
restricting the number of people among whom the family’s wealth had to be
shared, enrolling some female members in temples as celibate priests.
All the early civilizations also accorded great material and symbolic impor-
tance to fertility. Successful harvests and the reproduction of domestic animals
were crucial for their survival and prosperity. This reinforced a reproductively
oriented view of human sexuality. Human reproduction was clearly conceived
as analogous to the reproduction of plants and animals. The ancient Egyptians
and Mesopotamians viewed women as fertile ﬁelds and equated male sex-
ual activity with ploughing and sowing such ﬁelds (Lichtheim 1973: 69). The
Egyptians also imagined the divine power that had created the world as a form
of male sexual energy (Robins 1993: 17). In Mesoamerica parallels were drawn
between a woman’s womb and the earth, and sexual activity was seen as a way
of renewing all aspects of the terrestrial world (Townsend 1992: 132–36). Con-
sequently, there was a tendency to regard sexual practices that did not lead to
reproduction as contrary to the natural order of things.
It is clear that the Egyptians strongly privileged heterosexual relations and
in particular heterosexual relations within marriage. Men who were unable
for whatever reason to father children were regarded as pitiable or farcical
(Parkinson 1995). Among forty-two moral and ritual offences that, according
to the New Kingdom Book of the Dead, a dead man had to prove he had
not committed in order to be admitted to the kingdom of the god Osiris were
homosexual acts (Parkinson 1995: 61–62).
The Egyptians differentiated homosexual acts according to whether a man
played an active (male) role or a passive (female) one, the active role be-
ing judged less compromising to an adult male’s sexual identity. Sodomy was
viewedasdemonstratingthepenetrator’spoweroveranothermale,andsodom-
izing an enemy or having sex with a boy (willing or not) when women were un-
available did not call a man’s virility into question. The god Seth was described
as having this sort of intercourse with his nephew Horus in order to demon-
strate that Horus was too young and weak to rule Egypt (Parkinson 1995: 65).
Seth was a powerful deity who played a vital role in protecting the gods, but he
also was a deity associated with confusion and disorder – with political crises,
storms, and the dry, infertile lands beyond the Nile Valley. While his sexual

192
Sociopolitical Organization
appetite was easily aroused, his heterosexual activities were as unproductive as
his homosexual ones. He had no children, and even his sister-wife Nephthys
had become pregnant by the god Osiris, who was a brother to both of them.
A Middle Kingdom folktale portrays a high-ranking general named Sasanet
as remaining unmarried and engaging in sexual activity, as the passive partner,
with King Neferkare, who came every night to his house. Neferkare may have
been King Pepi II, whose long reign marked the end of the Old Kingdom.
While the tale is incompletely preserved, for any king to have engaged in this
sort of relation equated him with Seth and called into question his ability to
maintain the cosmic order (Parkinson 1995: 71–74).
Among the Mesopotamians, homosexuality was not an activity in which the
gods engaged but a disability inﬂicted upon humans to prevent them from
multiplying too quickly and disturbing the gods with their clamour (Postgate
1992: 295). The Code of Hammurabi, although containing numerous injunc-
tions against sexual misconduct, did not explicitly refer to homosexuality. Some
masters are reported to have sodomized their male servants, and there were
guilds of male prostitutes (assinnu, kurgarru, and kulu’u) who played pas-
sive roles (sinniˇsˆanu) in sexual relations. They appear to have been connected
with the cult of the fertility goddess, Ishtar (Inanna), who was believed to
be entertained by their irregular sexual behaviour (asakku) (Bott´ero 1992:
190–98). The gala, or male lamentation singers, attached to temples appear
to have been transvestites, and transvestites or men who engaged in passive
homosexual acts were attached to the royal court, apparently as servants and
entertainers (Bott´ero 1992: 197, 244; Postgate 1992: 126–27). Freelance male
prostitutes, like their female counterparts, lived near the city walls and fre-
quented taverns. They too were socially marginal, isolated, despised, and often
mistreated. While transvestites and habitually homosexual men were assigned
special roles in Mesopotamian society, it was generally agreed that by not mar-
rying and having children, they had failed to realize the proper destiny of a
man. They were probably included among the unclean and depraved persons
who had to be expelled from cities whenever their main temple was restored,
consecrated, and sanctiﬁed (Kramer 1981: 268). The gods had quixotically cre-
ated such persons to be different from others and then had to provide special,
anomalous roles for them in the social order (Bott´ero 1992: 196–97).
The attitude towards homosexuality was more sharply negative among the
Aztec and their neighbours. They viewed sexual intercourse as one of the few
genuine pleasures of a painful and difﬁcult existence, but they also believed
that, by engaging in any form of sexual activity too frequently, young men im-
paired their physical and mental development and condemned themselves
to impotence at an early age. There was therefore strong encouragement

Family Organization and Gender Roles
193
to restrict sexual activities to marital relations. Young, unmarried warriors
were, however, provided with female companions as a reward for their military
achievements. They were individuals believed to possess exceptional supernat-
ural power. Men who habitually engaged in homosexual acts were regarded
as weak, diseased, and withered. Passive homosexuality violated the military
ideals that structured life in this part of the world. Homosexual or transvestite
behaviour was punished by death or by being sold into slavery. Celibacy was
also disapproved of except for ritual reasons (Clendinnen 1991: 169; L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 303–6).
In the Inka kingdom marriage was obligatory and enforced by the state.
In some Peruvian cultures, homosexual acts were associated with religious
practices, being viewed as a way of transmitting supernatural power from
one man to another in order to facilitate the performance of certain religious
rituals. The Inka government vigorously attempted to suppress non-ritual
homosexual practices within its domain. The punishment for sodomy involved
the execution not only of those who committed it but also of their families
and the burning of their houses (Classen 1993: 60–61; Kendall 1973: 88; von
Hagen 1959: 179, 314).
While the degree of toleration of homosexuality varied from one early civi-
lization to another, such behaviour was regarded at the very least as contrary
to social ideals and at worst as a practice that violated the cosmic order and
had to be punished by death. Even in the most tolerant early civilizations,
those who publicly embraced a homosexual lifestyle were assigned socially
marginal roles. There is no evidence in our sample that attitudes towards ho-
mosexual behaviour varied with formal political organization. Nor does grow-
ing land pressure appear to have encouraged greater tolerance of homosexual
behaviour. The inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, which had the highest pop-
ulation density in our sample, were among the most hostile to it. The desire
of upper-class Mesopotamians to divide their landholdings among as few heirs
as possible may, however, have encouraged a more relaxed attitude towards
homosexuality. On the whole, family and state economic interests encouraged
a negative attitude towards homosexual behaviour that both reﬂected and re-
inforced the increasing patriarchal tendencies in early civilizations.
differences and similarities
Early civilizations exhibited considerable variation in kinship organization,
family residence arrangements, inheritance, the roles and status of women,
and attitudes towards homosexual behaviour. There is no obvious correlation
between these differences and various environmental settings, subsistence

194
Sociopolitical Organization
patterns, or forms of political organization, but there is some regional clus-
tering in patterns of kinship organization. Endogamous descent groups were
conﬁned to indigenous civilizations of the New World. The two civilizations
in which women had the most rights were located in Africa. The ones with
the least hostile recorded attitudes towards homosexual behaviour were Egypt
and Mesopotamia.
All early civilizations displayed varying degrees of masculine bias. It may be
that the increasing importance of political relations for the functioning of com-
plex societies led to a greater emphasis on male roles. If so, the transformation
probably began during the early state period. The position of women appears to
have been inferior to that of men in all the early civilizations, given the growing
importance of male leadership roles, greater male access to wealth as a result of
political manipulation and warfare, and the increasing domination of family life
by society and the state. Patriarchal attitudes towards reproduction probably
also encouraged more negative attitudes towards homosexual behaviour.
Nevertheless, the position of women varied signiﬁcantly from one early
civilization to another. In territorial states upper-class women generally en-
joyed more political power and social visibility as a result of being drawn into
secondary governing and ritual roles alongside their husbands. In city-state civ-
ilizations upper-class women appear to have had the greatest public visibility
among the Classic Maya; in Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico they were
limited to ritual roles, while among the Yoruba the chief public activity of kings’
wives was trade. The distinction between territorial and city-states is far less
useful for predicting the status of ordinary women. In Egypt men and women
enjoyed considerable legal equality, and in highland Peru the complementarity
of men and women in many productive tasks and in rituals was generally rec-
ognized. In Shang China, however, the legal and economic position of women
seems to have been much less favourable. Although Aztec women possessed
considerable economic and social freedom, they had very little role in public
decision making. Women in Mesopotamia appear to have been even more
restricted in terms of what they were allowed to do. The greatest degree of
overall female economic and social freedom and participation in political de-
cision making occurred among the Yoruba. While it might be argued that the
position of ordinary women tended to be more favourable in territorial states
than in city-states and that this reﬂected the higher status enjoyed by upper-
class women in these societies, the sample is too small and the correlations too
weak for this hypothesis to be supported. Moreover, the favourable position of
Yoruba women stands strongly against this generalization. More important is
the observation that, wherever the status of women can be traced over time,
it appears to have declined rather than improved.

10 Administration
W
eberian sociologists blandly deﬁne the state as a government that
possesses a monopoly of the legitimate use of force within a speciﬁc
territory. Marxists more cynically regard the state as a mechanism that deploys
physical coercion to defend the property and privileges of the dominant social
classes (Kamenka 1989: 7–11). While these deﬁnitions suggest what a state
is, they are inadequate to describe, even from a purely political point of view,
how a state operates. Physical force is never sufﬁcient by itself to maintain
order within society. Such order depends on most people’s being prepared
to accept the way things are being done. Social control is also inherent in
communities, economic institutions, and the family, whose leaders exert their
own forms of control through economic, social, and ideological coercion and
by manipulating public opinion (Mann 1986). Within uniﬁed political entities,
public order depends to a large degree on the extent to which those who
control these other sectors of society are prepared to cooperate with the state
and with each other.
The state can also be viewed as an administrative mechanism that extracts
sufﬁcient resources from society to maintain itself, defends the territory it
controls from foreign aggression, and is responsible for maintaining the unity
of its territory, if necessary by force. To do this it must uphold a social and
economic order which convinces ordinary people that, despite the demands
the state imposes on them, it makes their lives more prosperous and secure
than they would be if the state did not exist. An enduring state thus has the
dual task of protecting the privileges of the upper classes and ensuring that
the lower classes are not exploited, impoverished, or disaffected to the point
that their reactions undermine the social order.
To carry out these tasks the state must be able to collect taxes, administer the
properties it owns, fund institutions such as armies, police forces, and public
labour, and curb the dishonesty of ofﬁcials and powerful people generally.
195

196
Sociopolitical Organization
Such an administrative system is inevitably expensive and always in danger of
becoming self-serving and thus undermining rather than helping to preserve
public order (Tainter 1988). In early civilizations only the king, or perhaps the
king and a small number of councillors, had an unequivocal vested interest in
the equitable functioning of the bureaucracy as a whole. When they could get
away with it, most ofﬁcials sought to beneﬁt themselves, their families, and
their friends at the expense of the state through embezzlement and the shifting
of tax burdens to others. As Ibn Khaldun noted in the fourteenth century
a.d., where such behaviour got out of control it undermined the economy,
encouraged social unrest, and eventually destroyed the authority and power
of the state. Those who occupied the upper levels of the administration of
early civilizations had to be sufﬁciently powerful and well-informed that
they could control the ofﬁcials under them and ensure that these ofﬁcials
served the state and not only their personal interests (R. McC. Adams
1965: 71).
Atthispoint,however,aproblemarose.Inallearlycivilizations,rulerssought
to enhance their control by projecting an imposing image of their power and
authority. Yet the productive capacities of early civilizations were severely
limited by comparison with those of modern industrial societies. Because of
this, the ruling classes were disinclined to use more resources for managerial
purposes than were minimally needed to perpetuate the system. Doing so
would have reduced the wealth that they could use to provide themselves
with abundant food, fancy clothing, jewellery, palaces, tombs, and numerous
retainers, all of which made their lives more enjoyable and enhanced their
public image (Trigger 1990a).
The most expedient way to reduce administrative costs was to delegate de-
cision making from higher to lower levels in administrative hierarchies. In all
early civilizations, families, wards, and small communities were permitted and
even encouraged to manage their own affairs to a much greater degree than
is characteristic of developed industrial societies. Aztec calpollis, Inka ayllus,
Egyptian villages, and Yoruba extended families were left to regulate them-
selves, with the state intervening only when self-regulation had conspicuously
failed to work. The most common limitation on the power of such groups
was the requirement that death sentences be approved by higher ofﬁcials and
perhaps ultimately the king.
Effective administration depends on controlling subordinates, and this re-
quires both knowledge and power. A hierarchical approach is essential for
studying territorial states, in which leaders had to create effective ways to keep
regions and localities linked to the central administration. Such an approach
is also appropriate for understanding how villages and small administrative

Administration
197
districts were linked to capitals in those city-states in which most of the pop-
ulation resided outside the main urban centre. It is less useful, however, for
describing political processes in city-states where the population was largely
concentrated in a single urban centre, political power was not strongly cen-
tralized, and the main problem was producing consensus among competing
groups or interests. In some of these city-states kings had enough power to
enforce order but not enough to subordinate the interests of other powerful
groups entirely to their own. In less centralized city-states, kings served as a
symbol of political unity, and experienced ones played a vital role in helping
to broker consensus among competing political factions. Thus, when studying
city-states, it is necessary to consider forms of administration that were het-
erarchical as well as hierarchical (Crumley 1987; Ehrenreich, Crumley, and
Levy 1995).
city-state administration
Elizabeth Stone (1997) has suggested that the large proportion of the popula-
tion living in urban centres in early civilizations reﬂected the direct participa-
tion of large numbers of people in the government of such states. Yet there was
no regular mass participation in government in the early civilizations compa-
rable to that in the democratic city-states of Classical Greece. Political power
may have been shared by members of numerous groups, but it remained the
prerogative of a small minority of upper-class people, most of whom lived in
the capitals.
Administrativerelationsbetweentheurbancentresandtheruralhinterlands
of city-states were shaped by the numerical dominance of the centre. Urban
centres that contained more than 50 percent of the population dominated the
hinterland politically, economically, and militarily as well as demographically.
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia only a small population appears to have lived
in the countryside full-time. Among the Yoruba, many individuals shifted back
and forth between city and countryside, and a substantial minority were politi-
cally associated with small towns or villages that enjoyed local self-government
and whose leaders were connected as clients to politically important lineages
in the capitals. Likewise, in the Valley of Mexico and especially among the
Classic Maya, many city-state urban centres were surrounded by secondary
administrative centres and rural communities whose leaders were afﬁliated
with the political leadership in the capital.
Among the Yoruba, individual patrilineal extended families regulated their
internal civil, religious, legal, and military affairs under the leadership of their
bale, advised and assisted by a committee of elders. Leadership at this level

198
Sociopolitical Organization
was gerontocratic, but these ofﬁcials exerted no signiﬁcant inﬂuence beyond
their own residential groups. When issues of major importance had to be
discussed, meetings were held which all the adult residents of the group, as
well as the (mainly female) members of the extended family living elsewhere,
could attend. Genealogically related or neighbouring extended families also
managed their collective affairs at the precinct (ogbon) and ward (adugbo)
levels of Yoruba cities. Hereditary ofﬁce-holders at both levels regulated the
collective activities of these groups and presided over the public meetings that
were held to discuss major issues (Bascom 1969: 30, 44–46).
Many political ofﬁces, including kingship, were hereditary in particular lin-
eages, but since no exclusive rule of inheritance was speciﬁed they were the
subject of ﬁerce competition involving the eligible male members of the lin-
eage. A number of the most important non-royal lineages in the capital had
members who composed a small but very important state council, which shared
power with the king. Often these ofﬁcials were also ward leaders. Over time,
an extended family that was in political decline might be deprived of its seat
on the state council, while other important individuals or a representative of
a newly important extended family might be appointed to it. The members of
the state council, whose large compounds were often located adjacent to the
royal palace, commanded the army, headed the cults of important deities, and
played a major role in foreign affairs. They also collected a share of the fees
paid for legal services, taxes on goods being transported from one community
or state to another, and taxes and tribute levied on their own and conquered
peoples. The leader of the state council of Oyo was commander in chief of
the army and became regent on the death of a king. While the king had to
approve the appointment of all new members of the state council, the council
in turn selected a new king in consultation with spokesmen for the major royal
patrilineages. The members of the state council could also, if they were in
unanimous agreement, demand that a king abdicate or commit suicide (Law
1977: 73–74).
Yoruba life was also managed by age-grades and numerous voluntary as-
sociations (egbe) (Eades 1980: 99). The membership of these societies cut
across lineage divisions and hence both promoted community integration and
further decentralized political decision-making. The leaders of the more im-
portant voluntary associations played signiﬁcant roles in the political life of
their communities, especially in the smaller polities, where the power of both
the king and the state council members was weak.
Voluntary societies included the Ogboni, some of whose leaders were those
involved in electing and installing kings and leading ofﬁcials. The initiates of
this society judged some legal cases (Bascom 1969: 36–37). The main role of

Administration
199
the Oro society was to clear communities of evil spirits, but its members also
arrested criminals, settled quarrels, quelled civil strife, and executed kings who
refused to commit suicide when ordered to do so by the state council (93).
Age-grade societies, which bestowed titles on their members and collected
initiation fees from them, performed various forms of corv´ee labour for the
community, often under the direction of elderly compound heads. Craft as-
sociations not only organized and regulated various trades but, through their
titled leaders, gave the members of different professions a voice at the higher
levels of community government (Eades 1980: 85–86).
Despitetheking’ssupremeritualimportance,hisrequiredseclusionenabled
the members of the state council to derive vast political inﬂuence from their
greater freedom of movement. Opportunities for the king to increase his power
developed only if divisions arose among members of the state council or if he
was able to forge an alliance with rising political leaders who were not yet
members of it (Law 1977: 77–82).
Yoruba kings, as ofﬁce-holders, possessed large amounts of land and numer-
ous slaves, and therefore they were able to engage in foreign trade and supply
horses and soldiers to military campaigns. In return, they received a large share
of the booty collected in wartime, often in the form of slaves, and of the tribute
that was paid by conquered states in peacetime. Kings used their share of this
wealth to enhance their political importance in their kingdoms. Palace staffs,
supported by the king’s largesse, were made up of large numbers of ofﬁcials,
slaves, and household servants who bore palace titles and performed numer-
ous domestic and political functions. Many royal ofﬁcials who were eunuchs
carried out administrative, military, judicial, and ritual roles outside the palace
as the king’s personal representatives (ajele). Slaves guarded the king and also
acted as his agents in dealing with townspeople, village leaders, and rulers
of foreign states. Slaves and eunuchs were valued because they did not have
family interests that they might put ahead of those of the king. Women who
bore palace titles also performed administrative tasks such as supervising and
keeping order in the urban markets and among traders (Bascom 1969: 34–36;
Law 1977: 233–42).
In theory the king ruled the capital through a hierarchy of state councillors
and ward, precinct, and compound leaders and outlying communities through
town and palace ofﬁcials, leaders of outlying local centres, and bales. In reality
his control over both the urban centre and the outlying communities was
shared with quasi-hereditary leaders who belonged to non-royal lineages and
with the ofﬁce-holders of various voluntary, craft, and age-grade organizations.
The revenues of the state were divided between the king and powerful state
councillors, who created parallel administrative structures that vied with one

200
Sociopolitical Organization
another for inﬂuence in and beyond the capital (Bascom 1969: 29–30; Law
1977: 98–118).
PoliticallythemostcentralizedstateintheYorubaculturalspherewasBenin.
There the kingship and most other hereditary ofﬁces were inherited patrilin-
eally through male primogeniture. Although the uzama, the hereditary leaders
who were equivalent to the members of the state council in Oyo and other
Yoruba states, provided military commanders in chief and played an impor-
tant symbolic role in the installation of kings, their power had been radically
diminished by comparison with that of their counterparts in Oyo and Ife.
Moreover, most other titles had become non-hereditary and were in the king’s
gift. The palace title system was greatly expanded and opened up, so that any
man able to afford the initiation fees could enter its lower grades. As a result,
men personally loyal to the king were found throughout the kingdom. City
ofﬁcials represented a wealthy and inﬂuential section of the population that
could exert pressure on the king, but with rare exceptions their titles too were
non-hereditary, and the king could use his power to reassign them to attract
powerful people to his service. The Benin state council was made up of the
largely ceremonial uzama, the main palace and city ofﬁcials, and a number of
other military leaders. In Benin the king was the sole source of legislative and
state policy, and military leaders were directly responsible to him (Bradbury
1957: 35–43).
Unlike Oyo, which was a relatively small city-state exerting hegemony over
weaker, self-governing neighbouring kingdoms, Benin was surrounded by
small communities directly subject to its king (Mercier 1962: 150–51). The
territory ruled by the king was divided into a large number of tax units con-
sisting of chiefdoms, villages, and wards. Each tax unit was controlled by a
title-holder in Benin City, who acted as an intermediary in all dealings be-
tween its leaders and the royal court (Bradbury 1957: 42–43). Benin villages
usually had as their head the oldest active man (odiowere), but some also had a
hereditary co-ruler (onogie). These leaders and all the members of the oldest
age-grade in the community constituted the village council (32–34).
It is unclear whether the political organization of Benin is better viewed
as the most centralized variant of Yoruba kingship or as something different
that resulted from the imposition of Yoruba ideas about political organization
on an Edo society. Edo polities that were not inﬂuenced by Benin consisted
of autonomous local communities. Yet, despite the control that the Benin
monarch exerted over appointments to titled ofﬁces, the presence of inﬂuential
city leaders meant that even in Benin City royal power did not go uncontested.
None of the Yoruba states had a broadly participatory form of government,
but kings did share authority with the representatives of powerful lineages,

Administration
201
voluntary societies, craft guilds, and age-grades. Those individuals participated
in many types of decision-making that affected the administration of city-states.
Despite the seeming fragility of these arrangements and occasional lapses into
civic disorder, Yoruba cities endured for long periods. There is no evidence
that a relatively decentralized state such as Oyo was politically less powerful
than a more centralized one such as Benin.
Mesopotamian cosmological myths have sometimes been interpreted as
embodying memories of a time when cities were governed by councils (ukkin;
Akk. puh˘
rum) composed of elders and presided over by an en. This, it is
suggested, was probably an ofﬁce that elders occupied in rotation. Assemblies
of all free males may have met occasionally to approve or reject proposals made
by elders or ens, especially proposals that concerned waging war against other
states (Jacobsen 1943; Van De Mieroop 1999: 133–39). Iconographic evidence
has been viewed as indicating, however, that kings played a signiﬁcant role as
early as the Uruk period. If such assemblies ever existed, they were obsolete be-
fore the earliest records of contemporary political events. The Mesopotamians
themselves believed, at least in later times, that kingship had descended from
the sky world during the era of creation as a god-given model for conducting
human affairs. In historical times kings and temple administrators played
the major role in decision-making, although in each city councils composed
of elders (abba; Akk. ˇs¯ıb¯utum), who were outstanding citizens or heads of
powerful patrilineages, and even some ordinary citizens judged legal cases,
discussed matters of common interest, and performed various administrative
duties.
The internal affairs of each city ward were handled by a council composed
of representatives of the leading households in that ward. The council made
legal decisions, supervised land sales, and was responsible for maintaining law
and order. It was headed by a rubi¯anum (mayor), who held ofﬁce for a year and
served as the main link between the constituency he represented and the king.
In at least some cities, each ward ofﬁcial was aided by a policeman (ukuuˇs)
(R. Harris 1975: 58; Postgate 1992: 81; Van De Mieroop 1999: 120–33).
In Early Dynastic times much of the population of southern Mesopotamia
lived in urban settlements, and many people who had houses in nearby ham-
lets may have been city dwellers who inhabited these small settlements only
while they were cultivating their ﬁelds. It is unclear how the growing number of
people who lived year-round in rural settlements in later times governed them-
selves or were represented at the city-state level. If most of them worked land
that belonged to kings, temples, or rich landowners, they would have had no
direct role in government at the state level. By Old Babylonian times, however,
the inhabitants of villages (¯alum) administered their communities’ affairs by

202
Sociopolitical Organization
means of councils of elders and must have enjoyed a status corresponding to
that of the wards of capital cities (Postgate 1992: 83).
Kings may originally have been part-time military commanders, but by the
historical period they were full-time leaders whose ofﬁce was endowed with
extensive agricultural land and herds of livestock. Kings alone were respon-
sible for dealing with other states – maintaining and equipping professional
soldiers, training citizen conscripts for military campaigns, coordinating the
construction and maintenance of walls around cities, and conducting diplo-
matic relations with the rulers of other states. They also sought to control
the internal affairs of their cities to varying degrees. In their capacity as the
chief servant, or bailiff, of the city’s patron deity, kings frequently claimed the
right to review legal decisions made by lower courts. They required large ad-
ministrative staffs to manage palace lands, purchase and store imported raw
materials, manufacture the special equipment needed by the army, supervise
public construction work, exchange gifts with rulers of other states, and coordi-
nate economic, legal, and political activities with the leaders of wards, villages,
and craft associations and with powerful landowners. Palace administrators
in turn required the services of large numbers of scribes, who kept detailed
records and oversaw the physical labour that was vital for the palace’s eco-
nomic functioning. In theory administrative and scribal positions were royal
appointments, but in practice they often passed from father to son (Postgate
1992: 149–53).
Although temples existed in Mesopotamia long before any evidence of
palaces, the rise of royal power appears to have been accompanied by the
expansion of the temple estates that administered land viewed as the prop-
erty of major deities. Temples were controlled by chief administrators or small
groups of ofﬁcials. These administrators were usually not the chief priests who
served the deity, especially if those priests were women. The highest-ranking
administrators directed the work of large numbers of priests (male and female),
lesser administrators and accountants, and various craftsmen, tenant farmers,
farm labourers, and slaves. Temple estates played a major role in looking after
impoverished, sick, and crippled members of the community, many of whom
were absorbed into the permanent temple workforce. Impoverished families
often dedicated their children and other family members to temples. Temples
lent grain to ordinary citizens at a lower interest rate than palaces, private
landowners, or merchants. They also lent capital for the ransom of soldiers
captured in battle (Postgate 1992: 117–36).
Temple estates appear to have expanded as much land that had been com-
munally owned by patrilineal extended families passed into royal and private
ownership. It is unclear to what extent their expansion was a form of corporate

Administration
203
resistance to royal power or a response to the economic dislocation that re-
sulted from the increasing privatization of land. While gods did not treat their
tenants and workforce much more generously than other landowners, temples
do appear to have looked after the poor and helpless better than other insti-
tutions were prepared to. Various kings sought to increase their wealth and
power by assuming control over temple estates, but these attempts were not
always successful (Kramer 1963: 79–83).
The competition for power among kings, temple leaders, wealthy private
landowners, and the heads of patrilineal landowning groups created a ﬂuid
situation as power was negotiated at the ward and state levels. The king’s role
in government varied from one city to another and from one period to another
in the same city. Mesopotamia is the only early civilization to produce detailed
evidence of popular unrest as a result of economic exploitation and of efforts,
usually by kings, to counter such unrest by freeing community members en-
slaved for debt and decreeing amnesties on debts that involved the pawning or
loss of land (Postgate 1992: 195). Kings may have been more powerful in the
northern, more Semitic-speaking parts of southern Mesopotamia than they
were in the far south, and royal power may have grown as northern rulers
came to control the south (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 143–46). Nevertheless,
in all southern Mesopotamian cities political power remained relatively de-
centralized as different groups competed for political control. J. N. Postgate
(1991: 301) maintains that a form of administration based upon consensus
survived the growth of hegemonic and later regional states in Mesopotamia.
While political power generally appears to have been concentrated in fewer
institutions than among the Yoruba, the structures of government in these two
civilizations were very similar.
Tenochtitlan’s extraordinary size, political power, and role as the centre of a
tributary network that extended far beyond the Valley of Mexico made its
political organization different in many respects from that of neighbouring
city-states. All the city-states in the valley participated in a regional economy
controlled to a large extent by the Aztec and were subject in varying degrees
to Aztec domination.
The smallest unit of Aztec political organization was the calpolli. Tenochti-
tlan was said to have been composed of twenty large calpollis, each of which
played a part in the city’s complex ritual life (van Zantwijk 1985). For religious
reasons there may have been resistance to increasing this number. In reality,
by 1519 Tenochtitlan may have had four times that number of calpollis (called
tlaxilacalli) (Clendinnen 1991: 33; M. E. Smith 1996: 312). Each calpolli or
tlaxilacalli had one or two calpollecs (hereditary leaders). Their task was to
manage the group’s affairs with the advice and assistance of a council of elders

204
Sociopolitical Organization
drawn from member families. Together they oversaw the operation of the
calpolli temple, the school where young commoners were trained as soldiers,
and the military brigade. The leadership also settled internal disputes, col-
lected taxes, and organized corv´ees to carry out public works, which included
cleaning streets and dredging canals. Taxes in kind consisted largely of crops
produced by young men working ﬁelds that remained the collective property of
calpollis. This food was used to support corporate institutions and leaders and
to pay taxes to the central government. Leaders were also responsible for keep-
ing records, in particular concerning the assignment of land to members. They
were assisted in collecting taxes and organizing corv´ee work by ﬁscal ofﬁcers
(tequitlatoque) who supervised groups of twenty to one hundred households
(Berdan 1982: 59). It is unclear to what extent these ofﬁcers were the same
as the elders who sat on the calpolli council. Calpolli leaders had intermarried
with the royal family soon after the establishment of the Aztec monarchy and
thus had acquired noble status (M. E. Smith 1996: 145–51; Spath 1973). The
power of the calpolli leaders in Tenochtitlan had been curtailed by the state
administration. According to the Spanish, calpolli leaders had to report to the
palace daily to receive orders from royal ﬁscal ofﬁcers (Soustelle 1961: 41).
Frederic Hicks (1982) suggests that in Texcoco, in contrast to Tenochtitlan,
calpollis were no longer self-governing but organized and controlled by the
upper classes.
At the top of the state administration were the king and the chief decision-
makers, who bore the title tecuhtli (lord). In Tenochtitlan next in rank after the
king among this group were the cihuacoatl and the members of the Council of
Four. The cihuacoatl became regent when the king was ill or not in the capital,
routinely supervised the priesthood, and was in charge of various ﬁscal and
legal matters. Two members of the Council of Four were the commanders
in chief of the army. Together the four were the king’s chief advisers and
administrators and may have governed the four quarters into which the capital
was divided (Dur´an 1964: 40; Hassig 1985: 105; Soustelle 1961: 92).
The king and these ﬁve ofﬁcials headed a hierarchy of administrative, mil-
itary, and religious ofﬁcials recruited from among the members of the royal
family, other members of the nobility, and ennobled warriors. None of these
ofﬁces was hereditary; individuals were appointed to them by the king. Ap-
pointment to the most important ofﬁces, however, depended on the high status
of the candidate’s forebears as well as on his own talents and achievements.
High-ranking ofﬁcials assisted the king in formulating major policy decisions
and administered the palace law courts with the help of numerous secondary
ofﬁcials called calpixque. These lower-ranking members of the nobility over-
saw the collection and distribution of taxes and tribute, the construction of

Administration
205
state temples and public works such as causeways, aqueducts, and dykes to
control water levels, the management of state land and royal property, and the
amassing of the weapons, armour, and food supplies that were needed to pro-
vision the armies while on campaigns. Most ofﬁcials worked in Tenochtitlan,
but some were located in major towns throughout the regions that the Aztec
dominated to supervise relations with subject states, oversee the collection of
tribute, and ensure the delivery of food grown on ﬁelds that had been ceded
to the Aztec as tribute. These ofﬁcials were probably assisted by numerous
record-keepers, the youngest and least recognized members of the hereditary
nobility. All administrators and record-keepers would have required training in
the schools where members of the nobility were educated (Soustelle 1961: 49).
Former commoners who had been ennobled as a reward for military valour
but lacked special administrative training guarded the king and various public
buildings, arrested and executed people on orders from the king and high
ofﬁcials, and trained young men to be soldiers in the commoner schools of
the calpollis from which they came. The markets were regulated by pochteca
(long-distance traders) who were empowered by the king to establish fair
prices, control weights and the quality of goods being sold, and impose ﬁnes
and other penalties on those who defrauded buyers (Berdan 1982: 42; Hassig
1988: 29).
In Tenochtitlan the power of the king and nobles was greatly strengthened
by military success and royal control of the material resources received from
the Aztec tributary network. In smaller and less powerful city-states the inﬂu-
ence of calpolli and other community leaders remained stronger. Although the
Texcocan king shared hegemony with the Aztec monarch, the much smaller
Texcocan capital consisted of six wards, each with its own ruler and palace
(Hodge 1984: 24–25; Offner 1983: 5–7). The Texcocan ruler had, however,
gone farther than the Aztec king in integrating neighbouring city-states into a
common political system. Fourteen small nearby city-states that were tributary
to Texcoco participated to some extent in a common government. The tlatoani
of Texcoco was advised by a high council attended by the kings of these neigh-
bouring states as well as by the high-ranking Texcocan ofﬁcials who presided
over the councils of war, ﬁnance, religion, and justice. Commoners, palace of-
ﬁcials, and other nobles from these subordinate city-states and from Texcoco
served on these councils (Offner 1983: 147–49).
In some much smaller and weaker states there was more than one tlatoani,
and decisions relating to the community had to be reached by consensus among
these leaders. In small states with a single king, councils representing sectional
interests such as those of quarters, calpollis, and communities played general
decision-making roles that were much more important than the roles played by

206
Sociopolitical Organization
corresponding bodies in Tenochtitlan and Texcoco. Towns and villages located
beyond city-state capitals were composed of one or more calpollis. While some
larger communities had their own council and a subordinate ruler as their
head, other communities had the same relation to the king as calpollis in
urban centres (Hodge 1984).
While there was a vast amount of variation in the degree of internal cen-
tralization among the states in the Valley of Mexico, on the whole there ap-
pears to have been more centralization in this region than there was among
the Yoruba or in southern Mesopotamia. At least in part this difference may
be attributable to the sharp distinction between hereditary nobles and com-
moners (Stone 1997), which provided a basis for consolidating power struc-
tures that the other two city-state systems lacked.
Surviving texts reveal little about the ofﬁcials and administrators who served
the Maya’s divine rulers. Except to a limited degree in Terminal Classic times,
inscribed monuments were created solely to celebrate these rulers. Some of
these texts mention ofﬁcials with the titles ahaw and sahal (plural sahalob).
Ahaw may have been close relatives of kings or simply nobles (Hammond
1991: 270); sahalob, mentioned in inscriptions only in the western lowlands,
were hereditary ofﬁcials at the royal court and governed secondary centres and
rural districts (Hammond 1991: 280; Schele and Mathews 1998: 88–89, 339–
40; Tate 1992: 20). The title ah chul na (person of the sacred house/temple)
appears to have been bestowed on some important court ofﬁcials as well as on
members of the royal family and occurs in the names of some royal spouses
(Houston 1993: 130–34).
The distribution of high-status residences has been interpreted as evidence
that Maya kingdoms may have been divided into small provinces ruled from
local administrative centres by the hereditary leaders of the area’s highest-
ranking patrilineages. These districts, it is argued, were in turn composed of
a number of communities or small districts governed by subordinate heredi-
tary rulers. Comparisons have been drawn with the hereditary town and ward
leaders that the Spanish encountered among the Maya in the sixteenth century
(Marcus 1993). Alternatively, it has been suggested, that Maya political orga-
nization was more variable than this model suggests. While some Maya kings
may have ruled over nested hierarchies of hereditary rulers, others may have
created more unitary polities by replacing such rulers with their own specially
appointed kinsmen or unrelated ofﬁcials (Haviland 1992; Montmollin 1989).
The claim that rulers at the district and local levels constituted an endur-
ing hereditary element in Classic Maya political organization while particular
kingdoms grew, broke apart, and sometimes ceased to exist requires further
documentation.

Administration
207
The relatively dispersed nature of Maya settlement may have encouraged
the development of hierarchical administrative structures that on a small scale
more closely resembled those of territorial states than they did the adminis-
trative structures of any other city-state system in our sample. It remains to be
determined how this affected Maya economic organization and beliefs. The
Maya also seem to have resembled the highland Mexicans and differed from
the Mesopotamians and the Yoruba in having a well-deﬁned hereditary nobil-
ity. This, combined with the dispersed nature of Maya settlement, may have
encouraged administrative structures to be segmentary and under the control
of high-status patrilineal kin groups. What is not known is the extent to which
kings were able to overcome the centrifugal tendencies inherent in such an
administrative arrangement and replace it with a more centralized structure.
territorial states
While city-states required systems to administer the territories beyond their
urban centres, these territories were small, and a large proportion of the popu-
lation, resources, and wealth of these states was concentrated in their capitals.
Territorial states required much more elaborate regional administrations to
deal with the serious problems of keeping large territories subject to some
degree of centralized control. Egypt was divided into as many as forty-two
provinces (sp3t). These administrative divisions mostly straddled short sections
of the Nile Valley south of Memphis and consisted of areas of slightly raised
ground bounded by Nile distributaries in the Delta. During the Old Kingdom
a typical province had between forty thousand and seventy-ﬁve thousand in-
habitants, while by the New Kingdom the average population of a province
had probably risen to 112,000 people. The Inka organized their kingdom by
provinces,eachideallycontainingfortythousandfamiliesortwohundredthou-
sand people. The Shang state appears to have had at least a two-tiered system
of regional government, with the units at both the provincial and local levels
controlled by leaders of patrilineages linked in some fashion to the royal family.
Because of their size and numerous subdivisions, the governments of
territorial states had to be hierarchical. Some of them were organized in
a ‘delegational’ and others in a bureaucratic fashion (Kamenka 1989: 1–5;
Weber1968).Delegationalsystemshavealsobeencalled‘segmentary’systems,
and recent discussions of them are derived from Aidan Southall’s Alur Society
(1956) by way of Burton Stein’s (1980) application of his ideas to the Hindu
state of Vijayanagara (see also Southall 1988). The terms ‘segmentary’ and
‘delegational’ are in fact both problematic. ‘Delegational’ implies that effective
centralized control existed over the whole of a territory before power was

208
Sociopolitical Organization
assigned to local ofﬁcials to administer its parts; ‘segmentary’ suggests that
larger political structures were created by linking together smaller chiefdoms
whose rulers and local governments largely remained in place. In reality, both
processes were involved in the creation of territorial states and often in the
formation of the same state. The term ‘delegational’ is employed here mainly
because ‘segmentary’ was originally developed to classify prestate societies and
is therefore potentially the more misleading when applied to early civilizations
(Marcus and Feinman 1998). ‘Delegational’ is also preferable because even
minimal success in building territorial states required the creation of structures
that would bind incorporated polities to the larger entities.
In delegational systems responsibility for all the affairs of a region located
beyond the royal capital district devolved upon a single high-level ofﬁcial and
his staff. This ofﬁcial ensured the maintenance of order in the region, was
responsible for its defence, carried out public works, and collected taxes, a
portion of which he remitted to the central government. Territorial states
required multiple tiers of delegated authority. Ofﬁcials at each administrative
level were answerable to the king not only for their own conduct but also
for that of all the lower-level district ofﬁcials to whom authority within their
jurisdictions had been delegated. Yet, in practice, higher-level ofﬁcials often
had no direct control over regions administered by subordinate ofﬁcials and
no direct access to their resources. The great attraction of such a wholesale
delegation of plenipotentiary powers to regional and local leaders was that it
constituted a relatively inexpensive way to administer a large state. The main
challenge for the central government was to prevent a state administered in
this fashion from disintegrating.
Kingdoms organized in this manner varied radically in the way in which the
central government controlled regional ofﬁcials. In some, rulers of formerly
autonomous regions were retained as hereditary regional ofﬁcials, with suc-
cession to ofﬁce sometimes requiring royal approval. In such instances, the
incorporation of conquered regions into a territorial state remained weak even
if the local rulers were eventually linked to the king by marital ties. Alterna-
tively, when a regional polity was incorporated into a larger kingdom, its former
ruler was sometimes replaced by a governor selected from the king’s family or
entourage. In this instance the incorporation of the conquered territory was
more secure, especially if older polities were dismembered or rearranged and
new levels of regional control were established, but even here there was con-
siderable variation in control. A king’s powers were limited at the provincial
level unless he regularly replaced regional governors or could remove them
at will. While delegational systems were relatively simple to establish and in-
expensive to operate, they placed little power to control local resources in the

Administration
209
hands of the central government, and kingdoms tended to fall apart quickly if
the central government faltered.
The alternative arrangement in territorial states was a bureaucratic admin-
istrative structure, in which central, provincial, and local governments were
managed by ofﬁcials who were individually responsible for speciﬁc aspects of
administration. A province might be administered by separate military, le-
gal, and ﬁscal ofﬁcers, each of whom was assigned a particular sphere of
responsibility and resisted encroachment on his domain. Ofﬁcials were often
transferred at regular intervals from one province and one branch of adminis-
tration to another. With such arrangements, kings were better able to control
what was happening at the local level and keep provincial ofﬁcials closely tied to
the central government. This form of administration was more expensive to op-
erate and probably less efﬁcient at the local level than a delegational form. Be-
cause ofﬁcials were frequently transferred from place to place, they knew less
about the regions they were governing than if they had remained in the same
place for a long time. As a result, much de facto power remained in the hands of
the indigenous population. The limited differentiation of early bureaucracies,
by comparison with those found in modern industrial societies, and their more
personal and less rule-bound style of governing suggest that rulers of large
kingdoms were rarely willing or able to assume the full economic and admin-
istrative burden of controlling the lower levels of these administrative hierar-
chies. This difference led Max Weber to distinguish ancient patrimonial from
more ‘rationalized’ modern bureaucracies and to view early administrative sys-
tems as extensions of the management of royal households (Kamenka 1989: 1).
After Egypt was uniﬁed, the rulers and members of some of the leading
families of the small states and chiefdoms that had previously existed may
have been allowed to continue as provincial administrators within their former
territories, but within a few generations hereditary regional leaders had been
entirely replaced by itinerant ofﬁcials. In addition, some communities that
had been capitals of signiﬁcant rival polities prior to uniﬁcation were replaced
by new provincial administrative centres (T. Wilkinson 1999: 344–65). Village
leadership may have remained hereditary, but the tombs of these leaders grew
smaller as the power of the central government increased during the early Old
Kingdom (Reisner 1932).
In its developed form, during the Old Kingdom, the civil service was headed
by one or more viziers (t3ty) who administered the country, or major divisions
of it, in the name of the king. Under their supervision were government de-
partments concerned with collecting surplus grain, administering royal estates
and land registration, overseeing government supplies of linen, wood, wine,
metals, and other valuable commodities, carrying out construction projects and

210
Sociopolitical Organization
supervising craft production in government workshops, and maintaining law
and order and dealing with all legal matters that were of concern to the central
government. Most of these departments were divided into parallel sections
for Upper and Lower Egypt – a separation that may have been operational
or largely symbolic (Strudwick 1985). The centralized administration of food
offerings for royal funerary cults during the Fifth Dynasty suggests that many
estates and sources of revenue ofﬁcially assigned to individuals were managed
collectively by a single bureaucratic organization (Eyre 1987a: 23).
The civil service was distinguished from the royal household staff, which
included individuals of high rank who were the king’s companions or man-
aged his household and personal estates and numerous personal attendants of
various ranks and with specialized skills. Some of these ofﬁcials carried out spe-
cial political commissions for the king. The regular government departments
had their headquarters in the capital and branch ofﬁces in provincial centres
as well as in smaller local centres within each province (Hassan 1993). The
provincial units, at least in Upper Egypt, were of economic importance, since
some of them had constituted maximal irrigation units since late Predynastic
times (Butzer 1976). In the Old Kingdom the chief ofﬁcial representing the
king or a vizier at the provincial level held a title such as ımy-r wpt (overseer
of commissions), h
• q3 sp3t (ruler of a province), or sˇsm t3 (leader of the land).
Although he was responsible for ensuring that royal wishes were carried out,
this ofﬁcial could not prevent ofﬁcials working for other departments from
reporting directly to their superiors at the capital. A single overseer of com-
missions was frequently responsible for several adjacent provinces (Baer 1960;
Kanawati 1980).
At the top level of the administrative hierarchy, immediately under the vizier,
were a number of srw (singular sr) (high ofﬁcials). Those in the capital had easy
access to the king, while the rest represented royal authority in the provinces.
The srw and the high-ranking courtiers who attended the king and managed
his household together would have totalled at most a few hundred individuals.
Each government department was headed by a sr, who was designated as the
overseer (ımy-r, ‘giver of orders’) of that department. Working under each
sr were lesser-ranking overseers (ımy-r) and scribes (sˇsw, singular sˇs). The
total number of literate Egyptians would not have exceeded 1 percent of the
population during the Old and Middle Kingdoms (Baines 1983: 584). Ordinary
overseers made low-level decisions but did not formulate general policies,
while scribes were the record-keepers who carried out their orders. Many low-
level ofﬁcials were tax collectors and overseers of public works. Others were
assigned more speciﬁc responsibilities, among them administering particular
fortresses, dockyards, royal estates, and armouries and supervising particular

Administration
211
groups of priests, soldiers, carpenters, and herdsmen (Kanawati 1977: 15–33;
Strudwick 1985).
The ideal was for an administrator to occupy a series of posts of ever higher
rank that would take him from one part of Egypt to another. He might in
succession be a minor tax collector, in charge of a temple estate, manager of
the food supply for the army, and then the civil administrator in charge of
a province. His ambition was eventually to secure a high-ranking position in
the central administration at Memphis and be buried near the pyramid of the
king or the tomb of an important ancestor (near an older royal tomb). Sons
of high-ranking ofﬁcials aspired to take over their fathers’ ﬁnal and highest
posts or to secure even more exalted ones, and many ofﬁcials did in fact
succeed their fathers. Yet the ideal of the Egyptian state – working one’s way
up the administrative hierarchy by earning the approval of senior ofﬁcials and
the king – also inﬂuenced career patterns. Egypt achieved the extreme in
bureaucratic organization among early civilizations (Frankfort 1956: 99–103;
Janssen 1978).
The civil service hierarchy was remodelled repeatedly during the Old King-
dom. In the Fourth Dynasty the highest state ofﬁces were held by close male
relatives of the king under the joint supervision of the vizier, who collected
taxes and oversaw the legal system, and the ‘overseer of all the works of the king’
(ımy-r k3t nbt nt nswt), who was in charge of public works. King Menkaure
and his successors excluded members of the royal family from all high ofﬁces,
including that of vizier. King Neferirkare of the Fifth Dynasty further abol-
ished honorary court titles for close royal kin. At the same time, the number
of administrative titles was increased, the tasks assigned to each ofﬁcial were
more carefully deﬁned, and positions were more precisely ranked. As a result
of these changes, the civil service became separated from the royal family. The
king now shared power not with the hereditary nobility but with a much larger
number of individually more dispensable civil servants. Thus, contrary to what
is generally believed, the king’s control over his ofﬁcials was increased.
KingDjedkare-Isesialteredtherankingsystemtoreducethepowerofsenior
ofﬁcials, dividing the vizierate into three: one each for Upper and Lower Egypt
and one for the whole country. Viziers could once again be appointed from
the hereditary nobility or even from among the king’s sons. At the same time,
the number of high titles that an ofﬁcial might hold at one time was reduced.
Hereafter the organization of the civil service was modiﬁed in every reign but
one until the end of the Old Kingdom. It appears that the kings repeatedly
altered the way of doing things and the titles that accompanied government
ofﬁces as one way of maintaining control over the bureaucracy (Baer 1960;
Kanawati 1980; Strudwick 1985).

212
Sociopolitical Organization
The Inka state has been described as ‘proto-bureaucratic’ (Gose 1996a:
21). Its rulers constructed a complex nested hierarchy of units organized as
similarly at any particular level as local conditions permitted. Ten adminis-
trative levels extended from the monarch down to and often into the ayllu.
The top three levels were staffed exclusively by members of the Inka nobility
and included the central administration, the governing of the four quarters
of the kingdom, and the governments of approximately eighty provinces.
Five middle levels were governed by kurakas, or hereditary non-Inka ofﬁcials
who were members of various ethnic groups that had accepted Inka
sovereignty, arranged in nested levels according to whether they governed
approximately ten thousand, ﬁve thousand, one thousand, ﬁve hundred, or
one hundred families. The kurakas in charge of at least the higher of these
levels were recognized by the Inka as constituting a non-Inka nobility. In areas
where leadership previously either had not existed at these levels or had not
been hereditary, the Inka installed local notables as hereditary rulers. While
the smallest group often coincided with the ayllu, larger or smaller ayllus may
have corresponded with higher or lower administrative levels. The Inka further
divided groups of one hundred families into units of ﬁfty and ten families each
underthesupervisionofnon-hereditaryforemenwhowerecommonersoflocal
origin. Low-level ofﬁcials transmitted orders from their superiors and saw that
they were carried out. The non-Inka nobility was responsible for maintaining
order and ensuring that the local people performed their duties to the Inka
state. The middle and lower levels of the Inka administration were allowed no
role in the formulation of policy (Patterson 1987; Rowe 1944: 262–64).
Hereditary leaders from the hunu kuraka, the ethnic nobles governing
ten thousand families, down to the ayllu level tended to be descended from
families that had ruled an area prior to the Inka conquest. Because the Inka
divided large polities or united small ones to create administrative units close
to their ideal size, continuity in ofﬁce-holding from pre-Inka times was far
from complete. Moreover, while the leaders of these groups were hereditary,
their succession to ofﬁce had to be approved by the local Inka governor or
the Inka monarch. Kurakas’ loyalty to the Inka was reinforced by the increase
in their personal incomes that was a result of state control and agricultural
development (D’Altroy 1987b). Those at the highest levels were required to
visit Cuzco periodically, and houses were provided for them and their retainers
in the ring of settlements surrounding the elite centre. Inka ofﬁcials replaced
kurakas they suspected of disloyalty with more dependable members of their
families or ethnic groups and sometimes rewarded conscripted soldiers for
special acts of valour by making them foremen of ﬁfty or ten families. They
did not hesitate to intervene directly in the affairs of even small groups of

Administration
213
their subjects. While they stressed loyalty to the Inka state, they encouraged
rivalries and antagonisms among these small groups as a way of reducing the
chances of their combining to oppose Inka rule. In addition to dividing ethnic
groups and resettling portions of them alongside unrelated ones, they symbol-
ically emphasized ethnic differences and encouraged ritual battles that kept
alive memories of long-standing local disputes (D’Altroy 1992; Kendall 1973:
108–11; C. Morris 1998; Spalding 1984).
Provincial governors (tukuyrikuq) and all higher ofﬁcers were appointed by
the king from the various levels of the Inka nobility. A provincial governor lived
in the administrative centre of each province but had to report regularly in per-
son to the king. Governors were periodically transferred from one province to
another to prevent them from acquiring a local power base, and their principal
residences remained in or near Cuzco. Various itinerant inspectors and secret
agents monitored their behaviour and reported on their loyalty to the king.
A governor was assisted by a chief aide and a staff of priests, record-keepers,
and ofﬁcials in charge of corv´ee labour for public works. A rotating workforce
of four hundred corv´ee labourers was always available at the provincial ad-
ministrative centre, and larger corv´ees periodically repaired roads and erected
buildings throughout the province, served in the army, and carried out mining
operations. In general, military leadership was separate from the provincial
administration, as were the overseers of crown estates and the ofﬁcials who
visited ayllus to select children to become aqllakuna and yanakuna (S. Moore
1958: 96–114; Rowe 1944: 269).
In the Cuzco area there was a similar range of overseers and administrators
in charge of storage facilities, religious institutions, and state building projects.
The construction of the fortress of Saqsawaman was directed by four master
builders responsible to one of the king’s many brothers. In addition, special
government facilities were located at Cuzco, such as the schools for training
the young men of the royal family and the sons of high-ranking administrators
to be ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 78, 130; Niles 1993: 161).
The most important ofﬁces of the central government were held by broth-
ers, half-brothers, and other close male relatives of the king. The highest of
these ofﬁces were the four apukuna or prefects of the quarters into which
the Inka state was divided. These administrators helped the king to supervise
the provincial governors in their quadrants. The king delegated many of his
religious responsibilities throughout the kingdom to the high priest of the sun
and his military responsibilities to top-ranking army ofﬁcers, who served under
a royal commander in chief (apusquipay). He was also assisted by a chamber-
lain, who routinely issued orders in his name and acted as an intermediary
between him and other high-ranking ofﬁcials. It is suggested that all these

214
Sociopolitical Organization
ofﬁcials were viewed as substitutes for the king, who derived their power from
speaking for him much as oracles spoke for gods and dead kings. None of
these positions was hereditary. Yet together these ofﬁcials extended the role
of the king in governing the administrative, military, and religious spheres.
While the higher administration of the Inka state was patrimonial rather than
strongly bureaucratic, an effort was made to keep power under royal control
by separating the military and the religious from the civil administration. By
having a small number of close relatives act and speak for the king, it was also
possible for a monarch who was largely reclusive for ritual reasons to maintain
the appearance of infallibility (Gose 1996a).
While the Inka government was largely delegational within provinces, stren-
uous efforts were made to prevent provincial and higher government ofﬁces
from becoming hereditary. The military was separated from the civil adminis-
tration at the provincial level, and there was a tripartite division of administra-
tive,military,andreligiouspowersatstillhigherlevels.HadtheInkastatelasted
longer, its administration might have become more completely bureaucratized.
In Shang China kin ties were used to structure political relations. The Shang
kingdom was divided into a series of provinces or districts ruled by hereditary
ofﬁcials who bore the title hou or bo. Each of them, together with subordi-
nate ofﬁcials and retainers, occupied a fortiﬁed administrative centre (yi). The
construction of such a centre appears to have required the consent of the king
(Keightley 1969: 332). Each hou or bo controlled the population of the sur-
rounding region, collected taxes, supervised agricultural production on state
land, and commanded military units. It has been proposed that originally bo
governed border regions while hou presided over more centrally located dis-
tricts. Both types of ofﬁcials are occasionally recorded as rebelling against the
kings. While these titles may originally have denoted different functions, by
the Late Shang period the functions had become blurred and the titles seem
instead to have distinguished different ranks of the nobility and perhaps dif-
ferences in the size or population of the territory they controlled. Both appear
to have served as court ofﬁcials as well as regional administrators. While this
arrangement may have preﬁgured the ﬁve grades of lords who governed terri-
tories in Western Zhou times, there is no evidence that a ﬁve-tiered hierarchy
existed during the Shang period (Chao 1972: 99–109).
These regional authorities belonged to a network of high-ranking lineages
related to the Shang kings by blood or marriage. Some of them, including the
earliest known Zhou rulers, appear to have been descendants of local leaders
subdued by the Shang kings. Others were descendants of Shang kings or other
high-ranking members of the Shang state who had replaced defeated local
rulers. While the governors of provinces were granted hereditary control of

Administration
215
them and peripheral provinces sometimes rebelled against Shang rule, Chao
(1972: 115) maintains that the Shang kings were able to intervene actively in
the management of these political divisions. Western Zhou kings dismissed or
demoted regional ofﬁcials whom they mistrusted, and so perhaps did Shang
kings. Many regional ofﬁcials appear to have been consanguineal members
of the Shang royal family sent by the king to impose control over a region or
to rule over conquered territories with the help of other members of their
patrilineage. As genealogical relations between the heirs of such ofﬁcials and
the king grew more remote, their loyalty may have diminished (Shaughnessy
1999: 323). To counteract this tendency, such ofﬁcials and their lineages appear
to have been shifted from one location to another. A similar situation prevailed
duringtheWesternZhouperiod,when,itisnoted,theseofﬁcials‘couldmigrate
from one locality to another, and territoriality was of minor concern’ (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 268). Court ofﬁcials and regional rulers also looked to the king
to establish their younger sons as rulers of new districts as the Shang state
expanded. Those who did not secure such positions usually became landless
ofﬁcials working for their landholding kinsmen.
Hou and bo each controlled a variable number of tian, who ruled over small
areas from their own more modest centres. Some tian were the heads of local
ruling families who had accepted Shang rule. Like hou and bo, tian were
hereditary rulers and, provided that they paid taxes and supplied military aid
when called upon to do so, were probably left to manage the affairs of their
district relatively independently (Chao 1972: 110–11). The available evidence
suggests that the Shang state was governed by a nested hierarchy that had
at least three major administrative levels. At the top a single hereditary king
(wang) ruled from one or more capitals (da yi, ‘big yi’), while under him hou
and bo, and below them tian ruled from their own administrative centres.
The three top hereditary titles were zi (king’s son), hou, and bo. The zi
may have included some individuals who were honoured by adoption into the
royal family as well as the actual descendants of Shang monarchs. All these
were members of the royal clan (Chao 1972: 110; Chou 1968: 52–76). Many
zi served as court ofﬁcials, while others may have ruled over provinces and
hence also been called hou or bo. Close kin of the reigning monarch appear
to have lived near him, occupying high administrative posts and advising and
supporting him.
The oracle-bone inscriptions reveal that a large number of ofﬁcial titles
were used at the Shang court. Civil titles, each often divided into several
grades, included yin (administrator), chu (ﬁscal ofﬁcer, treasurer), shi (envoy),
chen (retainer, courtier), gong (ofﬁcer in charge of artisans or public works),
and zai (steward in charge of household servants). Envoys carried messages

216
Sociopolitical Organization
between the royal court and provincial or foreign rulers, while courtiers, who
were personal servants of the king, appear to have discharged many func-
tions of public administration, both civil and military (Chou 1968). Written
commands were issued by senior ofﬁcials to ofﬁcials of lower rank, who were
often addressed collectively and solely by title. This suggests that court ofﬁ-
cials were hierarchically ordered (Keightley 1978b: 221). Yet the wide range
of activities that the bearers of individual titles performed indicates limited
bureaucractic specialization. It appears that younger sons of senior ofﬁcials for
whom provincial governorships could not be found slipped into courtier roles
(Vandermeersch 1980: 41–43). The oracle-bone texts mention frontier guards
(shu), who may have commanded border garrisons. It is not clear whether they
were under the command of the governors of outlying provinces or directly
under the authority of the king.
The administration of the Shang state seems to have been organized on
delegational principles to a far greater extent than was Old Kingdom Egypt
or the Inka realm. The Egyptian rulers sought to bureaucratize administra-
tion at all but the village level and rotated ofﬁce-holders in order to maintain
centralized political, economic, and religious control down to the local level.
The Inka delegated most powers but rotated provincial governors and made
some attempt to separate military, civil, and religious authority. The Shang
kings and their Zhou successors tended to allow provincial and local control to
become or remain hereditary, although they did occasionally move rulers and
their lineages from one place to another. The strongly delegational nature of
Shang territorial administration seems to have been linked to the important
role played by patrilineal kin groups in Chinese society. The strength of such
lineage structures may have inhibited the rapid development of bureaucra-
tization such as occurred in Old Kingdom Egypt and appears to have been
happening in the Inka state. Chinese rulers eventually succeeded in replacing
a delegational state organization built around lineage structures with a bu-
reaucratic form of administration, but this transformation required more than
a millennium.
political processes
The political systems of early civilizations were dynamic ones. In territorial
states bureaucratic ofﬁcials might aspire to become provincial rulers if they
could avoid being moved from one place to another and combine a wide
range of powers under their control. Delegational systems could be trans-
formed into bureaucratic ones if the monarch could divide the powers that
belonged to provincial governors among various ofﬁcials responsible to the

Administration
217
central government. These processes could result not only in major changes in
administrative structures but also in the disintegration or territorial expansion
of states.
The early growth of Tenochtitlan led its inhabitants, lacking nobles of their
own, to solicit a foreign noble to become their king. As a result of this and
subsequent marriages between kings’ daughters and calpolli leaders, a noble
classdevelopedthatcutacrossexistingcalpolliandethnicdivisions.LaterAztec
military domination and exploitation of a growing number of neighbouring
city-states increased the economic power of the Aztec nobility and promoted
the expansion of this class as commoners who were successful warriors were
recruited into it. The ability of the Aztec king to control the distribution of
tribute resulted in an increase of royal authority beyond what was found in any
other state in the Valley of Mexico. Calpolli leaders, while part of the noble
class, were reduced to the status of minor ofﬁcials who managed their own
groups’ internal affairs and carried out the orders of the central government.
Decisions concerning the collective goals of Aztec society were made increas-
ingly by the king and a small circle of hereditary members of the upper class
(Davies 1980; Dur´an 1964).
Among the Yoruba the expansion of the Oyo tributary system increased the
number of palace slaves and royal ofﬁcials and might have resulted in an expan-
sion of royal power if non-royal lineages in the capital had not seized power and
made one of their own members the commander of the city’s military system.
The king now had to share with representatives of the dominant non-royal
lineages not only political power but much of the tribute paid by conquered
states. Despite this decentralization, Oyo remained the most powerful Yoruba
kingdom until the nineteenth century. In the late eighteenth century, the oba
Abiodun managed to harness military power in rural areas of his kingdom to
defeat the non-royal urban lineages, but soon after this happened the Oyo
tributary system disintegrated (Law 1977; R. Smith 1969: 32–50).
In the hegemonic city-state of Benin, royal authority was more centralized
than in any of the Yoruba states. This had been accomplished by introducing
royalprimogenitureandmakingmostpublicofﬁcesnon-hereditaryandsubject
to royal appointment. Even so, as a result of occasional civil wars over royal
succession, episodes of royal control and urban prosperity in Benin alternated
with interludes of political chaos and immiseration (Bradbury 1957: 20–21).
Within city-states realignments in political alliances and ﬂuctuations in the
extent of royal power could occur rapidly and frequently. Because of the com-
plex ways in which economic, political, and military practices were articulated,
it is not always possible to correlate periods of political centralization with
political stability or hegemonic power.

218
Sociopolitical Organization
In Old Kingdom Egypt, beginning in the reign of the Sixth Dynasty king,
Merenre, there was an increase in the number of administrators assigned
to each province. Overseers of commissions were replaced by provincial
governors (h
• ry tp 3), each of whom had his own overseer of granaries and
overseer of the treasury. Many ofﬁcials were now buried in the provinces,
and remaining in a single province became a desirable alternative to a career
that culminated in holding high ofﬁce at the royal court. It is unclear whether
this change was initiated to improve the quality of provincial administration
or to counteract the concentration of power in the hands of high ofﬁcials at
the capital or occurred because successive monarchs were for the ﬁrst time
unable to prevent the development of local and eventually hereditary power
bases. In the late Sixth Dynasty the size and number of tombs of major ofﬁcials
in the Memphis area declined as fewer revenues reached the capital. At the
end of the Sixth Dynasty Egypt split apart to form a number of independent
provinces and competing small kingdoms (Fischer 1968; Kanawati 1977;
1980).
The Middle Kingdom rulers reunited Egypt but still had to cope with pow-
erful hereditary provincial rulers in some areas, especially Middle Egypt. The
kings of the early Twelfth Dynasty developed the Fayum area as a source
of revenue and used part of this revenue to increase the military forces that
were under their direct control. By the reign of Senwosret III the king was
strongenoughtoabolishtheremaininghereditaryprovincialrulers.Hedivided
Egypt into three administrative districts, or wrt, each controlled by ofﬁcials
who were individually responsible to the vizier for legal matters, agriculture,
ﬁnance, and general administration. Centralized control was thus reestab-
lished. This completed a cycle of rebuilding the bureaucratic control that the
central administration had lost in the late Sixth Dynasty (Grimal 1992: 166–68).
Despite a tendency for governments to ﬂuctuate between more and less
centralized control and between delegational and bureaucratic forms of ad-
ministration, ideals concerning what was politically normal served as templates
for action. In Egypt the ideal was that a single monarch should control a united
Egypt and the world. When Egypt split apart to form a number of competing
states at the end of the Old Kingdom, its rulers found themselves without a
mechanism for securing and distributing the raw materials from abroad that
were regarded as essential for upper-class burials and needed to produce lux-
ury goods for the living. As a result, neither the most powerful rulers nor
the wealthiest individuals were able to live in the style that, during the Old
Kingdom,Egyptianshadcometobelievewasnormalforpeopleoftheirstation.
Moreover, even powerful local rulers were severely limited in their ability to tax
their subjects or control them, since dissident groups could threaten to declare

Administration
219
their independence or switch their allegiance to competing leaders. Thus no
ruler commanded the resources to build an elaborate tomb or produce high-
quality art. Ordinary people appear to have had more possessions than under
the Old Kingdom, but their lives were less secure because of endemic warfare
(Seidlmayer 1987). This promoted a widespread desire for the reuniﬁcation
of Egypt and the reestablishment of a moderate degree of centralized royal
power.
Elizabeth Stone (1997: 25) has argued that the city-state ideology of
southern Mesopotamia prevailed over the regional-state ideology of northern
Mesopotamia even though political uniﬁcation became a regional reality. In
Mesopotamia the city-state ideal endured into the ﬁrst millennium b.c. despite
the development of larger states and empires. Cities were still conceptualized
as divine estates and the property of their patron deities, with consequent rights
of self-government. Powerful Mesopotamian kings continued to be regarded
as human servants of the gods as much weaker kings had been in early city-
states. This too was a cultural template that Mesopotamian kings who wished
to be regarded as divine found impossible to overcome (Baines and Yoffee
1998). In their art and in the political regimes they attempted to construct,
the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico in the Late Aztec period also appear to
have been consciously modelling themselves on what they accepted were the
traditions of the long-vanished hegemonic city-state of Tollan (Richards and
Van Buren 2000).
The governments of early civilizations employed a mixture of bureaucratic
and delegational administrative structures. Rulers sought to control ofﬁcials,
regions, kin groups, and institutions, while these groups sought to retain or
establish their own full or partial autonomy.
City-states were characterized by perennial struggles between royal author-
ity and more decentralized forms of political control. Those that lacked a
hereditary nobility tended to exhibit more extreme heterarchical features, but
no city-state found in early civilizations was governed ‘democratically’ by an as-
sembly of its male citizens. Decisions were made by a relatively small number
of leaders, who might include politically powerful individuals, representatives
ofpowerfulfamilies,andtheleadersofmajorinstitutions.InAristotle’spolitical
terminology, such societies were not democracies but aristocracies. While the
Aztec city-state grew increasingly centralized as its military power and wealth
increased, successful Yoruba states such as Oyo combined military success with
decentralized government.
Territorial states had to develop complex, multilevel administrative hierar-
chies.BureaucraticfeatureswerestrongestinOldKingdomEgyptandweakest
in Shang China. The apparently rapid development of bureaucratic structures

220
Sociopolitical Organization
in Egypt and Peru but not in China raises the question to what degree a
strong emphasis on corporate patrilineages favoured the development and re-
tention of delegational administrative structures in some territorial states and
constituted a basis for resistance to centralization in city-states such as those
of the Yoruba. Shifts in the degree of centralization and bureaucratization
indicate considerable ﬂexibility and the ability to conceptualize alternative po-
litical structures. There is also evidence of a tendency to idealize and preserve
political arrangements over time.

11 Law
A
n important function of states is to maintain public order. One of the
ways this is done is by legal action – settling disputes that might lead to
violence, restraining and punishing those whose behaviour harms individuals
or society, ensuring that government orders are obeyed, and validating cer-
tain controversial actions by individuals and groups (Postgate 1992: 275). Law
frequently claims to serve the interests of society as a whole and actually does
so insofar as public order beneﬁts everybody. Yet, in early civilizations, the
upper classes and the major institutions they controlled had far more wealth
and privileges to protect than did commoners, and they relied on the law to
do this.
The power to punish crimes, in particular with death, was an important
manifestation of a ruler’s authority. Among the Yoruba, the sword of state
symbolized the exclusive and godlike prerogative of the monarch to execute
criminals (Bascom 1969: 83–84). Laws were often claimed to originate with
thegods,whotransmittedthemtohumansthroughtheproclamationsofrulers.
The Aztec term for ‘laws’, nahuatilli, meant ‘a set of commands’ (Offner 1983:
83, 242–45, 282). Laws were a means by which human society was not only
regulated but also aligned with a cosmic order that was profoundly hierarchical.
The Babylonian word m ˆe ˇsaru and the Egyptian m3t referred both to the
cosmic order and to legal justice (Bott´ero 1992: 182). The Inka state claimed
that subjects’ commission of crimes such as murder, witchcraft, theft, and
neglect of religious cults threatened the health of the king and considered
them sacrilege (Rowe 1944: 305). Later evidence from China indicates that
law(fa)wasbelievedtohavebeencreatedbysuperhumanbeingsinaccordance
with divine models and interests (Lewis 1990: 198). To promote order on earth,
rulers sought to suppress blood feuds and punish murder, treason, theft, incest,
and many other forms of misconduct.
221

222
Sociopolitical Organization
Supernatural powers were believed to support the legal process by revealing
guilt or innocence through oracles and ordeals and by punishing oath-breakers.
The gods punished individuals whose crimes went undetected or unpunished
by humans. The Babylonian king Hammurabi claimed to have assembled his
law code at the command of the god Utu, or Shamash, who, because as the
sun god he saw everything that humans did, was also the patron deity of
justice (Pritchard 1955: 163–65). Promulgating this law code gave Hammurabi
an earthly role analogous to that of Enlil, the chief executive deity of the
Sumerian pantheon. The laws proclaimed by the Aztec ruler Mochtezuma I
were described as ‘ﬂashes that the great king . . . [had] sown in his breast, from
the divine ﬁre, for the total health of his kingdom’ (Offner 1983: 83). This
claim referred to the divine powers that were implanted in the Aztec monarch
at the time of his enthronement. The early Chinese believed that improper
conduct was supernaturally punished.
Yet the coercive powers of the state were severely limited. Although exem-
plary and, by modern standards, often extremely cruel punishments were in-
ﬂicted on criminals, they were in fact an indication of the weakness rather than
the strength of law enforcement. Settlement patterns indicate that the main-
tenance of law and order was not as effective as the rulers of early civilizations
would have wished. The upper classes normally lived in urban centres, many
of which were walled or had their outskirts patrolled so that the movement
of individuals in and out of them could be carefully monitored. Such arrange-
ments protected urban dwellers against assaults by criminals and rebellious
peasants as well as foreign armies. Within walled cities, temples, palaces, gov-
ernment ofﬁces, and storehouses were often surrounded by walls. In addition
to emphasizing the importance and sanctity of such structures, these walls pro-
tected the people and goods inside them against thieves and casual intruders.
Houses, especially those of wealthy families, frequently had a single, guarded
entrance and no external windows, at least on the ground ﬂoor; rooms opened
off interior courtyards. In New Kingdom Egypt upper-class houses were built
inside walled enclosures, and Classic Maya houses faced inward from three or
four sides of a courtyard. These arrangements suggest a concern for security as
well as privacy (Flannery 1998; P. Wilson 1988). They also indicate that neither
the state nor supernatural powers could ensure the safety of temples, palaces,
and houses.
Signiﬁcant state intervention at the lowest level of a polity was difﬁcult where
collecting information and conveying decisions were cumbersome and expen-
sive. In keeping with their approach to administration generally, kings and
government ofﬁcials tolerated and encouraged self-regulation in legal matters
at the local and family levels and by craft guilds and other local organizations.

Law
223
In the Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba, traders were assigned respon-
sibility for policing urban markets. Among the Aztec, representatives of the
pochteca were empowered to arrest, sentence, and punish petty criminals,
dishonest traders, and tax evaders operating in marketplaces. In addition, the
leaders of the pochteca could try and sentence members of their associations
both in their native cities and on the road (Offner 1983: 156). By encouraging
such groups to resolve problems, the upper classes spared themselves numer-
ous difﬁculties and administrative costs and could devote more of the surpluses
they controlled to conspicuous consumption. The state intervened only when
lower-level controls failed to function or the interests of the upper classes were
at risk.
Nevertheless, kings sought to give substance to their claim to be the
supreme earthly legal authorities. They insisted on their right to hear appeals
and to review the sentences of lower-level courts, in particular death sentences.
In compact city-states, all capital cases were normally tried by palace ofﬁcials
or by the ruler himself; in city-states where there were substantial outlying
settlements, the king or his ofﬁcials tried all high-ranking people in urban law
courts and reviewed sentences passed by community leaders on commoners
in smaller settlements. Among the Yoruba, all public death sentences had to
be approved by the king (Bascom 1969: 38–39), but the Egungun and Oro
societies often secretly killed suspected witches on their own recognizance
(40). The Yoruba kings also claimed the right to pardon or release any prisoner
(Ajisafe 1924: 22). The Aztec king and other rulers in the Valley of Mexico
reviewed most death sentences before they were carried out. Among the
Aztec but not in Texcoco, the pochteca were granted the right to execute their
own members without royal approval (Offner 1983: 156). In Mesopotamia
there appear to have been legal limitations on the power of rulers to pardon
capital offences; the king could spare the life of a male adulterer only if the
husband of the woman involved decided not to kill her (Pritchard 1955: 171,
law 129).
In territorial states problems of communication often resulted in regional
ofﬁcials’ reviewing sentences in the king’s name. In the Inka kingdom all re-
gional ofﬁcials below the rank of provincial governor had to obtain a governor’s
approval before a death sentence was carried out. Ofﬁcials who failed to do so
were subject to rigorous corporal punishment. The Inka ruler apparently had
to approve all death sentences involving members of the nobility (Rowe 1944:
271–72). There were prisons throughout the Inka realm where individuals
were held for interrogation and pending trial and the conﬁrmation of their sen-
tences. Incarceration was not, however, a form of punishment (MacCormack
1991: 157). In the early Zhou Dynasty, family or clan leaders had the authority

224
Sociopolitical Organization
to sentence their relatives to death. It is not known whether such sentences
had to be approved by regional leaders before they were carried out (Creel
1937: 353).
legal systems
All early civilizations had a hierarchy of courts in which legal cases were heard
and judgements rendered. Some of these were specially constituted bodies
staffed by full-time or part-time judges; in other cases administrative assem-
blies or government ofﬁcials performed legal duties as required. The lowest-
level courts were associated with extended families, villages, or urban neigh-
bourhoods. More important courts existed in city-states at the ward, city, and
royal levels, although the last two were not always distinguished. In territorial
states there were courts at various regional levels, the highest-ranking one in-
variably being at the royal court. Judgements at lower levels were usually made
by the same authorities who coordinated other affairs at these levels. Low-level
judges were usually commoners, while more powerful ones came from the up-
per classes. In the Valley of Mexico close relatives of kings served on the
highest-level tribunals. Thus at the highest level both commoners and mem-
bers of the upper classes were judged by representatives of the upper class.
By contrast, upper-class individuals were never judged by tribunals presided
over by commoners.
Yoruba extended households were self-governing in legal as well as in politi-
cal matters, especially in the north, where single households often had several
hundred members. The bale and other elders and titled male members judged
cases that involved only members of the extended family. The bale had the
power to ﬁne, ﬂog, or imprison family members for short periods and to sell
them as slaves for various offences (Ajisafe 1924: 3). Cases were referred to
ward and town leaders only if they could not be dealt with satisfactorily by the
extended family (Bascom 1969: 44).
The lowest-level Mesopotamian courts mentioned in written records were
councils made up of men from villages or town quarters, presided over by their
mayor. The central government held the members of these local administrative
bodies jointly responsible for unsolved robberies and the misconduct of those
living in their area. The councillors collected information about local crimes,
heard divorce cases, and cautioned owners to tether dangerous animals. It also
appears that they adjudicated disputes and crimes within the group, but their
decisions could be appealed to the next highest level if any of the litigants was
not satisﬁed by a decision or the judges could not agree among themselves
(Postgate 1992: 275–77).

Law
225
ThegoverningbodiesofhighlandMexicancalpollisandPeruvianaylluswere
likewise responsible for resolving internal quarrels and punishing crimes. In
Chinalineageheadsappeartohaveplayedanimportantroleinsettlingdisputes
among family members (Creel 1937: 353). In Egypt, village councils (d3d3t,
later qnbt) arbitrated disputes about property, sanctioned divorces, and tried
to resolve internal conﬂicts. At least some of these councils were assisted by a
scribe connected with the central bureaucracy, who offered legal advice and
recorded the proceedings (Allam 1991; Eyre 1984: 100; 1991).
At this lowest level of legal deliberation there were no professional judges,
and public opinion was generally relied on to enforce decisions. Nevertheless,
a large Yoruba compound might contain a small prison, and both Yoruba and
Chinese lineage leaders could impose severe punishments on family members.
Decisions were based on a conventional rather than a specialized understand-
ing of the law. In most cases, a litigant who was not satisﬁed could challenge a
decision to a higher authority. In Egyptian local courts, disputes about prop-
erty sometimes continued for decades and even generations (Bierbrier 1982:
103–4; Eyre 1984: 102–3). Because the legal authorities at higher levels were
supported by increasing amounts of coercion, they did not have to rely on pub-
lic opinion to enforce their decisions. Therefore cases could be decided more
quickly and more arbitrarily than at the family or local level. Punishments also
tended to be more severe in higher-level courts. Those who acted as judges
generally possessed more detailed knowledge of laws as they were codiﬁed or
understood at the royal court.
Yoruba disputes that could not be settled within extended families or that
involved neighbouring families were taken to ward leaders, who were advised
by the heads of the compounds within their district. If their judgement was
not accepted, the case was referred to the ruler’s court, composed of palace
ofﬁcials who met outside the royal palace daily and jointly with town ofﬁ-
cials every fourth day. Their decision was then communicated to the king for
his approval. If no decision could be reached, the case was often referred to
the Ogboni society, whose membership included other town and palace of-
ﬁcials. Members of this highly secretive association used their supernatural
powers to collect unpaid debts and resolve acts of violence. As judges, they
specialized in cases involving murder. Their decisions too were referred to
the king for his approval. Heads of outlying villages heard civil cases but re-
ferred ones involving capital punishment to the capital (Bascom 1969: 38–40).
Members of the Oro society arrested criminals and brought them to court, as
well as taking immediate action to halt violent quarrels (Ajisafe 1924: 92). All
Yoruba ofﬁcials who could render judgements had prisons or dungeons (gbere)
where they could conﬁne dangerous persons or condemned criminals for up

226
Sociopolitical Organization
to six months. After that time individuals had to be either freed or executed
(Bascom 1969: 36–37).
The Yoruba king’s bodyguard (ogungbe) acted as a police force and as exe-
cutioners for the highest court. Another of their duties was to secure human
sacriﬁces, many of them condemned criminals. Junior palace ofﬁcials (emese)
summoned people to the court, and the royal bodyguard arrested those who
refused to present themselves willingly. Authorities from the ward level up, as
well as the king, collected signiﬁcant fees for hearing cases from both accusers
and defendants (Bascom 1969: 35–36).
In Mesopotamia, cases that could not be resolved at the ward level were
tried by members of the urban council of each city-state. A group of up to
seven councillors acted as judges for each case, which was heard either in the
council’s assembly rooms or in a temple. At least by the Old Babylonian period,
some judges were appointed by the king. Generally, the ruler of each city-state
represented the ultimate level of appeal within the judicial system; however,
during episodes of hegemony such as the Akkadian and Old Babylonian peri-
ods, the dominant ruler constituted a still higher level. Cases involving capital
offences and other important ones which lower-level courts could not resolve
satisfactorily eventually reached the highest level (Postgate 1992: 275–78).
Among the Aztec, above the level of calpolli tribunals there were separate
courts for judging or reviewing cases that involved only commoners and for
judging all cases in which nobles were involved. These courts were called
teccalco and tlacxitlan respectively. The lowest courts of both sorts occurred at
the district, quarter, or small-town level. The judges in these and higher courts
were invariably members of the nobility. All criminal cases and unresolved civil
cases were referred to the palace, where a high court consisting of thirteen
judges, presided over by the cihuacoatl, met every ten to twelve days. It appears
that death sentences passed against commoners at a lower level were simply
reported to this court for approval, while nobles facing the death penalty or who
protested judgements made against them at a lower level regularly appeared
in person before it. All death sentences also had to be approved by the king
(Berdan 1982: 104).
The state of Texcoco had constructed its legal hierarchy differently. Above
the calpolli level, the Texcocan king established law courts in wards and set-
tlements in which commoners were tried, sentenced, and punished, although
capital punishment may have required royal approval. Depending on their
nature, cases involving nobles were referred to one of the four advisory coun-
cils by which the affairs of Texcoco and nearby allied states were regulated.
These councils met in the royal palace of Texcoco. As part of its business, the
war council considered cases of treason, as well as offences and legal matters

Law
227
relating to the army, the ﬁnance council judged ﬁscal misdemeanours, and the
religious council dealt with cases involving witchcraft, supernaturally mediated
crimes, and offences committed on the open road. The legal council consid-
ered murder, assault, sexual transgressions, theft, drunkenness, sumptuary
offences, and issues relating to slaves. Commoners as well as nobles served as
judges on these councils, which were, however, presided over by close relatives
of the monarch. Decisions and appeals from this level were transmitted to a
supreme legal council, which met every ten to twelve days and reviewed the
most difﬁcult cases every eighty days. It was composed exclusively of high-
ranking nobles, including the heads of the four advisory councils. The decisions
of the supreme legal council were reviewed by two higher judges and then by
the king, who, often after being advised by the rulers from allied cities, passed
ﬁnal judgement. All nobles from Texcoco and allied states were executed in
Texcoco in a public ceremony that followed the royal review (Offner 1983:
147–55).
There is no evidence of special legal tribunals in Shang or early Zhou China.
In the Western Zhou period local and regional ofﬁcials appear to have per-
formed legal functions as one of their regular duties, usually on their own but
sometimes in conjunction with royal representatives. The presence of royal
ofﬁcials presumably allowed the king to punish disloyalty in regions that were
remote from the royal court with the help of loyal provincial ofﬁcials. Regional
and local rulers generally had sufﬁcient military force at their disposal to en-
sure that their decisions were carried out. At least in theory, a few types of
offences, such as drunkenness among the Zhou nobility, were reserved for
royal punishment (Creel 1970: 170, 192). Yet it appears that individuals were
usually subject to the judgement and sentencing of their immediate superiors,
with little if any effective right of appeal or requirement for royal approval
even with regard to the imposition of the death penalty. When persons of high
rank were executed, their extended families might also be killed or enslaved
to prevent them from seeking blood revenge.
It appears that between men of unequal status, the more powerful was
invariably deemed to be in the right, and therefore litigation could occur
only between equals (Creel 1937: 352–55). Disputes between high-ranking
ofﬁcials about land and commercial transactions were mediated by their
immediate common superior or by the king, who tried to guide them towards
a mutually agreeable solution. There was no enforceable penalty for failure
to carry out bargains. Theft was normally compensated by no more than
a twofold repayment (Creel 1970: 188–89). The idea that just behaviour
accorded with the cosmic order was already present at least by the early
Zhou period, and the king’s main jural role was to provide a model for proper

228
Sociopolitical Organization
conduct at all levels of society (Creel 1970: 163–64). The early Chinese
legal system already seems to have anticipated the later distinction between
punishment (xing), which was used to control the lower classes, and etiquette
(li), which regulated relations among the gentry (Creel 1970: 331–36; Lewis
1990: 196).
At least some Egyptian villagers had their cases heard by government ofﬁ-
cials at the provincial level. State intervention of some sort was inevitable if
written records that were kept in government archives had to be consulted,
and may have been mandatory for cases to which the death penalty applied.
Provincial ofﬁcials seem to have had the power of life and death over ordinary
people; only the wealthy and powerful would have been able to appeal their
sentences to the central administration in Memphis.
During the Old Kingdom the Six Great Mansions (h
• wt wrt 6) appears to
have been an entirely judiciary institution of the central government. It was
concerned mainly with regulating the ownership and transfer of property.
Many sorts of ofﬁcials may have made judicial decisions (Kemp 1983: 83–84).
Kings appointed high ofﬁcials, including the vizier, to conduct special, often
secret inquiries into crimes that seriously called royal authority into question –
conspiracies against the king, royal tomb robberies, misconduct by women
of the royal household, and thefts from temples. The commissions granted
to these ofﬁcials included the plenipotentiary right to try and punish those
involved in such activities (Robins 1993: 137).
In the Andean highlands the non-Inka nobles were held responsible for
maintaining order and curbing rebellion in their own territories. Ethnic of-
ﬁcials, including ayllu heads, were permitted to impose minor penalties on
those they governed. It is not known to what extent commoners or the non-
Inka nobility could appeal from one level of the Inka administrative hierarchy
to another. Inka ofﬁcials acted in the king’s name to enforce laws and apply
them to the higher ranks of the nobility. Judges were not differentiated from
general administrative ofﬁcials.
legal procedures
Legal hearings in early civilizations were conducted by judges, who heard
testimony, weighed the issues, rendered a decision, and proposed a settlement
or punishment. Especially at the upper levels, cases might be adjudicated by
a single authority, but in other instances decisions were reached by a panel
of judges working together. In the course of a trial, evidence was examined
in detail: testimony was heard from opposing parties, witnesses were called,
and, where applicable, documents relevant to the case were studied. Those

Law
229
presenting evidence were questioned by the judges, and litigants might be
allowed to contest each other’s statements. This was followed by a judgement,
sentencing, and implementation of the sentence (Postgate 1992: 279). Upper-
level courts were supplied with bailiffs and police and sometimes also with
jailers and executioners (Berdan 1982: 104). The basic techniques for hearing
cases and rendering verdicts were already present in prestate societies (Pospisil
1958, 1971), but in early civilizations they were adapted to the altered needs,
values, and administrative practices of hierarchical societies, and, at least at
the top end of the legal hierarchy, verdicts were enforced by the state rather
than by public opinion.
Not only in societies such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, which had writing
systems capable of recording speech, but also among the highland Mexicans,
with their pictographic mnemonic devices, scribes were present to explain
recorded evidence, cite relevant legislation, and record decisions (Postgate
1992: 281). In the early Zhou Dynasty litigants were occasionally represented
by spokesmen, although they may have been simply individuals standing in for
litigants who were unable or unwilling to attend a hearing (Creel 1970: 178).
Friends or relatives might advise someone appearing before a court, but there
is no evidence of professional lawyers.
Witnesses and litigants were often made to swear oaths, especially if the
evidence was unclear or conﬂicting. Yoruba courts at all levels could administer
a kola oath, which asked the ancestors to kill the person who swore it if he or
she gave false evidence to the court. In higher-level Yoruba courts, witnesses
could be asked to swear a still more powerful oath by the god Ogun while
an iron object signifying the presence of the god was placed on their tongues
(Bascom 1969: 40, 44). In Mesopotamia witnesses swore to be truthful on the
symbol of a deity that was brought to the court from the god’s shrine specially
for that purpose. At various periods they might be asked to swear an additional
oath in the name of the king. These oaths invoked divine (or royal) punishment
if one lied (Postgate 1992: 287).
When the evidence was inconclusive, judges also had recourse to ordeals
and oracles. Yoruba judges might ask accused persons to drink a toxic sass-
wood brew in order to determine if they were witches (Bascom 1969: 40).
In Mesopotamia ordeals were employed to discover the truth about sorcery,
adultery, and homicide. Those accused of sorcery proved their innocence by
staying aﬂoat when they were thrown into the river. In Akkadian times ordeals
were also used to resolve serious disputes regarding debts and ownership of
property (Postgate 1992: 281). Finally, oracles were utilized to decide legal
cases. In Egyptian villages councillors would consult the statue of the prin-
cipal local deity to establish the guilt or innocence of a litigant, the answer

230
Sociopolitical Organization
being given by the god’s statue’s weighing more heavily on one side or the
other of the frame on which it was being carried (O’Connor 1990: 16). These
methods were based on the belief that supernatural powers might choose to
reveal the truth to human petitioners. In Mesopotamia ordeals relating to
economic issues gradually became obsolete as a consequence of the increas-
ing use of written records to record business transactions. Eventually written
records took precedence over any other form of evidence (Postgate 1992:
281–85).
Punishments for particular crimes differed in nature and severity from one
early civilization to another. As in virtually all less complex societies, crimes
such as treason, murder, and witchcraft tended to be punished more severely
than theft or wounding. Yet in some early civilizations growing concern to pro-
tect property resulted in increasingly severe penalties for theft. The Yoruba
punished witchcraft, poisoning, and violent murder with death; treason with
death, exile, or loss of property; theft with death, amputation of hands, forced
labour, enslavement, or wounding; highway robbery with death; repeated in-
cest with castration or enslavement; assault with ﬂogging; and manslaughter,
rape, seduction, and adultery with ﬁnes (Ajisafe 1924: 29; Bascom 1969: 40).
It was, however, possible for wealthy Yoruba criminals to escape execution by
lavish gift-giving or providing a substitute human victim (Ajisafe 1924: 38).
The Aztec punished treason or failing to report treason, adultery, kidnapping
a child to sell as a slave, moving boundary markers, and disobedience to com-
mands in battle with death and murder or theft with death or enslavement
(Berdan 1982: 97–98). The Mesopotamians punished the murder of a free
man, the kidnapping of another man’s son, the harbouring of an escaped slave,
and the purchase of stolen goods with death. Robbery was punished by multi-
ple restitution or death, incest by death or exile, and wounding by retributive
wounding or a ﬁne (Pritchard 1955: 163–80). The Inka held witchcraft, trea-
son, and various crimes against state property to be capital offences, while they
punished adultery by death or ﬂogging and all other crimes with various forms
of execution and ﬂogging or sent convicted persons to be labourers on royal
cocoa plantations in the lowlands, where highlanders tended to die quickly
from the hot climate and local diseases. They did not use ﬁnes, imprisonment,
or enslavement as legal punishments (S. Moore 1958: 74–82). Punishments
in ancient China included death (sometimes in cruel and exotic ways such as
being boiled alive), the amputation of ﬁngers, toes, feet, and noses, conﬁne-
ment in portable stocks, and ﬁnes (Creel 1937: 353–54). Surviving Egyptian
records do not indicate standardized punishments for crimes such as murder
and wounding, but individuals were beheaded, impaled, drowned, mutilated,
exiled, and subjected to forced labour. Being burned alive was prescribed as a

Law
231
punishment for various forms of sacrilege (O’Connor 1990: 28; Robins 1993:
137–38; Strouhal 1992: 199).
All societies have rules for dealing with crimes such as treason, murder,
injury, theft, and sexual misconduct. In early civilizations the lowest-level tri-
bunals dealt with these offences by employing a mixture of customary local
laws and the judges’ awareness of how authorities at higher levels had modiﬁed
such laws. There was also, however, an elaboration of laws, either by prece-
dent or by legislation, to deal with problems speciﬁc to more complex societies.
Their subject matter tended to vary from one early civilization to another.
The Mesopotamians developed especially elaborate rules relating to ques-
tions of property ownership, business transactions, and the conduct of busi-
ness (Postgate 1992: 282–87). The Aztec had complex laws regulating the
lifestyles of nobles and commoners, distinguishing the sorts of clothing and
materials that people of different ranks and statuses could wear, the types
of houses they could live in, and the conduct that was expected of them
(Clendinnen 1991: 120; Dur´an 1964: 131–32). Inka law and Egyptian law,
as far as it has been preserved, elaborated detailed regulations dealing with
infractions, especially of a ﬁscal nature, against the state (Kemp 1983: 84). Inka
law also included sumptuary regulations, which sought to limit the accumula-
tion of wealth by lower-class families, as well as regulations that required each
ethnic group to wear a distinctive costume (Kendall 1973: 33, 59). The Yoruba
evolved elaborate legislation relating to debts and the use of royal or ofﬁcial
regalia by ordinary people and ﬁned people for ritual offences against the king
such as bringing a corpse too near the royal palace (Ajisafe 1924: 22). Old laws
could be altered and new ones introduced only after they had been discussed
by members of the Ogboni society and approved by the king (Bascom
1969: 40).
legal codes
There were signiﬁcant variations in the degree to which laws were codiﬁed
and publicly promulgated in early civilizations. What are called ‘law codes’
began to appear in Mesopotamia in the Ur III period. The most completely
preserved Mesopotamian law code is that of King Hammurabi, dating from
about 1700 b.c. A prologue proclaiming that it was written to ‘cause justice
to prevail’ and ensure that ‘the strong might not oppress the weak’ (Pritchard
1955: 164) was followed by 282 laws dealing with prices, trade, and commerce,
marriage and divorce, criminal offences, and civil law, including slavery and
debt. The laws took two forms: ‘If crime x has been committed, the appropriate
punishment is y’ and ‘If person N does x, person O must do y in return’. The

232
Sociopolitical Organization
code ended with an exhortation to all people to obey these laws and a curse
upon future kings who ignored them.
Hammurabi’s code treated manslaughter and accidental injury very differ-
ently from earlier codes. Following ‘desert law’, Hammurabi applied the prin-
ciple of ‘an eye for an eye’ to such offences, while Ur III law had subjected them
to ﬁnes. Jean Bott´ero (1992: 161–64) suggests that these codes were not com-
prehensive sets of laws meant to be applied literally but generalized verdicts
that provided models of sound legal judgement and represented Hammurabi
and other kings as just rulers. Hence the spirit of these laws was more impor-
tant than the letter. This might explain why the laws in the Hammurabi code
are not always mutually consistent. Pritchard (1955: 166 n. 45) had earlier sug-
gested that these inconsistencies reﬂected different stages in the development
of Babylonian law.
Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and perhaps other large states in the Valley of Mexico
elaborated legal codes that, like the Mesopotamian ones, prescribed speciﬁc
penalties for a vast number of offences. These codes had to be preserved by
memory, although they may also have been recorded in mnemonic form in
codices. The formulation of the ﬁrst systematic legal code in Tenochtitlan was
later described as part of King Mochtezuma I’s (a.d. 1440–68) far-reaching
reformulation of his state’s legal system. This code probably incorporated cus-
tomary laws but was mainly concerned with elaborating sumptuary regulations,
distinguishing the rights of nobles from those of commoners, and compelling
commoners to display more respect for the king and the nobility. In both
Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, successive kings altered old laws and decreed new
ones to take account of changing social conditions (Offner 1983: 81–85; Dur´an
1964: 131–33). The Yoruba distinguished between customary usage (asa) and
formulated, or statute, law (oﬁn). Both types varied from one city-state to
another (Lloyd 1962: 15, 26).
It has often been suggested that laws tended to be codiﬁed in a compre-
hensive fashion in multiethnic states such as those found in Mesopotamia and
the Valley of Mexico in an effort to reduce friction among resident ethnic
groups each of which had its own traditional laws (Offner 1983: 82). Yet sim-
ilarly detailed law codes were not formulated for the Inka state, despite its
extraordinary multiethnic composition, nor do legal codes appear to have been
developed in Mesopotamia prior to the Ur III period. It seems instead that
these codes were formulated in hegemonic city-states so that subject peoples
would know what laws would be applied if they became involved in legal cases
that would be judged by the hegemon or his courts (Postgate 1992: 289–91).
This would have been necessary if laws varied signiﬁcantly from one city-state
or one hegemonic regime to another.

Law
233
In other early civilizations, legal codes appear to have been less systemati-
cally elaborated and less publicly proclaimed by rulers. In Egypt, for example,
it is unclear whether there was any central body of written laws to guide the
actions of government ofﬁcials. The term hp meant both ‘law’ and ‘custom’,
and, while occasional references to a ‘hp of the king’ were probably to laws, they
did not necessarily refer to written ones (Bontty 1997). Village courts were able
to take account of local customs and precedents, which would be drawn to the
attention of ofﬁcials if cases were referred to higher courts (McDowell 1999:
167, 188). C. J. Eyre (1984: 92) asserts that there is no direct evidence of cod-
iﬁed law until after the New Kingdom. Nevertheless, a late Middle Kingdom
papyrus detailing what to do with people who attempted to evade corv´ee
duties cites precise variations of offences, and this suggests the possible exis-
tence of a legal code relating speciﬁcally to corv´ee that has not survived (Kemp
1983: 84).
The Inka formulated numerous laws dealing with the way in which ethnic
nobles and commoners were to be treated by the state, perhaps to provide guid-
ance to provincial ofﬁcials (S. Moore 1958: 74–85). While the early Zhou kings
are said to have greatly admired the legal practices of their Shang predecessors
and to have promulgated their own distinctive laws, there is no clear evidence
of general law codes in China at this period (Creel 1970: 165–66, 192). Royal
judgements appear to have been viewed as providing general principles rather
than speciﬁc prescriptions for punishing misdeeds and resolving disputes. The
absence of speciﬁc legal codes accords with the later Chinese view that precise
laws encourage rather than prevent wrongdoing (Creel 1937: 350–51). It thus
appears that, in general, there was less concern for promulgating explicit legal
codes in territorial states than there was in hegemonic or rapidly changing
city-states.
law and social hierarchy
Hammurabi’s code proclaimed that one of its chief goals was to defend the
weak against the strong. Yet in early civilizations there was no concept of
equality before the law. On the contrary, social inequality was expressed and
defended in many ways by legal systems.
Law that was administered by the state generally punished crimes com-
mitted against kings, government institutions, deities, and temples more
severely than crimes committed against other individuals. Hammurabi’s laws
sentenced to death even upper-class persons for theft from the king or from
temples. The theft of livestock, which was treated separately, from king or tem-
ples required a thirtyfold restitution, with death as punishment if the ﬁne could

234
Sociopolitical Organization
not be paid, whereas a similar crime committed against a private person called
for a ﬁne or a tenfold repayment (Pritchard 1955: 166, laws 6–8). Texcocan
law punished crimes committed within the royal palace more severely than
crimes committed elsewhere (Offner 1983: 159). Among the Inka, theft from
individuals or ayllus was punished at worst by ﬂogging, but anyone who stole
from government ﬁelds or storehouses or from temples or refused to perform
labour service was executed. Death was also the punishment for breaking into
houses where chosen women lived, setting ﬁre to suspension bridges, and (for
commoners) attempting to seduce upper-class Inka women. Inka law stressed
the sacred status of the Inka royal family and permitted the king to execute
subjects and conﬁscate their property more or less as he wished (S. Moore
1958: 74, 81–85). In Egypt the law sentenced people who robbed government
institutions and temples either to be killed or to be mutilated and condemned
to lifelong slave labour. The same sentences were imposed on individuals who
evaded paying taxes or performing corv´ee labour and on ofﬁcials convicted of
having been corrupted by bribes (O’Connor 1990: 28–29). In cases of theft
from individuals, in contrast, injured parties received only two- or threefold
compensation for their losses and even this limited compensation was often
hard to collect (Eyre 1984: 93; O’Connor 1990: 29).
Crimes committed against upper-class people also tended to be punished
more severely than crimes against commoners. Hammurabi decreed that, if
someone belonging to the upper-class was found guilty of having knocked out
an upper-class person’s eye or tooth or broken a bone, the same should be
done to him. If he had injured a commoner in the same ways, he had only to
pay ﬁnancial compensation. If an upper-class man assaulted a woman of his
own class who was pregnant and caused her to miscarry, he had to pay three
times more damages than for injuring a commoner in the same manner. Even
within the upper class, a man who struck someone superior in rank to himself
was given sixty lashes in the presence of the city council, while for striking an
equal he would have merely had to pay a ﬁne (Pritchard 1955: 175, laws 202,
203).
S. F. Moore (1958: 79) maintains that the Inka punished most crimes differ-
ently according to rank; nobles received light sentences for crimes for which
commoners were executed. Such treatment was justiﬁed by claiming that pub-
lic ridicule or loss of ofﬁce was as harsh a punishment for members of the nobil-
ityascorporalpunishment,exiletothetropics,orexecutionwasforcommoners
(75). Whatever a man’s class, the punishment for committing adultery with a
noble woman was death, while committing it with a commoner was punished
relatively lightly (Rowe 1944: 271). The Inka also had two classes of prisons
where individuals were interrogated, held for trial, or punished – ordinary

Law
235
prisons for commoners and more spacious and comfortable ones for nobles.
Yet, regardless of class, traitors, witches, those who stole state property, and
people who insulted the king were killed by being incarcerated in royal dun-
geons ﬁlled with snakes and wild felines (Kendall 1973: 133; Rowe 1944: 471).
In the Valley of Mexico the legal punishment of different classes was more
complex. The law discriminated against commoners in the sense that adultery
by male nobles with commoner women was punished less severely than com-
moners’ adultery with noble women. Texcocan law punished theft with stran-
gulation or enslavement, the severity of the penalty depending on the value
of what had been stolen, where the crime had been committed, the thief’s
previous criminal record, and the damage caused. Yet the ability to avoid such
penalties by making restitution payments greatly advantaged wealthier, upper-
class offenders (Offner 1983: 278–79). Aztec law, however, punished drunk-
enness in members of the upper classes more harshly than it did drunkenness
in commoners. Male nobles were strangled for severe public intoxication and
forfeited their titles and positions even for a minor offence (Berdan 1982: 97).
Commoners had their hair cut off and their houses levelled for a ﬁrst offence
and were executed after a second conviction. The reason for this was the belief
that nobles, as descendants of the god Quetzalcoatl, possessed stronger spiri-
tual powers that gave them a natural right to dominate and lead commoners,
but these same powers made it easier for them to resist temptation. Upper-
class drunkenness represented a failure to live up to claims that justiﬁed the
privileged position that nobles enjoyed and dissipated the special powers they
possessed.
Priests and young commoners undergoing military training were also exe-
cuted for single acts of drunkenness. Many priests were nobles, but those who
were not and young commoners training to be soldiers were subject to special
discipline because their service to the gods and to the state necessitated their
conserving as much supernatural power as possible. Priests were executed if
they were discovered breaking their obligation to be celibate (Berdan 1982:
97, 131–33; Offner 1983: 268–69). A similar attitude appears to have existed
in early Zhou China, where death was prescribed for ofﬁcials who participated
in alcoholic drinking bouts or sought to alter prescribed ways of doing things
(Creel 1970: 190). The Zhou (and perhaps the Shang) nobles, like those living
in the Valley of Mexico, believed that they were set apart from commoners by
a superior nature that endowed them with greater vitality and power (Lewis
1990: 32–33).
The state sought to reinforce parental authority and hence the context in
which habits of obedience to all levels of authority were learned. Texcocan law
executed individuals who injured or attacked their parents (Offner 1983: 204),

236
Sociopolitical Organization
while the Hammurabi code stipulated that a son who struck his father should
have his hand amputated. If the adopted son of a married Babylonian priestess
(who was not permitted to bear children of her own) denied his obligations to
his adoptive parents, he could be sentenced either to have his tongue cut out
or to be blinded (Pritchard 1955: 175, laws 192, 193, 195).
The ambivalent attitude towards slaves in early civilizations is reﬂected in
legislation concerning them. In Mesopotamia killing someone else’s slave was
a much less serious offence than harming any free person. It was compensated
by replacing the slave or paying a stipulated fee to the slave’s owner. At the
same time, a free person of whatever rank who concealed a runaway slave
or helped such a slave to escape from the city was executed (Pritchard 1955:
166–67, laws 15, 16, 19). Yoruba law permitted owners of slaves to execute
them or offer them as human sacriﬁces. Presumably such powers of life and
death were used mainly to intimidate and control slaves soon after they had
been captured in battle. Killing another’s slave required twofold restitution
(Ajisafe 1924: 28, 65). In Middle Kingdom Egypt royal slaves, many of whom
were prisoners of war, could be condemned to death if they misbehaved but
only after a hearing by a royal tribunal (Loprieno 1997: 200).
Most early civilizations, including the Yoruba, had laws protecting house-
hold and debt slaves and allowing them to be emancipated and even adopted
or married into their former owners’ families. In the Valley of Mexico laws
protected obedient and well-behaved slaves against being executed, used as
human sacriﬁces, or sold against their will (Offner 1983: 141). Both Aztec and
Yoruba slaves who took refuge in the royal palace were freed by the king. It
was illegal for anyone except their owner and his family to try to impede their
ﬂight (Ajisafe 1924: 22; Offner 1983: 140). In their mixture of harshness and
leniency, laws relating to slaves reﬂected both the need felt in early civiliza-
tions to maintain control over this tiny, oppressed minority and a willingness
to absorb them over time into the free labouring classes.
Among other classes, inequality was reinforced by the practice of justice as
well as by the nature of the laws. In the middle and upper tiers of the judicial
system all decisions were made or controlled by authorities who were members
of the upper classes. Despite formal orders that they should dispense justice
impartially and the severe punishments that were prescribed for failing to
do so, upper-class judges tended to favour members of their own class in
disputes with commoners. The upper classes also had more wealth and wider
social connections, which allowed them to bribe judges more effectively than
lower-class litigants (W. Clarke 1972: 253). Since in many law courts litigants
were expected to pay judges for hearing their cases, the distinction between
fees and bribery was often far from clear. The Hammurabi code ordered that

Law
237
a judge who altered a decision in someone’s favour should be ﬁned twelve
times the amount that was involved and permanently lose his right to hear
cases (Pritchard 1955: 166, law 5). That such severe penalties were thought
appropriate suggests that the corruption of justice was widely perceived to be
a serious problem. Given the close ties uniting the upper classes, this does not
mean that such penalties eliminated the problem or were very often imposed.
The control of the justice system by the upper classes also meant that lower-
class litigants were more likely to be subjected to painful and dangerous ordeals
in the course of a trial. They were not only more likely to lose lawsuits but also,
because of the nature of the laws, faced harsher penalties: ﬂogging, torture,
mutilation, forced labour, being sold as slaves, and painful forms of execution.
While a person of any status who incurred the Inka king’s anger risked being
penned up with his lethal menagerie, lower-class people ran far greater risks
of being severely punished by the law than did members of the Inka nobility.
Finally, extremely unpleasant penalties were often inﬂicted on the families of
individuals convicted of serious crimes, and these too were most likely to be
applied to members of the lower classes. Among the Aztec, all the members of
a traitor’s household were enslaved for four generations (Offner 1983: 225). In
Egypt the wives and children of men evading corv´ee duty could be enslaved
(Robins 1993: 137), as could the families of Yoruba men convicted of certain
kinds of theft (Bascom 1969: 40). The Inka exterminated entire families of
persons found guilty of witchcraft, probably because it was feared that other
members of such families might also be witches (Rowe 1944: 314).
Thus, while Aztec commoners were reported to have litigated among them-
selves like quarrelling turkeys (Offner 1983: 135, 259), most lower-class in-
dividuals avoided taking their social superiors to court. On the contrary, the
threat of litigation was a way to intimidate commoners and reinforce the power
of the upper classes. Law courts were used to collect debts from people who
were equal or inferior in status to their creditors; defendants were most often
poor men and women accused of theft and not paying their debts (Robins
1993: 137). The Middle Kingdom ‘Tale of the Eloquent Peasant’, which de-
scribes how the king, after a long delay, vindicated a poor farmer who protested
after being robbed and beaten by a powerful ofﬁcial, is overtly about justice
being done to an ordinary person. Yet justice was ﬁnally rendered in this case
only because the verbatim recordings of the farmer’s verbose pleas for justice
had entertained the king (Lichtheim 1973: 169–84). Eyre (1984: 104) observes
that, because of their power to bribe, socially manipulate judges and witnesses,
and ignore public opinion, powerful Egyptians had no fear of the courts. Under
these circumstances, the principal goal of the weaker party was to pacify and
win the favour of his superiors, not to oppose them. A powerful husband

238
Sociopolitical Organization
might seek justice against a socially inferior adulterer, but a lower-class hus-
band would not accuse a powerful ofﬁcial of seducing or raping his wife. H. G.
Creel (1937: 354; 1970: 190–91) observes that in early Zhou China members
of the nobility were punished far less often than commoners. It was not easy
for the king or regional leaders to impose severe penalties on individuals who
were supported by powerful kinsmen and many armed retainers.
Far from being a means of securing justice for the weak, the upper levels of
the legal system were a powerful instrument of intimidation and control in the
hands of the upper classes. The courts provided a way to coerce less powerful
individuals and reinforce the power and privileges of the upper classes and of
majorinstitutions.Thisuseofthelegalsystemisarchetypallyrepresentedinthe
biblical account of how the Israelite Queen Jezebel obtained royal possession
of a vineyard that its owner, Naboth, did not wish to sell to the king; she had
Naboth condemned to death on a false charge of blasphemy and his vineyard
conﬁscated by the crown (I Kings 21). This account of the use of legal systems
conforms to Aztec descriptions of the law as a wild beast, a trap, or a snare, an
overpowering force to be feared because people could be punished by it for
crimes they did not commit (Offner 1983: 243–44).
Even the use of the legal system for litigation among the upper classes
was discouraged. The Hammurabi code stipulated that, if an upper-class man
brought charges of murder or witchcraft against another upper-class man and
failed to prove them or was found guilty of giving false testimony in a case
involving a capital offence, he could be executed (Pritchard 1955: 166, laws
1–3). Such laws not only discouraged illegal behaviour but indicated that con-
siderable risks were involved in undertaking even legitimate legal actions of
these sorts.
These arrangements suggest that in early civilizations governments were not
anxious to expend time and resources regulating aspects of human relations
that could be controlled in a less formal manner. This in turn implies that
an important function of the legal system was to reinforce the power and
privileges of the state and the upper classes. While the legal system had to be
protected from being totally discredited as a result of too obvious corruption
and oppression, it functioned, behind claims of impartiality, as a not very subtle
means by which powerful individuals could coerce less powerful ones.
law and social order
The legal systems of early civilizations appear to have grown out of the seem-
ingly universal legal practices of smaller, more egalitarian societies. These
practices involved the recognition of local authorities as having the right to

Law
239
hear disputes and render verdicts in accordance with generally accepted prin-
ciples, which in turn were enforced by public opinion (Pospisil 1971: 39–96).
With the development of early civilizations, these arrangements were trans-
formed into multitiered, hierarchical legal systems staffed at the higher levels
by upper-class judges whose decisions were enforced by the power of the
state. The king was universally acknowledged to be the supreme legal author-
ity, and the laws upheld by the state were often treated as royal or divine
pronouncements.
There was, however, considerable variation from one early civilization to
another in the extent to which legal authorities and ofﬁces were differenti-
ated from general administrative ones. There were also marked differences in
the degree to which laws were codiﬁed and those relating to different gen-
eral categories, such as commerce, administration, and class privileges, were
elaborated. In general, variations in such categories reﬂected the different
preoccupations of the upper classes in particular early civilizations.
In most early civilizations law was described as a powerful force maintaining
order in an equitable, if unequal, fashion in the social realm. Yet, because at all
but the lowest levels of the legal system laws were made, cases were decided,
and punishments were determined by the upper classes, the legal system was
a potent instrument for intimidating individuals of lower status. Chinese law
appears to have differed from that of other early civilizations only in that, in
theory as well as in practice, litigation was possible only between equals. No
efforts were made to idealize the legal system as a means by which justice was
provided for all. Early Chinese realism with respect to law appears to have had
long-term consequences for the development of Chinese civilization, which
never evolved a strong sense of either private property or individual legal
rights. Elsewhere, in due course some people were inspired to try to realize
the ideals embedded in representations of their legal system as an instrument
of social justice as well as social order.

12 Military Organization
M
ilitary force played three important roles in early civilizations. It
secured and defended the frontiers of states; it enriched powerful
rulers by enabling them to exploit peripheral areas that contained valuable
natural resources, control lucrative trade routes, and impose tribute on con-
quered peoples; and it maintained internal order – suppressing rebellions,
ensuring the collection of taxes, maintaining social peace, and protecting the
power and privileges of the upper classes. No clear distinction was drawn be-
tween military and police forces. Because order and prosperity were important
for everyone, military strength was endowed with great political and religious
signiﬁcance.
Armed conﬂict was invariably destructive of human life and property, but
wherever it occurred in early civilizations it was preferable to belong to a
strong and disciplined polity than to a weak one. Military success offered
opportunities for personal enrichment and prestige to kings and commoners
alike. Warfare was surrounded by elaborate rules of conduct which sought
to limit unforeseen consequences, but these rules were often disregarded in
extreme situations or when ﬁghting enemies who did not understand them.
The Aztec and Inka both requested the target of a planned attack to submit
peacefully. Aztec ambassadors invited rulers to become friends of the Aztec
king, allow trade, and pay nominal tribute. If this offer was not accepted, a short
time later their Texcocan allies would threaten the targeted state with severe
punishment if it did not submit. Finally, the Tlacopans, the third members of
the Triple Alliance, would call upon the warriors of the threatened state to
surrender and save lives. These preliminary encounters were believed to be
essential to justify a military campaign (Berdan 1982: 106).
Rituals linked warfare to the cosmic order. Offerings were made to super-
natural beings to win their favour or induce them not to assist the enemy. The
Inka rulers consulted oracles before starting a war, sought to win the favour
240

Military Organization
241
of the enemy’s deities or to weaken them, and dedicated a portion of any ter-
ritory they captured to the service of the gods (Kendall 1973: 99–108). The
Shang kings sanctiﬁed war as a hunt for human prey to be sacriﬁced to their
ancestors and the gods. Major Chinese military campaigns began at the earth
altar and ancestral temple of the king or of a major provincial lord, where
the war was announced to the ancestors and their help requested. Tablets
inscribed with the names of these ancestors were carried into battle. After
a successful campaign, prisoners were sacriﬁced or severed enemy ears and
heads were brought from the battleﬁeld and presented at the ancestral temple
(Lewis 1990: 23–25). Before a military campaign, Aztec soldiers gathered at
temples to offer their own blood to the gods and receive weapons. Armed
priests carried images of the gods into battle (Hassig 1988: 9). The Aztec justi-
ﬁed war as an opportunity to collect prisoners who were sacriﬁced so that their
blood and ﬂesh could nourish the gods. Mesopotamians believed that wars
were fought at the command of the patron deities of city-states, whose will a
king was supposed to be able to interpret (Mikhaeli 1969: 78). At the start of
a military campaign, Yoruba soldiers offered sacriﬁces to their war standards
and covered themselves with charms that they believed would protect them
in battle (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 29).
Ultimately, it was kings who were held ritually and operationally responsible
for warfare. Peter Gose (1996b) has observed that among the Inka war was
the key to royal power. Kings normally led armies in person or delegated
command of them to close relatives or high ofﬁcials. Inka kings also initiated
wars, although only after consulting with high-ranking military and civilian
administrators. At an early period, to begin a war Mesopotamian leaders might
have needed the consent of a council of leading citizens and an assembly of
men of ﬁghting age (Postgate 1992: 81). The Aztec ruler sought the support of a
councilofhigh-rankingveteransoldiers(Hassig1988:47–48)andofthecalpolli
leaders who had to call up and provision most of the troops. Neither Yoruba
kings nor any member of Yoruba royal patrilineages normally led armies, and in
some states, such as Oyo, kings were forbidden to do so. Just as did rulers who
actually led or commissioned armies, however, Yoruba kings bore the ultimate
responsibility for victory or defeat because of the supernatural powers that
they commanded (R. Smith 1973: 227). They also proﬁted economically from
war as did kings in other early civilizations; in some cases receiving one-third
of the slaves and other booty (Peel 1983: 45).
Kings often began their reigns with shows of military force. Aztec rulers
needed to capture the large number of prisoners that had to be sacriﬁced
to complete their enthronement rituals. King Tizoc, who ruled from 1481
to 1486, may have been poisoned when he failed to do this (Hassig 1988:

242
Sociopolitical Organization
198). The Maya similarly appear to have treated warfare as an integral part
of royal succession ceremonies; heir designates were required to capture one
or more enemy soldiers of high rank for human sacriﬁce (Schele and Miller
1986: 116–17). New Egyptian kings could demonstrate their prowess in many
different ways, including big-game hunting and erecting large buildings, but
many of them led military expeditions (Hornung 1997: 306–8). Shang kings
were active as both soldiers and hunters, moving about their kingdom to
join regional ofﬁcials in attacks against rebels or foreign enemies (Keightley
1979–80).
Given its importance, documentation of warfare is surprisingly limited, spo-
radic, and equivocal for most early civilizations. Archaeological evidence of
warfare sometimes occurs in the form of city walls or frontier fortiﬁcations,
but city walls were not just for protection against foreign attack. Moreover,
while fortiﬁcations were not common in the Valley of Mexico or among the
Maya,literarysourcesrevealthatwarfarewasprevalentinbothregions.Among
the Shang Chinese and the Inka, warfare did not receive explicit iconographic
attention. Egyptian generals regularly depicted themselves as ofﬁcials wear-
ing civilian dress rather than military uniform. In works of art, New Kingdom
Egyptian rulers and Mesopotamian kings were represented on a much larger
scale than the armed forces they led, while the Old and Middle Kingdom
Egyptians, Maya, and Aztec often depicted military action in the form of the
king alone smiting one or more enemies. Yet we know from reliable literary
sources that the Egyptians and Aztec ﬁelded large armies. This discrepancy
suggests that the general lack of representation of large armies in Classic Maya
art does not signify that large armies were never assembled. What it does indi-
cate is that the discussion of warfare in early civilizations requires documents
as well as iconographic evidence.
mass armies
In most early civilizations wars against neighbouring city-states and foreign
peoples were waged mainly by conscript armies composed of farmers and
craftsmen led by ofﬁcers who belonged to the upper classes and the bureau-
cracy. The rest of the time many of these ofﬁcers were engaged in various
forms of civilian administration. Military campaigns usually began after the
main harvest had been collected. This period also frequently corresponded
with the dry season, in which travel was easier. Militias were trained to vary-
ing degrees and fought either with weapons that ordinary people used for
hunting and defence against wild animals or with more specialized weapons
provided by the state. In some civilizations conscripts were fed and clothed by

Military Organization
243
the government while they were on campaigns; in others they were expected
to provision themselves.
The Aztec and their allies waged war to control trade routes and collect trib-
ute from city-states they had subdued over much of central Mexico. Through-
out the Valley of Mexico, warfare was valued as a source of individual social
mobility and an activity that was essential to maintain the cosmic order. While
the Aztec idealized warfare even more than most of their neighbours, their
views about it were based on concepts that were shared by all the peoples of
the region.
At birth every Aztec male child was formally dedicated to the military, in
token of which a warrior undertook to bury the child’s umbilical cord on a
ﬁeld of battle during the next military campaign. The Aztec took more care
to educate young men to be citizen-soldiers than any other early civilization.
Every calpolli had a telpochcalli (school) in which young commoners were
taught to be warriors by members who had been elevated to noble status as a
reward for multiple acts of valour in warfare. Graduates of these schools were
incorporated into their calpolli regiment, which fought alongside others in
military campaigns. Normally each calpolli supplied four hundred soldiers
under the command of its own ofﬁcers (Townsend 1992: 197).
Boys began to attend such schools at puberty. Younger boys were under the
control of older trainees who had already participated in military campaigns.
All of them continued to eat at home but were required to sleep in the school
buildings and to avoid drunkenness and sexual licence. They grew food on
ﬁelds that belonged collectively to the calpolli and performed corv´ee labour –
dredging canals, repairing streets, and cleaning public places under the di-
rection of calpolli elders. They were also instructed in the special lore and
traditions of their calpolli. Together with the young women of their calpolli,
they attended sessions in the cuicacalli (houses of song), where they learned
the songs and dances they would perform as adults at major religious festivals
(Clendinnen 1991: 112–18; Hassig 1988: 30–34).
Yet the young men’s training was principally as soldiers. About the age of
twenty they ﬁrst accompanied older warriors to battle as shield-bearers and
observers. In the next campaign they were allowed to ﬁght in small groups
under the supervision of seasoned veterans and began to rise in the warrior
hierarchy by capturing enemy soldiers for human sacriﬁce. Those who failed,
even as part of a group, to capture a prisoner were not allowed to cut off
a youthful lock of hair, which remained a lifelong source of humiliation for
them. Whether or not they were militarily successful, men were allowed to
marry and withdraw from the telpochcalli by their mid-twenties (Hassig 1988:
36–40).

244
Sociopolitical Organization
Sons of nobles received a more intensive administrative and religious edu-
cation in special schools (calmecacs) that were attached to temples. They too
began to receive rigorous military training when they were about ﬁfteen years
old. A young noble’s reputation and chances of being appointed to a major state
ofﬁce could be ruined by his inability to succeed as a warrior (Clendinnen 1991:
121–22).
The Aztec fought with clubs, atlatls (throwing sticks) and darts, and slings,
but their principal weapons were swords and spears. While Aztec soldiers were
trained and drilled with wooden weapons, they fought with swords edged along
twosideswithobsidianbladesandwithobsidian-tippeddartsandspears.These
weapons, which had great cutting power, were distributed to ordinary soldiers
in wartime and stored between campaigns in armouries near the temples at the
centre of the city and perhaps also in or near calpolli temples (Hassig 1988:
61, 75–94). Leading soldiers wore heavily quilted cotton armour. Tribute-
paying city-states along the routes armies travelled were required to supply
the soldiers with food as they passed by. Between harvest time and the start
of spring planting, the Aztec calendar was ﬁlled with rituals relating to war
(Clendinnen 1991: 295–97).
In addition to wars of conquest, highland Mexican city-states engaged
in xochiyaoyotl (ﬂowery wars), which consisted of carefully prearranged,
‘friendly’ battles between rival states. Soldiers were killed in these battles and
prisoners taken, but military action was restricted to the battleﬁeld and the
overt political status of the participants was not altered, at least in the short
run, by the outcome. The rationale for these contests was to capture prison-
ers for sacriﬁce to the gods. Flowery wars were said to be waged when not
enough wars of conquest were occurring. In addition to training soldiers and
permitting individuals to win military honours, these contests served to deﬂect
formidable nearby rivals while states were expanding elsewhere and to reduce
the strength of rival states too powerful to be conquered in a single campaign.
The Triple Alliance repeatedly challenged the Tlaxcalans, east of the Valley of
Mexico, to ﬂowery wars in an effort to weaken them, but they were unable to
incorporate them into their tributary system (Hassig 1988: 129–30, 172; M. E.
Smith 1996: 184–85).
Mesopotamian city-states fought over water rights, agricultural land, and
trade routes. Wars were a source of wealth for rulers in the form of tribute and
female slaves, who could be employed as weavers. Military action was also nec-
essary to defend Mesopotamian states against incursions by Semitic-speaking
pastoralists from the northwest and the peoples of the Zagros Mountains to
the east, who appear to have grown increasingly dangerous in the course of
the third millennium b.c. The Ur III ruler, Shu-Sin, built a wall where the

Military Organization
245
Tigris and Euphrates Rivers came closest together to hinder the southward
movements of Amorite bands (Crawford 1991: 27).
Glyptic representations of battles and bound prisoners occur as early as the
Uruk period (Collon 1987: 162), but for Early Dynastic I times there is still
no clear evidence of standing armies. Kings or prominent citizens appointed
by city-state councils may have led armies raised from among the free men
of the community. Such levies continued in wartime long after kings assumed
permanentcontrolofmilitaryaffairs.Conscriptsoldierswerearmedwithmetal
axes, spears, incurved swords or daggers, and stone-headed maces that were
either owned by them or produced and stored at palaces or temples and issued
to them in wartime. These arms were heavy and specialized compared with
those used in neighbouring Egypt at the same period. There is no evidence in
the Early Dynastic period of archers or lightly armed ﬁghters. The bow and
arrow were introduced in Akkadian times (Huot 1989: 225; Jacobsen 1943).
It is not known how or by whom soldiers were trained. In Sumerian, erin
meant both a dependent labourer and a soldier, which suggests that many
soldiers were recruited from the paid labour forces of temple estates. The term
nubanda, which later became a military rank, was originally the title of a temple
administrator. Military service must also have been required of those who
owned or rented land. In all cases, it would have been perceived as a form of
corv´ee labour. Defeated cities frequently had their walls breached or levelled,
and their temples were sometimes plundered, although this was believed to
provoke the anger of the gods and draw divine retribution upon kings who
allowed such an offence to occur (Gelb 1973; Mikhaeli 1969; Postgate 1992:
241–56).
Egyptian kings fought wars to defend their borders, control foreign trade
routes, and obtain prisoners to augment agricultural production. Commoners
were recruited for military service as one of many forms of corv´ee labour that
did not require specialized skills. Soldiers were referred to generically as d3mw
(recruits) or nfrw (young men), and in the Middle Kingdom the term nh˘ n nıwt
(community dweller) in practice meant a soldier (Eyre 1999: 38). The term mˇs
was applied equally to an army and a mining crew. In the Sixth Dynasty, the
courtier and high ofﬁcial Weni led ﬁve consecutive armies, composed of men
conscripted from all over Egypt, into Canaan (Grimal 1992: 82–85). Like other
corv´ee labourers, soldiers were fed and cared for by the state while they were
away from home. Farmers fought with bows and arrows, clubs, and spears,
presumably the same weapons they used for hunting and defence against
wild animals in their home villages. Workers attached to speciﬁc temples and
mortuary cults were granted permanent immunity from all forms of corv´ee,
including military service (Andreu 1997: 21–23).

246
Sociopolitical Organization
12.1. Inka battle scene depicting the storming of an Andean fortress (pukara), from the lavishly
illustrated manuscript El primer nueva cr´onica y buen gobierno (New Chronicle and Good
Government of Peru), written by the Andean provincial noble, Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala,
probably ﬁnished in 1713 or 1715. Source: after F. Guaman Poma de Ayalla, Nueva Cr´onica y
Bien Gobierno (Paris: Mus´eum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Travaux et M´emoires de l’Institut
d’Ethnologie, 23, 1989), 63.
The Inka state resorted to large-scale warfare to extend its control over the
peoples of the Central Andes (Fig. 12.1). Later expansion appears to have
aimed mainly at gaining control of more remote areas that were rich in natural
resources, especially metals, and at securing defensible boundaries. Inka of-
ﬁcials used corv´ee labour as a source of soldiers, every male between the ages
of twenty-ﬁve and ﬁfty being liable for military service. In each settlement or
ayllu, instructors were responsible for teaching teenage males how to ﬁght.
Military contests involving young men from neighbouring communities were
among the activities encouraged by the Inka state. Members of the Inka no-
bility were educated at special schools in Cuzco where, in addition to being

Military Organization
247
taught how to be administrators, they received a rigorous military education
and were encouraged to ﬁght enthusiastically for the Inka king. The individual
strength and military skills of young Inka nobles were tested in the course of
an elaborate set of coming-of-age ceremonies in which their ears were pierced
and the king presented them with insignia of noble status. These ceremonies
included races and individual and group combat in the course of which some
contestants were killed (Bram 1941; Grou 1989).
Ordinary Inka conscripts were organized in groups of ten, one of their
number being responsible for seeing that the rest were armed, fed, and had
the necessary supplies (Kendall 1973: 98). These in turn were incorporated
into groups of ﬁfty, one hundred, ﬁve hundred, and one thousand (Hyslop
1990: 147). If conscripts were away from an ayllu during the growing season,
its remaining members had to plant and harvest their ﬁelds for them. Some
soldiers may have been accompanied by their wives, who helped to cook and
carry equipment. Food and clothing were provided by the state from depots
located at provincial administrative centres and government rest places located
along the main roads. Small units might pass the nights in large public halls at
such places, but large armies lived mainly in tents provided by the state (Murra
1980: 99). Inka soldiers did not wear uniforms, and most fought with the slings,
bolas, bows and arrows, spears, and clubs that they had been trained to use
in their home villages (Hyslop 1990: 147). In the celebrations and rituals that
followed a conquest, defeated soldiers were made to wear women’s clothes as
a sign of submission, and the Inka king walked over the prostrate living bodies
of his enemies (Classen 1993: 56–57).
The Yoruba waged war to control trade routes and obtain slaves. Military
service was obligatory for all free and able-bodied Yoruba men. If a person re-
fused to ﬁght, his crops might be plundered and he himself be severely beaten.
The heads of extended families were required to train and arm their follow-
ers and organize them into a ﬁghting force that could join their city-state’s
army when required. Extended-family units were aggregated under ward and
quarter leaders. The principal weapons were iron spears, double-edged (ida)
and single-edged (adedengbe) slashing swords, daggers for stabbing, and bows
and arrows. Extended families supplied both food and arms for military cam-
paigns, although once out of their own territory armies tended to live off the
land (Ajayi and Smith 1971).
The available data on Maya warfare deal almost entirely with the behaviour
of kings and high-ranking ofﬁcials, and it is unknown to what extent commoners
were summoned for military service during wartime. Maya epigraphic and
pictorial evidence documents numerous episodes of the capture and eventual
sacriﬁce of the kings and nobles of one city-state by the rulers of another, and

248
Sociopolitical Organization
the capture of large images of deities that accompanied military expeditions
was one of the most celebrated accomplishments of Maya kings (Harrison
1999: 155–56). This and the absence of fortiﬁcations have led some Mayanists
to conclude that Maya warfare involved small bands of upper-class warriors
engaging in heavily ritualized and perhaps prearranged conﬂicts on the bor-
ders of their respective states. Such battles, it is argued, established the relative
prestige of individual rulers and members of the upper classes and provided
upper-class victims for a sacriﬁcial cult (Schele and Miller 1986: 209–40).
Other Mayanists have suggested that some wars were fought to create re-
gional superstates (Demarest 1978; Webster 1993: 429–30). Still others deny
that territorial gain was a signiﬁcant motive for Maya warfare; they main-
tain that warfare among city-states was concerned mainly with establishing
tributary networks and controlling trade routes (Culbert 1991b: 336; Freidel
1986; Houston 1993: 137–38). Competition of this sort involved the efforts
of major kingdoms, such as Calakmul, to form alliances with far-off states
that would encircle mutual rivals or threats such as Tikal and, by gradu-
ally severing their trading networks, weaken them economically prior to a
major military confrontation (Drew 1999; Martin and Grube 2000; Sharer
1996).
In fact, warfare was directed not only against the borders or outlying admin-
istrative centres of city-states but also against their capitals. The defacement
and smashing of stelae in the centres of major cities such as Tikal suggest
that enemy armies penetrated them. In its ﬁnal phase an attempt appears
to have been made to fortify the centre of Dos Pilos against such an attack
by erecting palisades and fortiﬁcations built of stone blocks wrenched from
existing buildings. Similar emergency fortiﬁcations have been identiﬁed in
some other urban centres (Houston 1993: 46). Yet, while victorious rulers
no doubt sought to humiliate defeated cities, imposed tribute on them, and
sometimes installed individuals of their own choosing as their kings, there is
no evidence that efforts were made to incorporate one large city-state into
another. Nevertheless, known patterns of warfare would have required large
military forces, even though such forces are not documented in Maya art and
inscriptions. The general lack of specialized weapons and military technology
suggests that most soldiers were farmers or craftsmen conscripted for short
military campaigns. Most battles probably dissolved into individual combats,
and kings and high-ranking ofﬁcials were no doubt special targets for attack
and capture. There is no proof, however, that Maya kings deliberately exposed
themselves to capture in battle or that kings taken prisoner were necessar-
ily captured in hand-to-hand combat by other rulers. They may simply have
taken personal credit for every ruler and many nobles captured by their armies.

Military Organization
249
Inferential evidence suggests that the lower classes did participate in military
campaigns, but it is not known how they were trained, called up for military
service, or commanded.
The numerous references to warfare in Shang divination texts suggest that
warfare was of great importance to the Shang kings (Keightley 1979–80). War-
fare appears to have been much concerned with occupying and settling pe-
ripheral lands, with protecting Shang settlements against attacks by pastoral
peoples living to the north and west, and with maintaining the unity of the
state. Shang oracle bones refer to the king’s levying farmers and state labour-
ers for military campaigns, the farmers in units of one thousand and the
labourers usually in multiples of one hundred. It is not clear what role these
conscripts played in military campaigns or to what extent they constituted
the bulk of a military force (Keightley 1969: 66–144). In Shang and Western
Zhou times continuous liability to military service may have been limited to
the retainers of nobles who lived near the capital or alongside regional of-
ﬁcials in their fortiﬁed administrative centres (Lewis 1990: 53–64). Some of
these retainers may have farmed the surrounding countryside but been avail-
able for military campaigns whenever they were needed. Most royal armies
must have been composed of local rulers and their retainers assembled by
regional ofﬁcials and by the king, who had their own larger forces. It ap-
pears that at each level ofﬁcials were responsible for arming and training
their own followers. If soldiers had to abandon their crops to accompany
their lords on military campaigns, other workers must have been available
to cultivate their ﬁelds. These may have been full-time farmers, who were
not normally called upon to ﬁght but may have been requisitioned as porters
in wartime to assist armies that passed through the regions where they lived
(Lewis 1990: 55).
While conscript armies could be used to defend a state or wage war against
others, they were not a source of internal power for kings or members of the
upper classes. It has been suggested that the rulers of territorial states, espe-
cially multiethnic ones, could have used conscripts to suppress uprisings in
remote parts of their kingdoms or played rivalrous neighbouring groups off
against one another. The Inka rulers may have been pursuing this sort of pol-
icy when they moved portions of recently conquered ethnic groups nearer the
centre of their kingdom and replaced them with settlers drawn from peoples
who had long demonstrated their loyalty or when they encouraged ritualized
competition among neighbouring groups. These arrangements did not, how-
ever, supply rulers with a reliable source of physical coercion. The injudicious
application of such a policy might have created anarchy rather than increased
the power of the state.

250
Sociopolitical Organization
officers and professional soldiers
Arguingthatconscriptarmiesweretheonlymilitaryforceavailabletotherulers
of early civilizations, Elman Service (1975) concluded that these were not true
states in the sense that the legitimate deployment of physical force played a
signiﬁcant role in ensuring their viability. Rather, he suggested, extending the
now-discredited view that chiefdoms were held together only by supernatural
sanctions, early civilizations were large, chiefdom-like theocracies in which
authority was sacerdotal and all sanctions were supernatural (91 n. 9). Without
addressing in detail the nature of armies in early civilizations, Maurice Godelier
(1986:31–32)alsomaintainedthatinsuchsocietiesthepowerofrulersresulted
from the belief on the part of most of their lower-class subjects that powerful
supernatural forces supported them. Godelier argued that, because the people
in the Andean region thought that the Inka monarch was divine and kept
the universe functioning, they believed that they owed their lives to him and
accepted that this gave him the right to dominate and exploit them – that
if they did not obey him supernatural powers would punish them and the
well-being of the cosmos would be endangered (159–61).
Godelier was correct that Inka monarchs, like other Andean rulers and rulers
in most other early civilizations, promoted a belief in their own divinity. Yet
numerous subject peoples had only recently been incorporated into the Inka
state, and many people who belonged to these societies would have remem-
bered that, before they were ruled by the Inka king, their world had functioned
perfectly well without him. Moreover, there is no evidence that subject groups
anywhere accept theocratic claims easily or uncritically and much evidence
that they generate their own counterideologies to oppose those of their rulers.
If fear of divine sanctions alone were an effective control, why did all an-
cient states have to guard temples, palaces, and government storehouses from
thieves and threaten robbers with drastic physical punishments? Why were
Egyptian and Inka divine monarchs assassinated as a result of court intrigues?
Why was the threat of violence needed to collect taxes in ancient Egypt and
other early civilizations? Why did protests occur when, as happened in New
Kingdom Egypt, governments could not pay their employees’ wages? Why
were there peasant revolts? Morton Fried (1967) strongly disagreed with
Service’s views and argued that physical force played an important role in
managing early civilizations.
Service and Godelier were correct only to the extent that force alone is never
sufﬁcient to make a society work. Farmers in early civilizations depended on
governments for defence from external attack and the maintenance of internal
order and were prepared to tolerate and at least minimally support any regime

Military Organization
251
that could do this. Capable rulers took care not to alienate most of the popula-
tion by allowing rapacious ofﬁcials to overtax and abuse them and won support
by functioning as a source of prestige, status, and material rewards. Neverthe-
less, the rulers of early civilizations needed trustworthy and capable soldiers to
guard them and their families, nobles and government ofﬁcials, government
storehouses, and tax collectors. They also frequently needed soldiers to gar-
rison control points and frontiers and to wage wars that took men away from
their homes for months or even years at a time. Some of this work could have
been done by military corv´ees, but many tasks were better entrusted to profes-
sional soldiers, whose loyalty was reinforced by their socially and economically
privileged status. As more complex forms of weapons and more sophisticated
techniques of ﬁghting developed, the need for more specialized training also
encouraged the professionalization of the armed forces. These factors suggest
that, contrary to Service, conscript armies were rarely if ever adequate for all
the military and policing tasks that had to be performed in early civilizations.
The Inka, long considered to have had no career soldiers, are now acknowl-
edged to have been in the process of building large professional armies (Grou
1989; Murra 1986). Rotating corv´ees of farmers called up for short periods of
military service produced large armies that could overwhelm adjacent territo-
ries or intimidate the rulers of small polities into submitting to Inka rule. Yet
armies of this sort were inadequate for wars that continued for years such as
those that the Inka king Wayna Qhapaq was waging in Ecuador early in the
sixteenth century. Inka rulers discovered that career soldiers could be more
highly trained and better armed and hence produced more effective ﬁghting
forces. Well-trained and loyal soldiers were also needed to garrison adminis-
trative centres and protect Inka governors. Large numbers of full-time soldiers
were settled near Cuzco both to protect and maintain order in the capital re-
gion and to be ready to move in any direction to suppress rebellions in the
provinces (Hyslop 1990: 318). Prudence dictated that armies of conscripted
subject peoples not be assembled within striking distance of Cuzco (Kendall
1973: 99). As the Inka state reached its ecologically sustainable boundaries,
there was also a growing need for soldiers to defend its borders against in-
cursions by tribal peoples living to the north, east, and south. This required
establishing fortiﬁed garrisons that did not have ethnic afﬁnities to local groups
living on either side of the border they were guarding.
Full-time soldiers to perform these special tasks were recruited from sub-
jugated ethnic groups that were noted for their martial skills. These groups,
which were otherwise a potential threat to Inka control, were transformed into
supporters of the Inka state by assigning them a privileged position within the
kingdom’ssocialandeconomichierarchy.Individualfarmerswhodistinguished

252
Sociopolitical Organization
themselves in battle while performing military corv´ees were also recruited as
full-time soldiers, while instructors who trained young commoners to ﬁght
may also have channelled the strongest, bravest, and most skillful into military
careers. Inkas-by-privilege may have been selected on the basis of their per-
sonal performance to become middle-level ofﬁcers, commanding units of one
hundred, ﬁve hundred, or one thousand soldiers (Grou 1989).
These recruits were specially trained and armed with shields, helmets, and
round metal plates to protect their bodies, and they fought with metal axes,
metal-tipped spears, and heavy stone maces. They and their families were
exempt from any form of taxation. Career soldiers were frequently granted
land owned by the king for their support. It is unclear if the garrisons of
frontier forts took turns working this land and guarding forts or if the land
was worked for them by local populations as part of their labour tax (Hyslop
1990: 148–72). Extensive government farms were created to feed the royal
armies. The Cochabamba Valley in Bolivia was a particularly important centre
of maize production that freed the full-time soldiers stationed near Cuzco
and elsewhere from having to grow food to feed themselves and their families
(La Lone and La Lone 1987; Wachtel 1982). The loyalty of seasoned regiments
of full-time soldiers and their commanders, who had served Wayna Qhapaq
in Ecuador, assured his son Atawalpa of victory over the larger armies, made
up mainly of peasant conscripts, that fought for his half-brother Waskar when
the two princes struggled to succeed their dead father.
The Inka king was surrounded by a palace guard of two thousand soldiers
and a personal bodyguard of one hundred high-ranking ofﬁcers. These units
were composed of nobles and men recruited from special ethnic groups such
as the Ca˜naris, who were renowned for their military ability. The Ca˜naris and
their families had been resettled in the Yucay Valley, near Cuzco, where they
had been granted tax-free land. The king’s guard, Inka nobles, and full-time
soldiers formed the core of any major Inka army. Such armies were ofﬁcered
at the highest levels by Inka nobles, who commanded units of twenty-ﬁve
hundred and ﬁve thousand soldiers. An entire army made up of a number of
such units was led either by the king or by a close royal relative who served as
its commander in chief (Kendall 1973: 98). Some of these ofﬁcers performed
military duties only as one of a number of high-level administrative functions.
Others, however, spent their careers leading armies (Grou 1989).
When the Egyptian kings abandoned their early policy of depopulating ad-
jacent regions (Hoffman 1979) for one of constructing forts along their fron-
tiers to control the movement of people and goods, these forts were probably
manned by full-time soldiers. Middle Kingdom forts in Nubia were garrisoned
by rotating military units until the end of the Twelfth Dynasty, when these

Military Organization
253
garrisons were replaced by settlers from Egypt. At least during the Twelfth
Dynasty, grain was sent in bulk from Egypt to the Nubian forts rather than
grown locally in that infertile region. The garrisons were also supplied with
standard military equipment, such as hide shields and stone-tipped spears,
some of which may have been manufactured at the large Egyptian forts in
Lower Nubia (S. Smith 1995; Vila 1970). Royal palaces, provincial adminis-
trative centres, and government warehouses were probably also guarded by
full-time soldiers. Beginning in the First Intermediate Period, companies of
forty lightly clad archers or spearmen were depicted in the service of regional
ofﬁcials. Similar squads of soldiers were associated with provincial governors
in the early Middle Kingdom (Andreu 1997: 19–21). These were probably the
same sort of full-time soldiers or police that had been employed by the central
government in the Old Kingdom. Beginning at that time, large numbers of
Medjay pastoralists from the Eastern Desert, as well as Nubians and Libyans,
were recruited as soldiers and settled in Egypt with their families. One of their
tasks was to assist government ofﬁcials to collect the grain tax from recalcitrant
Egyptian farmers, whom the soldiers would arrest, ﬂog, and imprison until
they delivered what bureaucrats had estimated was the government’s share
of the harvest. In the Sixth Dynasty, companies of these foreign recruits, as
well as conscripted commoners, were led by high-ranking ofﬁcials on military
expeditions against Canaan (Strouhal 1992: 202–3; Trigger 1976a: 54–63).
Senwosret III boasted that increasing royal revenues during the Middle
Kingdom permitted him to expand the number of soldiers in his service and
increase their remuneration (Lichtheim 1973: 199). It is uncertain whether
such soldiers performed their military duties full-time. They may have been
given land to work themselves or have worked for them by tenant farmers.
There is no evidence of specialized weaponry, apart from large shields and
battleaxes, prior to the introduction of chariots, compound bows, and new
and more effective types of bronze swords and daggers from southwestern
Asia during the Second Intermediate Period. Nevertheless, professional sol-
diers appear to have been specially trained to move in formation and ﬁght
as units (Andreu 1997: 23–25). They may also have played a leading role in
the attacks on fortiﬁed Canaanite towns that are depicted in tombs of the
Fifth and Sixth Dynasties. These assaults involved the undermining of town
walls and the use of wheeled siege ladders by soldiers armed with axes. Large
armies are recorded as being led by government ofﬁcials during the Old King-
dom and by kings’ sons, who were sometimes junior co-rulers, in the Middle
Kingdom (Andreu 1997: 21–23). There is no evidence that these leaders, who
were titled ımy-r mˇs (overseer of an expedition) or tsw (commander), were
full-time military personnel. If there were full-time ofﬁcers, it was probably

254
Sociopolitical Organization
at a lower rank than is documented in tombs and funerary texts. Professional
soldiers increased in numbers and were far more complexly organized in the
New Kingdom (Schulman 1964).
Because of the crucial importance of warfare in Shang and Western Zhou
China, military organization appears to have been professionalized to a consid-
erable degree. Among those employed full-time may have been some military
ofﬁcers, troops who were trained to handle special equipment such as chariots,
and numerous soldiers who protected the upper classes and helped to enforce
their authority. Many different types of army-related ofﬁces are mentioned in
Shang texts. General categories include ya and shi (ofﬁcers, commanders), ma
(chariot ofﬁcers), she (archery ofﬁcers), chuan (dog ofﬁcers), and shu (garrison
commanders). Dogs may have been used in military and police actions, as well
as for hunting, which was viewed as a form of military training (Chao 1972: 14–
15, 74–86; Chou 1968: 276–320; Vandermeersch 1980: 66–68). Each of these
categories was subdivided into various ranks. While some ofﬁces may have
been entirely military, others seem to have been of a mixed nature. Chariot
and dog ofﬁcers may have been responsible for breeding horses and dogs as
well as for their military training and use. Yang (sheep ofﬁcers) appear to have
been agricultural ofﬁcials who were involved with military campaigns on which
animals were likely to be captured as booty (Keightley 1969: 88). Kung (artisan
ofﬁcers), whose concerns were not primarily military in nature, perhaps accom-
panied military expeditions to attend to the provisioning and repair of military
equipment (24–27). The distinction between military and non-military ofﬁces
does not appear to have been closely drawn, and it may not be correct to speak
of a speciﬁcally military as distinguished from a civil administration. There also
appears to have been much overlap in function among the holders of different
military titles.
Next to ritual vessels, elite weapons such as dagger-axes, knives, and arrow
and spear points, along with helmets, shield bosses, and chariot ﬁttings, were
the most important products of the Shang bronze industry (Chˆeng 1960:
156–76). Horse-drawn chariots were costly to manufacture and use but were
produced in large numbers, which suggests that they were manned by com-
moners as well as by aristocratic army leaders. This impression is reinforced by
the large numbers of chariots, together with their horses and personnel, that
were buried in ritual contexts at Anyang and elsewhere (Lu 1993). Chinese
tradition maintains that chariot drivers were menials until the Spring and
Autumn period (722–481 b.c.) (Creel 1970: 276–80). Chariots appear to have
been used not only as mobile raised platforms for directing battles but also
to break the ranks of enemy foot-soldiers. Since considerable experience was
needed to drive and ﬁght from a chariot, only well-trained, probably career

Military Organization
255
soldiers could have used them. Each chariot carried a driver, a dagger-axe
man, and an archer. Chariot burials suggest that there were two crews for each
chariot and that every chariot was accompanied by about one hundred foot-
soldiers.Chariotsweredeployedinbasicunitsofﬁveandlargerunitsoftwenty-
ﬁve. Two of these larger units would have been made up of three hundred men
(Chao 1972: 79–81). The infantry was organized in squads of ten men, each
under the command of a better-armed leader. Ten of these squads formed a
company and three companies a combat unit. Archers were also organized in
units of three hundred men (Chou 1968: 279–84; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 27).
The Shang king appears to have been able to mobilize many soldiers, whom
he sometimes led himself. Otherwise, he appointed generals, who were often
princes and in two recorded cases women (fu) of the royal household. Princes
had their own ofﬁcers and soldiers under their command. Individual royal
armies appear to have numbered from three thousand to ﬁve thousand soldiers
organized into right, centre, and left divisions. The king sometimes sent royal
forces to help provincial administrators suppress rebellious local ofﬁcials, carry
out punitive raids against foreign enemies, and annex new territory and to man
border garrisons and facilitate the settlement of new areas (Keightley 1979–80;
Vandermeersch 1980).
The entire Western Zhou male ruling class was trained as warriors (Lewis
1990: 243). Zhou kings were personally protected by their ‘tiger guards’ (hu
chen) and had a large standing army six divisions of which were located near
their old capital in the Wei Valley and eight more around the eastern admin-
istrative centre they established at Chengzhou (Chˆeng 1963: 294; Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 241–45). Each of these fourteen armies was divided into a right
and a left half. Regional and local ofﬁcials in charge of fortiﬁed strongholds or
walled administrative centres had their own smaller armies or armed retain-
ers. These forces guarded against enemy attack and controlled the surrounding
countryside. Weapons were stored when not in use in or near the leader’s an-
cestral temple (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 268–69; Lewis 1990: 23, 260). Regional
and local ofﬁcials led their soldiers to join the royal army when ordered to do
so (Lewis 1990: 261).
The divisions of the royal standing army are said to have been self-supporting
(Keightley 1969: 267–78). Hence some or all of these soldiers and their families
mayhavegrowncropsaroundthecentreswheretheywerebased.Alternatively,
full-time farmers may have been assigned to produce food for these regiments.
If such soldiers were engaged in warfare during the growing season or had to
accompany the king on lengthy military campaigns, they and their families
must have depended on surplus food produced by others (Lewis 1990: 261–
69). The relative proportion of military as opposed to other forms of labour

256
Sociopolitical Organization
appears to have increased from conscripted soldiers through armed supporters
of provincial rulers and the standing armies of the king to full-time armed
guards, charioteers, and military ofﬁcers.
The later development, during the Warring States period (481–221 b.c.),
of mass conscript armies composed not only of retainers (guoren) living in
and around administrative centres, but also of country people (yeren) was
accompanied by the symbolic division of the year into seasons of growth (spring
and summer) and seasons of death (autumn and winter), the latter being the
time for interstate wars. Mark Lewis (1990: 65) suggests that before that time
the elite and their retainers hunted and waged war in every season. It was also
not until late Zhou times that armies were legally and ritually distinguished
from the state and it became possible for generals to commend, reward, and
punish soldiers independently of rulers (Lewis 1990: 126–27; Maisels 1999:
309–11).
The Aztec and other polities in the Valley of Mexico linked male political
and administrative careers to military service as well as to status at birth. All
military achievement was individual and calculated according to how many
enemy warriors a soldier had captured alive in battle. Combat was therefore
primarily a personal enterprise. Every prisoner captured entitled a soldier to
be promoted to a higher rank in the warrior hierarchy. Each rank was as-
sociated with a different costume, insignia, and privileges. The king publicly
conferredthesedistinctionsonsoldiersatannualreligiouscelebrations.Nobles
who had captured four prisoners would join the eagle (caucuauhtin) or ocelot
(ocelomeh) orders, which had their meeting places in the royal palace (Hassig
1988: 45). Membership in these orders was a prerequisite for holding any
signiﬁcant military or civil administrative position. The capture of more pris-
oners led to membership in still higher military orders, the otontin (Otomies)
and cuahchicqueh (shorn ones), which qualiﬁed a noble to hold the highest
military positions (Hassig 1988: 45–46). The two principal army leaders, the
tlacateccatl (he who commands warriors) and the tlacochcalcatl (the man of
the place where weapons are stored) were close relatives of the king, and one
of them usually was chosen as his successor. The king, as supreme head of the
army, bore the title tlacatecuhtli (lord of warriors) (Soustelle 1961: 44).
Warfare opened a narrow path for commoners into the nobility (Clendinnen
1991: 120). As we have seen, commoners who had captured four prisoners
were made eagle nobles. Such men were granted either the produce of a plot
of land in some conquered city-state or a supply of maize from the palace,
the two being effectively the same in that palace ofﬁcials oversaw the growing
of corn in tributary states and its transportation to Tenochtitlan. This would
also explain why it was said that, while eagle nobles were granted land, unlike

Military Organization
257
hereditary nobles they were not also granted bound labourers (mayeque) to
cultivate it (Hassig 1988: 29). Nevertheless, such revenues made eagle nobles,
like hereditary ones, independent of their calpollis (Hassig 1988: 145–46). An
eagle noble no longer had to earn a living with his hands or perform corv´ee.
Eagle nobles who captured many enemy soldiers could join the higher military
orders, but their lack of hereditary nobility and of an upper-class education
debarred them from holding major administrative ofﬁces (Berdan 1982: 103).
Ennobled commoners trained young men to ﬁght in calpolli schools, spent
part of each year guarding the royal palace, and arrested and executed peo-
ple on the orders of the king and of palace judges and administrators. They
watched over the central armouries where lethal weapons were kept out of
the hands of commoners during peacetime. They also provided experienced
middle-level leadership and highly skilled ﬁghters for military campaigns. In
this way the Aztec state recruited career soldiers who lacked the administra-
tive training a hereditary noble would have had to provide leadership for the
army as well as a police force which ensured that the decisions of the king and
palace administrators were carried out. Eagle nobles and hereditary nobles
who commanded the army constituted a substantial body of full-time soldiers
at the disposal of the state (Berdan 1982: 64–65).
In Mesopotamia the key responsibility of the Early Dynastic kings was to
protect their city-states from attack by neighbouring states or nomadic groups.
Armed attendants were killed and buried with rulers at Ur (Postgate 1992:
241), and there are depictions of uniformed soldiers wearing metal or leather
helmets, leather armour, and cloaks, carrying shields, and armed with bronze
spears, maces, daggers, sickle-shaped swords, adzes, and blades mounted on
wooden handles. Soldiers of this sort were trained to ﬁght in phalanx-like
formations that would have allowed them to cut through the ranks of less well-
organized adversaries (Fig. 12.2). The infantry was accompanied by a primitive
‘chariot’ force using heavy wooden carts with four solid wheels, each pulled by
four onagers. These carts transported two ﬁghters armed with spears, javelins,
and axes. As in China, such vehicles were used as observation platforms to
direct a battle. On level terrain they were also employed as assault vehicles
(Mikhaeli 1969; Postgate 1992: 245–50). Thus there appears to have been in
each Mesopotamian city-state a core of full-time or nearly full-time soldiers,
employed, trained, and equipped by the king. One of their roles may have
been to curb pastoral intruders at times of the year when most people were
engaged in farming and city-states would normally have been at peace with
each other. In return for their military service, these soldiers were assigned
the use of land that belonged to the palace. In many cases the use of such land
was inherited from one generation to the next, along with the military duties

258
Sociopolitical Organization
a
b
12.2. Mesopotamian battle scenes: (a) one side of the so-called Royal Standard of Ur, a box-like
object from royal tomb PG 779 in the Royal Cemetery at Ur – from bottom to top, it portrays
a chariot charge cutting down the enemy, followed by infantry, the taking of prisoners, and
presenting these prisoners to the king. The ‘standard’ is a mosaic of lapis lazuli and other stones,
shell, and ivory set in wood. Early Dynastic period, ca. 2700 b.c., height 20.2 cm; (b) the Stela
of the Vultures, carved in limestone, commemorates a victory of King Eannatum of Lagash over
the neighbouring city of Umma. This panel portrays enemy corpses being trampled under foot
by heavily armed infantry ﬁghting in a phalanx formation, from Telloh (Girsu), Early Dynastic
III, ca. 2450 b.c., height of panel ca. 85 cm. Sources: (a) after C. L. Woolley, The Sumerians
(Oxford 1928), 51; (b) J. Oates, Babylon (London, 1979), 27.

Military Organization
259
associated with it. Mesopotamian career soldiers were bound to kings who
were not only their military superiors but also their landlords. Other palace
land produced surplus grain that supported economic activities related to the
army. Metal was obtained from long-distance traders in return for grain or
cloth produced by palace dependents, and some of this metal was turned into
weapons perhaps in palace workshops or, alternatively, by artisans working for
the palace in their own homes (R. McC. Adams 1966: 143).
Career soldiers were trained and ofﬁcered by high-ranking palace ofﬁcials.
In peacetime these soldiers guarded the palace and royal properties and en-
sured that the king’s orders were carried out. Control of a standing army was a
signiﬁcant source of political power in a city-state, where even a small amount
of force could alter the internal balance of power and hence the pattern of
government signiﬁcantly. Thus the inﬂuence of kings tended to increase at the
expense of temples and rich landowners. In wartime, career soldiers provided
a trained core for an army still made up largely of conscripts (Postgate 1992:
241–42).
Mesopotamian kings generally appear to have had palace staffs of about
ﬁve hundred people, many of whom were probably soldiers. Sargon of Akkad
claimed that over ten times that number ate bread in his palace daily, and his
total standing army must have been considerably larger. Shulgi, a hegemon of
the Ur III dynasty, recruited a regiment of spearmen among the citizens of his
capital (Postgate 1992: 242; Van De Mieroop 1999: 34). Prisoners captured
in battle were held for ransom, killed, or put to work as labourers for palaces
and temples. In Hammurabi’s time, soldiers were generally ransomed by their
families (Postgate 1992: 254–56). If their families lacked the resources to pay
for this, ransoms were sought (as loans?) from temples and, as a last resort,
from the king (Pritchard 1955: 167, law 32). Hegemonic rulers used their
military power to try to subdue resource-rich areas to the northwest and east
of Mesopotamia and south along the Persian Gulf. Control over these areas
appears invariably to have been fragile and transitory.
A Yoruba state had no single standing army, but that did not mean that
there were no full-time soldiers. Kings had armed attendants who not only
protected them and their palaces but also arrested people, brought them to
court, and executed criminals. The kings of Benin recruited and armed a large
number of young men who acted as their bodyguards, policed the palace,
conveyed messages, and enforced their wishes throughout the state. For as
long as they served the king, these young men were forbidden either to wear
any clothes or to marry, observances which betokened their childlike devotion
to the monarch. When they left his service, the king clothed them and gave
them valuable presents (Bradbury 1973: 61; H. Roth 1903: 24).

260
Sociopolitical Organization
Titled members of the main extended patrilineages in Yoruba capitals and
smaller towns, in addition to having numerous male kin who followed them into
battle, were attended by a permanent entourage composed of as many as 150
well-armed kinsmen, mercenaries, and slaves. Supporting these retainers, who
were full-time soldiers, consumed a major portion of these leaders’ resources.
These soldiers did not wear uniforms but were supplied with padded jackets,
as well as single- and double-edged swords, spears, lances, and javelins made
of iron. Unlike conscripted soldiers, they did not ﬁght with clubs and slings.
In the northern and central woodland-savanna region, most full-time soldiers
were horsemen armed with thrusting spears, while infantry, equipped with
leaf-shaped swords that were better suited for close ﬁghting, predominated
in the forested south. Maintaining horses was difﬁcult even in the northern
Yoruba regions and added greatly to the cost of outﬁtting retainers. It also made
the distinction between full-time and part-time soldiers much more important
in the north than it was in the south, where armies were composed almost
entirely of infantry and only major leaders rode horses. Rulers of powerful
northern states such as Oyo, who were precluded from leading soldiers into
battle, invested in horses which they supplied to lineage leaders in return for
a larger share of the booty from military campaigns (R. Smith 1973).
By owning large numbers of slaves, leading Yoruba could produce enough
food to support many full-time soldiers. Promising slaves were also recruited
as full-time soldiers (R. Smith 1969: 119). In peacetime these supporters con-
stituted an armed guard and were a major source of political power for their
patrons. They also enabled the Yoruba leadership to keep the lower classes
under control. In wartime they formed the well-trained and equipped nuclei
of the larger units that came together to form a city-state army. The full-time
soldiers who were members and followers of each extended family rallied to
that family’s ward and quarter leaders.
In Oyo the state army was led by the seven Oyo Mesi, who constituted
the state council that governed the kingdom in collaboration with the king.
Each of them led the forces from his section of the city as well as the armed
ﬁghters sent by his dependents in the countryside. The army as a whole was
commandedbythebasorun.Specialmilitarytitleswerebestowedonimportant
ofﬁce-holders, cavalry leaders, and leaders of the vanguard, which was made
up of young ﬁghters. In addition, there was an elite group of seventy mounted
warriors called eso who ranked militarily immediately below the Oyo Mesi
and served as subordinate commanders under them. The Oyo Mesi conferred
this title on individuals with the approval of the king. All but one of these
warriors lived with their followers in a special section of the capital called Oke
Eso. The one exception, the are ona kakamfo, had a military base near the

Military Organization
261
border and was usually not allowed to visit the capital because the Oyo Mesi
feared that he might conspire with the king against them. An unsuccessful
campaign by the rural military force he commanded was customarily cause
for his execution. The Oyo army was divided into a centre and two wings and
engaged in skirmishes, raids, set battles, and sieges but rarely attempted to
take a town by direct assault (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 13–55; Law 1977: 74–75;
R. Smith 1969: 120–29; 1973).
In Benin, despite the greater power of the king, the army was usually led
by the ezomo, a hereditary ofﬁcial whose position corresponded to that of the
basoruninOyo.HeandhisfellowcouncillorslackedthepoweroftheOyoMesi,
however, and he was clearly subordinate to the king. Alternatively, the king
could appoint as army commander the iyase, who was the chief town ofﬁcial
of Benin city and the oba’s main rival for power. After he had commanded
an army, the iyase was required to leave Benin and settle in a town or village
outside the capital and a new iyase was appointed; thus by conferring army
leadership on an iyase the king could eliminate a dangerous rival (Bradbury
1957: 36, 43–44). Presumably, the wealth that could be acquired from leading
a successful military campaign was the main reason that an iyase would accept
such a command.
Among the Maya, even if armies were mainly conscripts, kings and no-
bles would at the very least also have had guards and armed retainers. A few
representations suggest that some kings had armed retainers, perhaps of
foreign origin, supplied with specialized weapons, such as obsidian-tipped
spears. (Henderson 1981: 137). The upper classes and their retainers would
have provided leadership for Maya armies.
career soldiers and civil authorities
In early civilizations, armies did not develop, as they did in the Roman Empire
and some other later preindustrial states, into separate institutions whose com-
manders possessed power independent of the state and were therefore able
to challenge or dominate civil authorities. The highest-ranking leadership of
military forces was always drawn from the upper echelons of the general power
hierarchy. Yet in all six well-documented early civilizations some soldiers were
better trained and armed than the farmer and artisan conscripts who might
periodically be assembled to attack neighbouring states or defend their own,
and the poorly documented Maya do not appear to have been an exception to
this pattern.
Some of these more specialized soldiers appear to have been engaged in
military activities full-time. Others combined farming and soldiery but were

262
Sociopolitical Organization
exempt from taxation and corv´ee labour. Where there was a need to defend
the state against external enemies who were not tied to an agricultural cycle,
there may have been a greater need for soldiers who were wholly disengaged
from agricultural production. Yet full-time soldiers provided the cores of mass
armies in all early civilizations and were essential to the support of civil author-
ities within each state. In most cases, the ultimate control of military and police
forces lay with the king. Among the Yoruba, control was shared by non-royal
ofﬁcials who belonged to a small number of powerful lineages, but even these
were able to use their armed retainers to control slaves and intimidate the lower
classes. Career soldiers could be provided with more elaborate equipment and,
because they were better trained and disciplined, could make better use of it.
Chariots were advantageous for directing battles and smashing through poorly
coordinated infantry lines. Metal weapons were more deadly than ordinary
stone or bone ones. Shields and armour, whether made of metal, thick leather,
or padded cloth, protected combatants. On the whole, however, technology
was less important than the discipline and ﬁghting style most evident in the
phalanx techniques of Mesopotamian soldiers and the military formations of
Chinese ones.
Professional soldiers were recruited in various ways. For Aztec commoners
it was as a reward for valour. For Yoruba slaves it was a way to escape from agri-
cultural drudgery and a move towards eventual emancipation. Mesopotamian
kings recruited regiments from among the free men of their own cities, pre-
sumably those who were seeking to better themselves economically. Inka ofﬁ-
cials recruited career soldiers from among ethnic groups and individuals who
displayed a conspicuous talent for military life. Career soldiers were paid with
grain allotments or given the use of land which they or their families could
work themselves or rent to full-time farmers. The economic beneﬁts that they
and their families enjoyed were inducements to support their patrons, since
continuing service depended on their patrons’ military and political success.
Professional military forces were larger in territorial states than in city-
states, but it is unclear whether a higher percentage of the population was
so employed. Career soldiers always represented a small fraction of the total
population. Most states relied on temporary conscripts to form the bulk of their
armies. In the Valley of Mexico all free men were subject to military service
and had been specially trained for it. In Shang China military service may have
been limited to some of the farmers and labourers who lived in and around
administrative centres, many of whom might better be described as soldiers
who farmed in their spare time than as farmers who also served as soldiers.
While there is no direct evidence of conscript armies among the Classic Maya,
there is no direct proof of career soldiers either. Denying the existence of

Military Organization
263
conscript soldiers would suggest that Maya warfare was a ritual game mainly
played by kings and nobles, a view that does not accord with what we know
about it.
In city-states professional soldiers were key in asserting the power of kings
and ruling groups over rival factions and the lower classes. The wealth that the
leaders of hegemonic states extracted from neighbouring polities augmented
the ability of rulers to support more soldiers and maintain their political dom-
inance. Yet the decentralized military and political leadership of Oyo demon-
strates that hegemony did not inevitably increase the political power of kings.
Nevertheless, even where kings did not control the army, military success
reﬂected favourably on the role they played as the ultimate intermediaries
between the human and the divine realms.

13 Sociopolitical Constants
and Variables
T
he development of early civilizations appears inevitably to have pro-
duced monarchs; even in societies with patterns of dual leadership at
lower levels there was a single preeminent ruler. The unity of the state seems to
have been conceptualized by imagining the political, economic, legal, military,
moral, and cosmological dimensions of society to be embodied in the person
and will of a single human being. Kingship was viewed as inherited within kin
groups; the Sumerians may have believed that it was conferred on individuals
by the gods, but even for them kingship was hereditary in practice. The powers
of kings, the roles they played, and the ways in which kingship was concep-
tualized varied considerably from one early civilization to another. In Egypt
monarchs could exercise great personal inﬂuence, although doing so required
considerable skill. Among the Yoruba, in contrast, kings had to share power
with the leaders of important kin groups and sometimes were no more than
ﬁgureheads. Kings were present in all early civilizations not so much because
they were practically necessary as because kingship was a master concept in
terms of which other, less comprehensible political relations could be under-
stood and negotiated. The unity of states had to be achieved not only politically
but also symbolically.
All early civilizations were based on the idea of social and economic in-
equality, which not only informed the understanding of society as a whole
but also pervaded the family. As a consequence, ideas of inequality and obe-
dience to authority were inculcated in everyone from earliest childhood. As
children grew older, the concept of obedience was reinforced in schools, so-
cial life, and relations with government ofﬁcials. In each early civilization a
small number of privileged people were supported by a large number of
taxpaying farmers. This upper class governed society and controlled much
of its wealth and surplus labour. Beneath it were various groups of special-
ists ranked according to how much they resembled the upper classes in not
264

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
265
having to engage in hard manual labour. Ordinary bureaucrats normally ranked
above professional soldiers and they in turn above specialized craft work-
ers and household servants. The highest grade of farmers possessed land,
either individually or collectively; of lower status were farmers who had to
rent land, farmers who were tied to land owned by others, and landless man-
ual labourers. At the bottom of the class hierarchy in many early civilizations
were slaves: temporary debt slaves, who could hope to regain their freedom,
hereditary household slaves, and prisoners of war or criminals, who were of-
ten condemned for the rest of their lives to labour under extremely wretched
conditions. Slaves tended to be most common in city-state civilizations. In ter-
ritorial states they were often replaced by individuals who were bound to the
service of government institutions or individual members of the upper class
but could not be bought and sold. Both slaves and such bound individuals were
relatively few.
There was some vertical mobility in all early civilizations, but it varied consid-
erably in degree. Slaves were absorbed fairly easily into the lower free classes.
Upward mobility was possible for commoners in states that were expanding
either economically or militarily, but it was impeded by the difﬁculty of acquir-
ing the appropriate skills and generally subject to the approval of the upper
classes.
The rich and powerful strengthened their social position by contracting
marital alliances with members of their own class. Rulers often married their
younger daughters to ofﬁcials or client rulers to consolidate the support of
such individuals, and upper-class families might maritally co-opt promising
young men. While peasants married within the same village or landowning
group and artisans often married among themselves, the upper classes forged
marital links within their own class that often extended across whole states
and sometimes united families of equivalent status in neighbouring polities.
These far-reaching ties helped them to cooperate in controlling the rest of
society.
In all the early civilizations for which we have adequate documentation,
the privileges of the upper classes were protected by armed forces and the
legal system. While lower-class conscripts were generally used to ﬁght for-
eign wars, professional soldiers served as a police force to protect the upper
classes, government property, and ofﬁcials. Commoners were encouraged to
settle their own disputes, provided that this did not disadvantage the upper
classes, but the legal system invariably had higher levels at which decisions
were enforced by the punitive power of the king. This system was used to
intimidate the lower classes and protect the privileges of the wealthy and
powerful.

266
Sociopolitical Organization
forms of state
The early civilizations in our sample exhibited only two varieties of political
organization: city-states and territorial states. These types of states were dif-
ferentiated on the basis of numerous organizational principles not only from
each other but from later regional urbanized kingdoms, later city-states, and
true empires. City-states in early civilizations controlled small territories and
often had a single urban centre surrounded by farming villages, although the
geographically largest of them and those with the most dispersed populations
also had small towns that served as secondary administrative centres. These
secondary centres caused the general arrangement of settlement units of those
city-statestoresemblesuperﬁciallythearrangementsofterritorialstates.Other
aspects of their settlement patterns were, however, very different.
City-states frequently had numerous farmers living in their urban centres
and intensively working the land nearby. This arrangement reduced the cost
of transporting food to the city and offered farmers’ homes maximum pro-
tection against attacks by neighbouring states. It also encouraged the broader
participation of the well-to-do in political life. Cities were centres for the pro-
duction and marketing of goods. High-quality raw materials imported from
abroad were sold publicly by long-distance traders (the Maya being a possible
exception). Full-time craft workers manufactured goods not only for temples,
the government, and the upper classes but also for other craft workers and for
farmers. Markets made such goods more accessible to ordinary people, and
this increased the demand for manufactured products and supported more
specialists and the production of better-quality goods.
Territorial states had one or more royal capitals and numerous regional
administrative centres. These urban centres tended to be inhabited only by
administrators, full-time craft workers, and labourers employed by the govern-
ment and by government ofﬁcials. Farmers lived in villages in the countryside
and, in addition to growing food, produced handicrafts from locally available
raw materials and exchanged these products at local markets. Full-time spe-
cialists generally worked for the government, often in government workshops,
where they were provided with exotic raw materials obtained by the state.
Relatively little of what they produced was accessible to ordinary people and
then only as gifts from members of the ruling class.
Archaeological evidence makes it clear that neither the ancient Egyptian
nor the Inka territorial state evolved from a city-state as deﬁned here. Egypt’s
development involved the political uniﬁcation of a series of chiefdoms or small
early states, and the Inka united a large number of chiefdoms. In China, the
Yellow River ﬂoodplain was probably a zone of chiefdoms resembling those

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
267
found in Predynastic Egypt and the central Andean highlands rather than of
city-states prior to the emergence of territorial states. Nor did the city-states in
our sample eventually become territorial states. Mesopotamia moved toward
a deﬁnitive regional uniﬁcation in the mid-second millennium b.c., but large
urban centres continued to play a crucial role in the economic, cultural, and
religious life of the region rather than coming to resemble the administrative
centres of early territorial states. In Egypt after the New Kingdom and in
late Zhou China, territorial states evolved more populous and economically
more important urban centres, economies that were less controlled by the
central government, and administrations that were increasingly based on the
centralized control of military power. Rather than city-states’ evolving into
territorial states (or, alternatively, developing from the breakup of such states),
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and China civilizations of both types evolved into a
single later form: the urbanized regional kingdom (Trigger 1985a).
ElizabethStone(1997:25),followingEisenstadt,Abitbol,andChazan(1988:
186–92), has suggested that it would have been much easier to create territorial
states where existing hereditary nobilities could be absorbed into expanding
power structures than where expansive rulers had to rely wholly on military
power. Mesopotamia and the Yoruba, the early civilizations that she treats as
quintessential examples of city-states, did not have hereditary upper classes.
In them a heterarchical sharing of power resulted in large urban centres where
there was political competition, a moderate amount of social mobility, a high
degree of entrepreneurship, and broad access to goods produced by full-time
artisans. Kings were not embedded in a hereditary nobility through which
they could dominate the rest of society. Instead, they shared power with other
sections of the upper class and played a mediating role in city-state politics.
While they were regarded as essential for placating the gods, they reigned with
the consent of their more powerful subjects.
All the rulers of the city-states in the Valley of Mexico, and probably the Maya
kings as well, belonged to a hereditary nobility that was coterminous with the
upper class. The mutual recognition that the Aztec monarchs and the rulers of
tributary states all belonged to the same, genealogically related regional upper
class may have provided a basis for closer relations between them. The Aztec
used marital alliances to establish more intimate ties with the rulers of some
subject states, and this may help to explain how they were able to create a
tributary network far more extensive than any Yoruba or Mesopotamian one.
It also might be argued that, because of their hereditary nobilities, the Aztec
and Maya had greater potential for creating regional urbanized kingdoms than
did the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians. Evolutionists who do not distinguish
between territorial states and regional kingdoms might also argue that the

268
Sociopolitical Organization
Aztec and Maya represented an intermediate level of political development
between the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians, on the one hand, and territorial
states with hereditary nobilities, such as those of the Inka and Shang, on the
other.
Yet the claim made in the Valley of Mexico that all kings and nobles were
descended from the god Quetzalcoatl was paralleled by the claim of Yoruba
and Benin rulers that they and all the members of Yoruba royal clans were
descended from the god Oduduwa. While the Aztec quickly expanded the
descendants of their ﬁrst kings, traced through either the male or female
line, into a sizable nobility, the Yoruba curbed the expansion of their royal
clans by restricting membership to male descendants and creating economic
conditions that encouraged most kings’ sons who had no hope of becoming
kings to seek adoption into their mothers’ patrilineages. Hence the potential
for creating a larger hereditary aristocracy, which was actively pursued in the
Valley of Mexico, was rejected by the Yoruba. This calls into question the
proposal that the presence or absence of a hereditary nobility can by itself
account for the major political differences between the Valley of Mexico and
the Yoruba. It is also noteworthy that the Mesopotamians, who appear to
have lacked any arrangements predisposing them to develop a hereditary elite,
repeatedly created hegemonic city-state systems and that Mesopotamia, after
remaining a city-state system for almost two millennia, was transformed into
a regional kingdom. There is no convincing evidence that this was about to
happen either in the Valley of Mexico or among the Maya. The chief source of
power for both Mesopotamian and Aztec kings was their control of the army
and the distribution of tribute. The Yoruba kings, by contrast, did not control
the army and had to share foreign tribute with their chief councillors. While
it has been argued that the expansion of royal power in Mesopotamia resulted
from foreign ideas imposed on the region by Semitic-speaking pastoral leaders,
the increasing military power of Sumerian rulers allowed them to bring about
an unprecedented degree of economic centralization within the hegemonic
city-state system they created during the Ur III period. The Yoruba rulers
were prevented from doing this by being forced to share military power with
other leaders.
Both the Inka and Chinese territorial states had hereditary ruling classes,
and incorporating the hereditary rulers of numerous small polities into a na-
tional upper class may have played a signiﬁcant role in the uniﬁcation of Egypt.
In Egypt hereditary nobles were, however, quickly eliminated as major power-
holders, and thereafter, at least in theory, the power of ofﬁcials depended
entirely on royal favour. Thus hereditary nobilities were not essential for the
governance of all territorial states, and the preexistence of a hereditary nobility

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
269
does not appear to have inﬂuenced whether early civilizations developed as
city-states or territorial states. There is also no evidence that the presence of
a hereditary upper class accelerated the rate at which city-states were trans-
formed into regional kingdoms.
Why some early civilizations developed as city-state systems and others de-
veloped as territorial states is unclear. The limited variation in our sample sug-
gests that viable early civilizations could be organized in only a limited number
of ways. Perhaps only two general forms of political organization functioned
well enough to endure for a signiﬁcant length of time. Once city-state systems
or territorial states arose in a region, there seems to have been little prospect of
the development of the alternative form of political organization. Either type
of state seems eventually to have been able to evolve into a regional kingdom.
The central governments of early civilizations preferred that small groups,
such as extended families, landowning collectivities, and craft associations, be
self-regulating. Higher-level authorities intervened only when their interests
were threatened by speciﬁc forms of non-compliance, such as refusal to pay
taxes in kind or to supply corv´ee labour, or by the breakdown of local order.
Otherwise, letting local groups manage their own affairs reduced the cost of
government.
In city-states, rich landowners, powerful lineages, temple corporations, mer-
chants’ associations, and inﬂuential voluntary groups had their own forms of
self-government and were represented in various ways on councils at village,
ward, or city levels. These councils, which exercised both legislative and judi-
cial functions, shared power with or organized their activities around a king.
Administrative procedures were less formal than in territorial states because
communication could be more direct and decision making more decentralized.
In some city-states, especially hegemonic ones that administered tributary net-
works, kings were able to use their control over the army and the distribution
of tribute to enhance their power and move towards a more centralized form
of government.
In territorial states and hegemonic city-states, high-level administration ap-
pears to have originated within the royal household, and a distinction between
the royal household and the state developed only slowly. From Old Kingdom
times on, the Egyptians differentiated between the ofﬁcers and revenues of
the royal court and those of the various branches of government, but into the
New Kingdom royal estates were used to support both the royal family and the
state. This reluctance to distinguish clearly between the royal household and
the state was reﬂected in a similar reluctance to assign mutually exclusive and
precisely deﬁned duties to individual ofﬁcials. High-ranking ofﬁcials seem to
have been viewed as ofﬁcers of the king’s household and therefore bound to do

270
Sociopolitical Organization
whatever the king ordered. Max Weber called this a patriarchal form of
government. Eventually, however, these states came to display two types of
administration – either delegational or bureaucratic. In delegational systems
a king, while keeping an area around the capital under his direct control and
receiving a share of the taxes collected by ofﬁcials in every part of the realm,
delegated a full (or nearly full) range of powers over more distant provinces to
subordinate ofﬁcials. Central control could be strengthened by relocating sub-
ordinate ofﬁcials from time to time. The bureaucratic approach strengthened
the power of the central government by dividing authority to administer differ-
ent activities, both at the capital and in provincial and local centres, into a sufﬁ-
cient number of parallel structures that no single ofﬁcial had enough power to
challenge the central authority. While delegational states were harder to hold
together, bureaucratic ones were often less efﬁciently governed, especially
when ofﬁcials were moved at frequent intervals not only from one province to
another but also from one branch of administration to another, unfamiliar one.
forms of family
Family organization among early civilizations varied, although it generally had
a masculine bias. The Yoruba, Chinese, and people in the Valley of Mexico
lived in patrilineal extended households. So did the Mesopotamians, although
over time the number of families living together appears to have grown smaller
and even to have given way to nuclear families, especially in urban centres.
The Classic Maya are generally believed to have lived in patrilineal extended-
family groups, but this is denied as a general principle by some Mayanists
and considered inapplicable to some major urban centres by others. Andean
highland peoples lived in extended-family units, although in some areas these
groups were matrilineal rather than patrilineal. In Egypt the ideal household
was a nuclear family, although often at least parts of two adult generations
lived together. There was no correlation between different types of family
organization and the distinction between city-states and territorial states.
To some extent, different types of family organization may represent a sur-
vival of various forms that had existed in particular parts of the world prior to
the development of early civilizations. The special emphasis placed on endog-
amous landholding units and dual leadership at lower social levels in the Valley
of Mexico and highland Peru may have resulted from historical connections
between these two regions, which shared crops of Mesoamerican origin. Yet
Mesopotamian extended families appear to have declined in importance in
urban settings as ownership of land and property shifted from a collective to
an individual basis. Among the Yoruba coresidential units were much larger

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
271
in the north than in the south, probably because of the need in the north for a
more integrated form of military organization to cope with the greater military
threat from adjacent non-Yoruba states. Thus family organization seems to
have been shaped to some degree by the functional requirements of particular
early civilizations.
Patrilineal extended families could be interpreted as encouraging the de-
velopment of a delegational form of government in Shang and Eastern Zhou
China and of a more heterarchical form of government among the Yoruba.
Conversely, the most bureaucratized form of government emerged in ancient
Egypt, where there was no extended family. Nevertheless, the growing military
power of kings among the Aztec and the Mesopotamians made it possible for
them to construct modest bureaucracies that operated without sharing power
with extended families or endogamous landowning groups. The Inka kings,
while favouring their close relatives for high ofﬁces, selected ofﬁcials from
among the various levels of the hereditary nobility without primary reference
to speciﬁc panaqa or ayllu membership. In these societies extended families,
while socially important, played a political role that was more modest than in
China or among the Yoruba. It is therefore impossible to determine whether
large extended families encouraged the development of delegational or het-
erarchical forms of administration or more centralized and bureaucratized
forms of government promoted the breakup of large extended families. While
in Mesopotamia the declining importance of large extended families appears
to have accompanied the growth of royal power, it is not clear that there was
a direct connection between these two trends or, if there was one, which was
cause and which was effect.
In all early civilizations women appear to have been signiﬁcantly disad-
vantaged by comparison with men. This disadvantage reﬂects, at least partly,
a pervasive tendency to model family relations on those that characterized
the state. Families were conceptualized as miniature kingdoms in which the
father had the same relation to his wife (or wives), children, and other depen-
dents that a monarch had to his subjects. Since all early civilizations had male
heads of state and female ones were regarded as exceptional or not allowed,
this arrangement either encouraged the development of patriarchal relations
within families or reinforced existing ones. While women had played important
decision-making roles in many small-scale societies, men had generally acted
as spokespeople in conducting public business. This form of behaviour may
have been related to strategies that sought to protect the reproductive capacity
of small groups by exposing males rather than females to greater risk of loss of
life in encounters with potentially hostile neighbouring groups. The exposure
of males to greater danger is found not only in human hunter-gatherer societies

272
Sociopolitical Organization
but also among higher non-human primates (DeVore and Hall 1965). As hu-
man societies grew more complex, the increasing regulatory importance of
the public domain may have enhanced the political role traditionally played by
men and, along with it, their authority to make decisions relating to all aspects
of public life. Through status emulation, such patriarchal attitudes inﬂuenced
the nuclear and extended family. While suggesting why patriarchal tendencies
were nearly universal in early civilizations, this explanation does not imply that
these attitudes were in any fashion biologically innate.
In everyday life the position of women varied considerably from one early
civilization to another. In general, Yoruba and ancient Egyptian women pos-
sessed more freedoms and explicit legal rights than did women in other early
civilizations. They did not, however, have an equal role with men in the po-
litical and administrative spheres, and married women were subordinated to
their husbands in many ways. Inka farm women played a signiﬁcant role in
religious activities, and their special role in growing crops was symbolically ac-
knowledged. Women in the Valley of Mexico could move about communities
freely and engage in local trade, but their participation in political and ad-
ministrative activities was extremely limited by comparison with that of men.
Mesopotamian women were even more limited in their freedom to move about
and manage their own affairs, and ordinary women in ancient China appear to
have been totally integrated into their husbands’ extended families. In many
early civilizations, slave women and prostitutes provided examples of the hu-
miliation and dishonour that could befall women who did not have male kin to
protect them. There is no evidence that overall the status of ordinary women
was different in city-states from what it was in territorial states, but for upper-
class women the situation was somewhat different. In territorial states royal
women appear to have played signiﬁcant roles in government, and, as mem-
bers of a small ruling group, upper-class women were viewed as suitable to
direct the activities of lower-class males as well as of subordinate females.
explaining regularities
There was considerable cross-cultural uniformity in the sociopolitical institu-
tions of early civilizations. The similar general conceptualizations of kingship,
similar class and legal systems, and the use of full-time police and soldiers to
support the upper classes recurred in every early civilization for which there
is adequate documentation. In addition, there were only two basic forms of
political organization (city-states and territorial states) and only two systems
for administering extensive territories (delegational and bureaucratic). Fur-
ther, despite variation in family organization and gender roles from one early

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
273
civilization to another, male dominance appears to have increased as a result of
the development of early civilizations. These ﬁndings do not accord with the
basic tenet of cultural relativism – that human behaviour is shaped primarily
by cultural traditions that are not constrained to any signiﬁcant degree by non-
cultural factors. They certainly do not conﬁrm the argument that universals, if
any, are insigniﬁcant (Geertz 1965).
It might be objected that the early civilizations examined in this study shared
many sociopolitical features only because these traits are the ones I employed
to assign societies to this general category. Yet the recurrent and correlated
features are too numerous and complex for this objection to carry signiﬁ-
cant weight. The societies at this level of complexity that are alleged to have
displayed radically different features are not well enough documented to be
certain that these features are not the anthropologists’ own inventions. Increas-
ing information about the Maya has made this early civilization, once believed
to be radically different from any other, closely resemble other city-state sys-
tems. The principal challenge in terms of sociopolitical features is therefore
to explain cross-cultural similarities and limited variation.
Many uniformities may reﬂect functional requirements. For societies to
grow more complex they may have to evolve speciﬁc forms of organization.
Information theory suggests that the number of decision-making nodes and of
decision-makers must increase as societies grow in scale and complexity. An in-
creasing number of nodes at any one level in turn requires the creation of more
higher-level nodes to coordinate them, which produces increasingly multilay-
ered decision-making hierarchies (van der Leeuw 1981). Such hierarchies also
require more resources to facilitate communication between levels and pro-
vide the compulsion that ensures that higher-level orders will be carried out.
For complex societies to function, decision-makers must be able to determine
courses of action for others without undue delay. This requires the setting
of strict limits on the amount of consultation and explicit personal consent
required to establish and implement public policy. Decision-making in early
civilizations was inevitably associated with what people in small-scale, egalitar-
ian societies would have regarded as unacceptably arbitrary power (Flannery
1972).
Information theory offers a functional explanation for the development of
institutionalizedsystemsofunequalpoliticalpower.Therepeatedindependent
evolution of early civilizations that possessed class systems, administrative hi-
erarchies, hierarchical legal systems, and military and police forces suggests
not only that these features corresponded to functional needs but also that hu-
man beings can repeatedly transcend the intellectual constraints of traditional
cultures to create structures that can satisfy new functional requirements.

274
Sociopolitical Organization
Neoevolutionists have argued that, because arrangements at the preceding
chiefdom level were already so similar, they facilitated the development of
cross-culturally similar institutions in early civilizations. This argument, which
reﬂects the neoevolutionist passion for unilinear change, diminishes the im-
portance of the functionalist causality which neoevolutionists also cherish. It
is also not a position that is supported by archaeological evidence, which in-
dicates considerable variation in the types of societies that gave rise to early
civilizations (Yoffee 1993).
A functionalist or adaptationist argument does not, however, explain why
in early civilizations the unity of the state was symbolically expressed by a
monarch. Nor does the presence of a king in each early civilization corre-
spond with the relativist-romanticist belief that peoples coping with similar
problems have virtually limitless speciﬁc ways of conceptualizing solutions for
these problems. It does, however, correspond with the nineteenth-century
evolutionist assumption that people at a particular level of social complex-
ity who face similar problems will tend to devise similar solutions for them.
This was a view to which Franz Boas (1963 [1911]: 154) subscribed, despite his
commitment to cultural relativism, when he drew attention to the detailed and
far-reaching cross-cultural similarities that characterized fundamental human
ideas. Varied cross-cultural similarities, especially those of a cognitive variety,
that cannot be explained simply by functional arguments suggest that certain
ways of thinking and behaving may in some manner be ‘hard-wired’ into the
human psyche even if they are not realized in the same way in societies at
different levels of complexity. This embeddedness may also explain why so-
cial scientists habitually treat many regularities in sociopolitical organization
as commonplaces, but the existence of these regularities requires explanation.
Limited variation, such as the differences between city-state systems and ter-
ritorial states, appear to reﬂect functional alternatives that correspond equally
well with human needs and perform equally as long as these two sorts of so-
cieties are not competing with each other or with any more complex societies
(Hallpike 1986: 75–76). More idiosyncratic variations in family organization
and gender roles, although still relatively limited, may partly reﬂect differing
cultural heritages from an earlier stage of development. Even these differences
seem to have been modiﬁed convergently in the context of early civilizations
as families became internally more hierarchical and patriarchal and the public
role of women was increasingly restricted.
In drawing attention to cross-cultural regularities in many major features
of sociocultural organization in early civilizations and to the limited range of
differences in other features, I am not seeking to impose undue uniformity on
the data. Kingship had a different speciﬁc meaning in every early civilization,

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
275
as did slavery and the concept of an upper class. Yet these differences cannot
be allowed to obscure the great similarities in sociopolitical organization that
early civilizations came to share as a result of convergent development. To
ignore these similarities out of loyalty to hoary dogmas of cultural relativism or
historical particularism would be as misleading as to ignore cultural differences
in the name of unilinear evolutionism.

Economy

14 Food Production
G
ordonChilde(1928),KarlWittfogel(1938),JulianSteward(1949),and
many other social scientists believed that early civilizations originated
in river valleys located in arid or semiarid regions where, as a result of irrigation
works, rich, easily worked soils fed large rural populations, produced surpluses
that supported many full-time craft specialists, and allowed a ruling class to live
in luxury. Many Old World prehistorians continue to hold this view (Hassan
1997: 51). Yet primary civilizations evolved in many different kinds of envi-
ronments: river valleys in warm, arid regions (Egypt, Mesopotamia), tropical
forests and tropical forest-savanna borderlands (Maya, Yoruba), mountainous
valleys of different sizes, shapes, and elevations (Peru, Valley of Mexico), and
temperate rainfall zones (Shang China). Early civilizations are associated with
vast differences in temperature, rainfall, elevation, topography, soil fertility,
and microenvironmental diversity. In addition, very different assemblages of
domesticated plants and animals constituted the basis of food production in dif-
ferent parts of the world, with no signiﬁcant overlap between the Eastern and
Western Hemispheres. These domesticates, often considerably transformed
from their wild ancestors, and knowledge of how to care for them were part of
the cultural heritage from earlier phases in the development of each region.
Early civilizations are found in temperate or hot climates rather than in cold
ones (Northern China, where the average temperature in January would have
been close to the freezing point, and highland Peru were borderline cases)
and in areas with light, easily worked soils and without dense, deeply rooted
grasses. Yet not all regions with these characteristics produced early civiliza-
tions. There is no basis for theories that attribute the rise of civilization to the
inﬂuence of a single type of environment or climatic event.
Childe (1930) also maintained that the development of early civilizations
was a consequence of the invention of metallurgy and, in particular, of bronze-
working, which encouraged the manufacture of implements that permitted
279

280
Economy
more productive agriculture and the growth of cities and more hierarchical
societies. Others have argued that agriculture was impossible in tropical forests
such as those of West Africa prior to the development of iron tools. Yet agri-
cultural implements tended to remain simple in most early civilizations. The
Classic Maya and the peoples of the Valley of Mexico manufactured all their
agricultural implements from wood and stone. The Maya used stone axes and
adzes to cut down or girdle trees and simple wooden digging sticks to till the
soil and plant crops. The Aztec had a somewhat more elaborate wooden dig-
ging stick (huictli) with an enlarged base that could be pressed into the earth
with the foot and used as a spade (Donkin 1979: 6). Both lacked tools capable
of turning over soil impregnated with deeply rooted grasses. The highland
Peruvians employed agricultural implements made of wood with stone, bone,
and rarely bronze cutting edges. Their most important implement was the
chaki taklla (foot plough), a wooden digging stick with a heavy stone blade
and a ﬁrmly attached crossbar that could be pressed deeply into the soil with
a foot. These were used to turn over the shallow-rooted grasses of the Andean
highlands. All the Shang or early Zhou agricultural implements appear to have
been manufactured from wood, bone, shell, and stone, and two-pronged hand
ploughs managed by two men were used to turn over grass-covered soil. Alter-
natively, these have been interpreted as foot ploughs or digging sticks equipped
with a foot bar that two men might have employed to lever up clods of earth
(Hsu and Linduff 1988: 351).
The Yoruba, by contrast, employed an extensive array of iron implements
to till the soil, including heavy short-handled hoes and machetes with sharp
cutting edges. Yet Maya success in cultivating similar tropical forest and sa-
vanna environments far more intensively indicates that metal implements did
not provide the crucial advantage that is often attributed to them. In southern
Mesopotamia, little stone was available on the ﬂoodplain. In the Ubaid period
the Mesopotamians manufactured sickles and sometimes mullers, hammers,
and even axes from heavily ﬁred clay. The sickles had sharp, vitriﬁed cutting
edges but shattered easily, and by the start of the Early Dynastic period they
had been replaced by wooden sickles with cutting edges made of imported
ﬂint and some agricultural tools were already being made of copper. By the
Akkadian period copper sickles had become more common, and by the Ur III
period copper sickles, hoes, and axes were standard (Edens 1992: 125–26;
Pollock 1999: 85). In Egypt during the Old and Middle Kingdoms, agricul-
tural implements and all other tools used by farmers continued to be made of
stone, bone, and wood; only in the New Kingdom did metal farming imple-
ments become common (Andreu 1997: 107; David 1986: 169–70). The failure
to manufacture copper and bronze farming tools in most societies where these

Food Production
281
metals were known reﬂects the relative scarcity of copper and tin throughout
the world. By contrast, the abundance of iron ores made iron an appropriate
material from which to manufacture farming implements once it was known
how to smelt them.
Egypt and Mesopotamia were the only early civilizations in our sample
that supplemented human agricultural labour with that of domestic animals.
Oxen- and donkey-drawn ploughs were present from an early period. Draft
animals are estimated to have resulted in a 50 percent reduction in the human
labour needed to grow grain, and this permitted small groups of men to work
large, monocropped ﬁelds (R. Hunt 1991: 148). Special skills were required to
construct and maintain ploughs, and draft animals had to be fed, harnessed,
and trained to pull them.
Animal-drawn ploughs were used not to cut deeply into the soil or to turn
over heavy turf but to loosen the surfaces of ﬁelds to help conserve subsur-
face moisture and cover seed. Ploughs were equipped with wooden blades,
which in Mesopotamia were sometimes sheathed with copper. Mesopotamian
ploughs were also equipped with a ‘drill’ or funnel which dropped seed into
the furrows as the plough moved along (Postgate 1992: 167). This form of
sowing was more economical of grain than the broadcast method employed in
Egypt. Because ploughs were expensive to manufacture and used to work large
ﬁelds, they either belonged to large estates or were owned communally. Small
independent farmers had to rent ploughs and teams of oxen or pay to have
their ﬁelds ploughed. Animal-drawn ploughs were not used until the late Zhou
period in China, although animal traction was employed routinely for military
purposes in Shang times. The absence of ploughs in New World civilizations
can be explained by the lack of domestic animals that could have been used
to pull them; the Peruvian llama was unsuitable as a draft animal, although
it was used to carry light packs. The Yoruba kept a few cattle, but ploughing
was not well adapted to their root-crop agriculture. Even the Egyptians and
Mesopotamians did not use their ploughs, as Iron Age Europeans were to do,
to cultivate rich and fertile but heavy and therefore hard-to-work soils. Instead,
they worked lighter soils that could otherwise have been cultivated using hand
implements.
There is therefore no basis for viewing the rise of early civilizations as being
closely linked to improved agricultural implements. The development of such
technology was related to historically contingent factors such as whether draft
animals were available and whether metallurgical techniques were capable of
mass-producing farm implements. Moreover, the Maya, using digging sticks,
were able to support a civilization that was at least as complex as that of the
iron-using Yoruba in a generally similar environment.

282
Economy
Efforts have also been made to correlate the development of civilization with
the segmentation of different forms of agricultural production – the separation
of gardening from grain production or of agriculture from animal husbandry. It
has been suggested that more complex segmentation of agricultural activities
would have produced a greater division of labour as individuals and groups
specialized in performing different tasks and that this in turn would have
promoted the development of expertise and higher levels of food production
(Fussell 1966). It has also been maintained that increasing agricultural special-
ization inﬂuenced gender relations by making agriculture a male occupation.
In reality, however, women in early civilizations appear to have performed
many agricultural tasks, such as herding animals and tending kitchen gardens
near their homes. Where major reliance on a few crops created short peak pe-
riods of agricultural labour, women and children also joined in activities such as
winnowing grain. Such labour ﬂuctuations reached extremes in societies that
worked ﬁelds with animal-drawn ploughs. The highland Andean civilization
was the only one in our sample that recognized and ideologically justiﬁed the
cooperation of men and women in producing food (Silverblatt 1987: 10–15).
In other early civilizations, the ideological celebration of men as food pro-
ducers served to reinforce patriarchy. Although the symbolic differentiation
of male and female tasks exceeded their real separation, a growing division of
labour in complex societies resulted in men’s increasingly specializing in food
production while women specialized in food processing and other household
tasks.
In the past it would have been argued that Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba gar-
dening represented the simplest form of agriculture associated with early civ-
ilizations. These economies would have been followed by that of the Shang
Chinese, who appear to have kept more domestic animals and sowed grain in
hand-ploughedﬁeldsaswellastendingkitchengardens.Nextwouldhavecome
the Inka economy, with its altitudinally varied plant complexes and specialized
herding sector. Egypt and ﬁnally Mesopotamia would have represented the
most elaborate forms of agriculture, with their complex associations of gar-
dening, ploughed ﬁelds, farm animals, and specialized herding. Yet, as we
have already noted, much of this variation was fortuitous. The lack of any
indigenous large domesticable animals in Mesoamerica and of suitable draft
animals in Peru precluded various forms of specialization. The presence of ad-
jacent pastoral peoples in China, Mesopotamia, and (to a much lesser extent)
Egypt created additional possibilities for articulating complementary forms of
food production. More important, however, there is no evidence that organi-
zational specialization of this sort corresponded with increased productivity.
The Yoruba kept a few large domestic animals, but their agricultural system,
while highly sophisticated and well adapted to their environment and to a low

Food Production
283
population density, was much less productive than that of the Aztec or the
Maya, who did not. Specialization in food production was important, but it
does not account for overall productivity. To understand productivity, intensi-
ﬁcation of production and labour must be considered.
Many evolutionary theories treat population pressure as the driving force
behind more intensive food production and the development of more hierar-
chical societies, including early civilizations (Boserup 1965; M. Cohen 1977;
P. Smith 1976). These theories assume that population pressure characterized
all early civilizations and that people submitted to taxation and political au-
thority only if they had nowhere else to go. This ties in with the argument that
early states and civilizations developed only in regions where fertile soils were
circumscribed by far less productive areas, with the result that, as populations
expanded, people could not easily evade political authority by moving else-
where (Carneiro 1970b). Using Michael Mann’s (1986: 38–40) terminology,
these populations became ‘caged’.
Agricultural land was naturally circumscribed in the Valley of Mexico, Peru,
Egypt, and Mesopotamia. In highland Mexico and Peru, arable land, located
mostly in valleys, was limited, and relocation from one valley to another would
have been socially and politically difﬁcult for farmers. Moving to the lowlands
would have required ecological knowledge that was not easily obtained. Es-
cape from Mesopotamia necessitated a major change in lifestyle (one that has
been undertaken in the Middle East by marginal and oppressed farmers who
become pastoralists [A. Cohen 1972: 7]). The areas immediately adjacent to
the Nile Valley in Egypt had little sustaining power in historical times. Pedro
Cieza de Le´on observed that in Peru the population was easy to control because
most of the region consisted of wasteland that offered no refuge to dissidents
(Salomon 1986: 20).
The Classic Maya, Yoruba, and Shang Chinese civilizations had no such
natural boundaries. The Maya could have expanded farther south into Central
America (McAnany 1995: 146), and the low overall population density of the
Yoruba gave people considerable room for movement and colonization within
their existing territories. Shang and Zhou expansion was ecologically restricted
by the cold and arid terrain to the north and west, but vast amounts of desirable
farmland lay to the south. People in these civilizations had large areas of less
densely inhabited arable land into which to escape from authority.
Another intensiﬁcation argument is that, as population densities increased
andsuitablelandwasdevelopedtosustainhigherlevelsofproductionbymeans
of drainage, terracing, and irrigation, such land became an investment that its
owners would not willingly abandon. They would submit to authority and
taxation if necessary to retain possession of their farms and supported rulers
who offered their holdings protection against claims by neighbours who lacked

284
Economy
such good soil or intruders from elsewhere (Linton 1933; 1939). Theories
of circumscription thus assume that coercion depended either on increasing
population density without any outlet for excess population or on the growing
appeal of staying in one place.
Estimates of population sizes and densities without modern census data de-
pend largely on archaeological settlement patterns and written records. Even
if archaeologists can date houses and farming hamlets to speciﬁc periods, it is
notoriously difﬁcult to determine how many buildings were occupied simul-
taneously, how many nuclear families inhabited each structure, and how large
the average nuclear family was. Written information is frequently even less re-
liable. Early European visitors to Mexico, Peru, and West Africa recorded their
own and what were purported to be indigenous estimates of the populations of
speciﬁc cities or regions, but they seem often to have exaggerated population
size to impress European readers. In Mexico and Peru, reliable census data
are available only after the Spanish conquest, when European diseases had de-
stroyed much of the aboriginal population. For the Yoruba and Benin, census
data are available only after European colonization had resulted in major eco-
nomic and political changes. There are reports by Greek and Roman writers
on the population of Egypt, but because of the intensiﬁcation of agricultural
production that occurred during the Ptolemaic period (Butzer 1976: 50) it is
difﬁcult to apply these ﬁgures to earlier times.
Despite these limitations, the intensiﬁcation of food production does ap-
pear to be closely correlated with increasing population density. The invest-
ment of more labour in agricultural production is indicated archaeologically
by hydraulic works, including various forms of irrigation, which were intended
to bring more land under cultivation and would have permitted more abun-
dant crops to be grown in most areas than rainfall agriculture alone. Drainage
schemes also brought more land under intensive cultivation. Agricultural ter-
races vary from simple works designed to limit soil erosion in areas of rainfall
agriculture to serried banks of carefully irrigated and drained artiﬁcial ﬁelds
such as those that lined the steep lower slopes of the Andes. Most of the labour
needed to construct and maintain irrigation works, terraces, and wetland ﬁelds
could have been performed at the village or district level. Other promotions
of intensive agriculture took the form of state-directed projects intended to
increase royal revenues.
agricultural regimes
Yoruba territory extends from the swampy coastal plain along the Gulf of
Guinea north through tropical forests to the southern edge of the savanna.

Food Production
285
The terrain, which mostly lies below ﬁve hundred metres, rises gradually to
the north, where a ﬂat plain is interrupted by massive outcrops of metamor-
phic rock rising as high as nine hundred metres. A number of small rivers
ﬂow south into the Gulf of Guinea. It is a region of red lateritic soils. In the
far south, around Lagos, the mean temperature is 27.2 degrees C in January
and twenty-ﬁve degrees C in July; around Ibadan these ﬁgures are lower only
by a degree or less. Dry, hot harmattan winds blow south from the Sahara
Desert between December and February, while moist winds blow north from
the Gulf of Guinea at other seasons. The coastal region receives signiﬁcant
rainfall year-round, but in the north rains sufﬁcient to grow crops last for only
six months, with peaks in June and again in September and October. The
dry season in the north lasts from December to February. Two hundred and
thirty centimetres of rain fall each year around Lagos but only 111 centime-
tres around Ibadan. Agriculture is therefore more seasonal in the north, and
farmers who live there are more likely also to engage in other forms of labour
(Bascom 1969: 4; Ojo 1966a: 24–26, 66).
Despite their iron agricultural tools, the Yoruba had the least intensive sub-
sistence pattern in our sample. They practised swidden agriculture, which in-
volved girdling large trees and cutting underbrush and small, second-growth
trees during the dry season and then, when the wood had dried out, subject-
ing the area to a controlled burn. Finally, the soil was broken up and hoed,
and tubers and seeds were planted between the stumps in April. Prior to
a.d. 1500, the main crops were yams, which were West African domesticates,
and sorghum and pearl millet from the Sahel, but, since their introduction
from the New World, maize has largely replaced sorghum and cassava is com-
mon. Beans, melons, oil palm, kola nut, and other fruits and vegetables were
also cultivated prior to European contact. African cotton was grown to make
cloth. Yams were planted in low mounds of loose soil and, after they were dug
up, dried to make ﬂour (Law 1977: 100). A wide variety of crops were grown
together in a manner imitating natural plant growth in tropical clearings, a
practice that minimized both erosion and the need for weeding. Successive
yam crops began to mature in July, November, and December. Groves of oil
palms were planted on community and lineage land (Bascom 1969: 18–20;
Bradbury 1957: 23; Forde 1934: 151–56).
Cities were surrounded for up to thirty kilometres by belts of farmland.
An extended family usually had holdings near the city (oko etile) and at vary-
ing distances farther away. This land was divided among the patrilineage’s
adult male members. Farmers commuted between their houses in the city
and nearby farms but lived in houses or cabins on these farms for weeks at
a time when agricultural work was at its peak. Other members of the same

286
Economy
extended family lived year-round in agricultural hamlets farther from the city
(oko egan) but sometimes moved into their patrilineage’s urban compound
when they grew older. In general, younger and less prestigious members of
urban lineages tended to live and work farther from the city (Krapf-Askari
1969: 39).
Three years of cropping were followed by seven to twenty years of fallowing,
during which time the soil’s fertility was renewed. The land was then recleared
of trees and crops were planted once again. Because population density was
low, there was usually enough land around agricultural hamlets for an extended
family to occupy the same farms and houses indeﬁnitely, cultivating adjacent
patches of land in rotation. Although land close to cities and occasionally small
plots of land inside cities may have been cultivated more intensively than
land farther away, the Yoruba made no use of inﬁelds (specially tended and
artiﬁcially fertilized land) near their residences. In the north, only some onions
and other garden vegetables were hand-watered during the dry season.
Farming was viewed as men’s work. Wealthier and more powerful extended
families had male slaves to help cultivate their ﬁelds and release male family
members for other tasks. Women might help to carry seed yams to a farm and
harvest some crops, and they transported surplus food to market and sold it.
They were not, however, asked to help clear ﬁelds or hoe crops (Bascom 1969:
20). Ideally their tasks were homemaking and marketing. Less afﬂuent farmers
were routinely helped by their unmarried sons or engaged in balanced labour
exchanges (aro) with neighbours. They also invited other relatives, friends, and
age-mates to attend bees (owe) when they needed extra labour to clear ﬁelds.
Such assistance was reciprocated while in progress with food and drink and in
the long run with return labour.
Yoruba families kept a small number of goats, sheep, dogs, chickens, and
a few diminutive cattle for sacriﬁces and eating, although only the wealthy
consumed meat regularly. Meat was mainly a ceremonial and celebratory food
and was sometimes preserved by drying (Law 1977: 99–100). Horses were
kept for military purposes. Farmers who had a specialized knowledge of wild
animals, plants, and medicines and belonged to hunters’ associations hunted
in the forest reserves during the dry season and guarded the borders of the
state against surprise attack. Males in Epe and other coastal communities
supplied smoked ﬁsh to traders coming from as far away as Oyo, Ife, and
Ado-Ekiti (50). Animals were not employed for ploughing. Their skins were
used to make leather, but no use was made of secondary animal products such
as milk and wool (Ojo 1966a: 30–50).
Gender relations with respect to agriculture appear to have been more ﬂex-
ible in Benin. Richard Bradbury (1957: 23–24) reports that, while the people

Food Production
287
of Benin regarded growing yams as a male occupation, women helped to plant,
weed, and harvest the crop. They also cultivated their own ﬁelds, where they
grew various other crops to feed their families and to sell. Young men who
helped to work their fathers’ yam ﬁelds also grew crops on adjacent land,
which they sold for proﬁt.
No reliable population statistics are available for the Yoruba during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The population at that period has been
estimated to have been between ﬁve and ten million. More recent ﬁgures
indicate that the Yoruba generally have a population density of 30 to 60 persons
per square kilometre. This may be higher than in previous centuries as a result
of the introduction of European medicine. The population varies, however,
from Ife, near the center of Yoruba territory, with 135 people per square
kilometre, and Ekitu, northeast of Ife, with 60 per square kilometre, to Ondo,
southeast of Ife, Oyo, and Benin, each with about 30 per square kilometre
(Bascom 1969: 2; Bradbury 1957: 4; Eades 1980: 82; Lloyd 1962: 53). These are
low population densities compared with those of other early civilizations. They
conﬁrm that for all lineages and individuals who were trying to accumulate
food surpluses in order to increase their political power, securing labour was a
much greater problem than acquiring land. This problem was widespread in
sub-Saharan Africa.
The successive Shang and Western Zhou kingdoms were centred on the
central plain of northern China, much of which is less than forty-ﬁve metres
above sea level. Enormous deposits of light, easily worked soil were carried
down the Yellow River from the loess plateau to the north and deposited
on this plain. River channels were often higher than the surrounding plain
and changed course over time, sometimes dramatically (Jing, Rapp, and Gao
1997). Numerous lakes and marshes existed in low-lying areas north and south
of the levee backslopes. The plain was originally covered with temperate forest,
including oak, pine, cypress, tamarisk, and mulberry, and was home to wild
animals such as cattle, bears, tigers, leopards, and panthers.
The present climate of northern China is strongly seasonal. The average
temperature is zero degrees C in January and twenty-eight degrees C in July.
Winds blow mainly from the north in winter and from the southeast in summer.
Rainfall is highest in midsummer but totals only seventy-six centimetres an-
nually and as little as ﬁfty centimetres in the lower Yellow River valley. There
is also considerable variation in rainfall from one year to another, with precip-
itation being uncertain in the spring and sometimes excessive in July. Strong
winds, heavy downpours or prolonged droughts, crop diseases, and insect pests
threaten the crops. Snow falls in winter, and crops can be grown only from
spring to autumn.

288
Economy
It has been suggested that northern China may have been a few degrees
warmer and the overall precipitation somewhat greater in Shang times than at
present, but the climate would still have been continental rather than tropical
or subtropical. The Shang oracle-bone records, which include divinations con-
cerning the weather, suggest only limited climatic change (Chˆeng 1960: 83–88;
Keightley 1999a; Wheatley 1971: 22). These texts indicate royal concern that
there be enough rain to grow food and fear that heavy summer rains may spoil
the crops (Keightley 1979–80: 29).
Wheat was the preferred cereal of the upper classes, and broomcorn millet
(Panicum miliaceum [shu]) was generally preferred to foxtail millet (Setaria
italica [chi]) (Hsu and Linduff 1989: 345–55). Barley, sorghum, hemp seed,
and numerous varieties of protein-rich beans (including soybeans) and peas
were grown as food crops. Clothing was produced from hemp, linen, and wool.
The upper classes already wore silk. A character that later means ‘rice’ (dao)
appears in the oracle-bone texts, but it is not known if wet rice was grown
in the Yellow River valley in Shang times. Producing it would have required
irrigation, for which there is no evidence (Bagley 1999: 178; Chˆeng 1960: 197;
Hsu and Linduff 1988: 365). Domestic animals included pigs, dogs, water
buffaloes, sheep, and oxen, as well as horses.
Fields initially had to be cleared of forests. Their fertility was maintained
by fallowing, burning weeds and brush as fertilizer, and manuring (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 354–55). Fields were surrounded by low earth walls inside
ditches which prevented the subsoil from becoming waterlogged as a result
of excessive summer rains or high water tables in low-lying areas (H. Sugiura,
cited in Isaac 1993: 452–53). Idealized descriptions of later times suggest that
individual ﬁelds were surrounded by shallow ditches, blocks of nine large
ﬁelds by deeper ones, and one hundred such blocks by still larger trenches
(Vandermeersch 1980: 221–22). Each cultivator was assigned approximately
6.6 hectares of good land for cultivation and more for fallow, allotments being
larger where the land was poorer.
The culturally approved view of country life had men working the land
while women cooked, looked after children, tended the family house, and
wove. Men worked in teams. In spring, grass was burned from the ﬁelds and
the root-impregnated soil was turned over with two-man hand ploughs. The
clods of earth were then broken up by pounding them with clubs or ordinary
hoes. Large grain ﬁelds appear to have been monocropped, and men worked
in large groups to harvest them (Granet 1958 [1930]: 140–46).
Farmers planted orchards and vegetable gardens near their houses, while
grain and hemp ﬁelds were located farther away. There appears to have been
considerable antipathy towards pastoral peoples who lived to the north and

Food Production
289
west and, when driven by hunger or attracted by the prospect of easy plun-
der, harassed settled regions. The Shang and Zhou people relished meat but
shunned milk and dairy products because of their associations with pastoralists
(K. Chang 1977: 29).
No population ﬁgures are available for Shang or Western Zhou China, and
there are as yet no comprehensive settlement pattern data. The earliest sur-
viving census, for a.d. 2, suggests a population of forty to sixty persons per
square kilometre on the central plain, but by then China had an agricultural
economy based on iron tools and private ownership of land (Barraclough 1984:
80). If Shang and early Zhou agriculture depended entirely on rainfall, popula-
tion density was probably relatively low. Yet patrilineages appear to have been
multiplying rapidly, and the apparent expansion of Shang and Zhou popula-
tions into adjacent regions suggests considerable natural population increase
(Pokora 1978: 193, 209).
The Lower Mesopotamian alluvial plain, which constituted the heartland
of southern Mesopotamian civilization, is located in a desert or semidesert
region. Between ten and twenty centimetres of rain fall each year during the
winter, mainly in November and December, and again in March and April. This
is sufﬁcient for winter grazing but not for agriculture in the regions beyond
and between the ﬂoodplains of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Southern
Mesopotamia was more or less cut off by extensive marshes to the east of the
Tigris from the Susiana plain and the forested valleys of the Zagros Mountains.
The average temperature of southern Mesopotamia is sixteen degrees C in
January and twenty-eight degrees C in July, with large diurnal variations and
low humidity (Postgate 1992: 6–20).
Settled life depended entirely on water from the rivers. The Tigris, which
received numerous tributaries from the east, was a turbulent river but too
deeply cut into the ﬂoodplain to be a useful zone of settlement in ancient times.
It was ﬁrst substantially harnessed for irrigation purposes in the Hellenistic
period (R. McC. Adams 1981: 244). However, its major tributary, the Diyala,
was an important area of settlement. The Euphrates River ﬂowed across the
desert farther west. Incised into the plain to the north, it formed levees in
southern Mesopotamia, where it was also divided into a series of braided
channels. It carried less ﬂood water than the Tigris and ﬂowed more slowly
and was therefore easier to control. Its various branches were, however, subject
to both gradual and abrupt shifts. The Euphrates carried a vast amount of silt,
most of which was deposited on the ﬂat delta north of the Hammar Swamp.
Channels were bordered by low, easily breached levees composed of coarse
deposits beyond which broad, gentle backslopes composed of ﬁne silts sloped
down to the desert. The levees and backslopes were covered with willow,

290
Economy
poplar, and tamarisk trees and licorice shrubs. It is uncertain whether, in the
third millennium b.c., the Persian Gulf reached almost as far north as Ur and
Lagash or whether lagoons, swamps, and marshes stretched south, as they
do today, to near the present shoreline (Pollock 1999: 34–35; Postgate 1992:
14–20). Both the Tigris and the Euphrates ﬂooded in the spring, reaching their
highest level in April.
Irrigation was essential for growing crops (Fig. 14.1). Water was drawn from
the Euphrates through canals that ran south along the levees and was then dis-
tributed by gravity ﬂow through smaller channels that ﬂowed down the back-
slopes. Controlling the ﬂow of water required diverters, head regulators, and
dykes. Water that was not absorbed by the soil accumulated in brackish ponds
and lakes on the edge of the desert. Around 2500 b.c., small, shifting distribu-
taries were replaced by more extensive and permanent canals (Maisels 1999:
86–87; Postgate 1992: 174). Considerable engineering skills were required to
build even these medium-sized systems, which were replaced by still larger ir-
rigation complexes in the ﬁrst millennium b.c. Water was distributed through
small feeder canals to ﬁelds (ikum) approximately sixty metres square and sur-
rounded on all four sides by low banks. As more agricultural land was required,
dykes were constructed to reclaim some of the marsh land along the lower mar-
gins of the backslopes. At least one canal built in Ur III times was forty-ﬁve
kilometres long (Postgate 1992: 182). An elaborate and carefully administered
system of allocation was required to provide every ﬁeld with four waterings
during the course of the growing season. Because of the terrain, large-scale
irrigation systems were generally more difﬁcult to construct in the northern
part of southern Mesopotamia than in the south (R. McC. Adams 1974b; 1981:
1–10; Liverani 1996; Oates 1996; Walters 1970).
The main crops were barley, wheat, legumes, and ﬂax, which was used to
produce both oil and cloth. Sesame was grown for oil after 2300 b.c. Wheat
and barley were winter crops, grown on the backslopes. Fields were pre-
pared in July and August. They were weeded and harrowed, using oxen-drawn
ploughs, and then ﬂooded. Ploughing loosened the surface of ﬁelds in order
to minimize evaporation. Crops were sown in August and September, wa-
tered and tended over the winter, and harvested in March and April. The
Mesopotamians also maintained year-round kitchen gardens, vineyards, and
orchards along the levees. In the orchards a three-tiered pattern of cultivation
was practised. Fig trees, apple trees, and pomegranates were planted in the
shade of high date palms, while vegetables such as onions, garlic, cucumbers,
and lettuces were grown beneath the shorter trees. Some of these gardens
and orchards were located inside the city walls. The Euphrates and the Tigris
were lowest in winter, when water was needed for agriculture, and highest in

wells
orchards / gardens
cereal fields
marginal fields
marsh
sweet water
salt water
river
orchards,
gardens
weir
reservoir
reservoir
desert
grazing
marginal
marsh
fields
(only irrigable
some years)
marsh reclamation
dyke
trees
orchards,
gardens
canal
canal
levee
village
grain
fields
grain
fields
trees
river
levee
levee
a
b
14.1. Mesopotamian irrigation system – hypothetical reconstruction in (a) cross-section and
(b) plan of one irrigation unit. Sources: (a), (b) after Postgate 1992: 175.
291

292
Economy
spring, when their ﬂoods threatened the ripening crops. Much effort had to
be expended in strengthening the levees to hold the ﬂood waters within their
banks (Maekawa 1984; Postgate 1992: 167–82).
Soils along the levees were higher, coarser, and well-drained, and therefore
salt from river water quickly made its way back into the river and the arable
land remained fertile. On the more ﬁne-grained, heavier soils of the back-
slopes, poorer drainage meant that irrigation water tended to remain near the
surface, and the accumulation of salts there eventually destroyed the fertility
of the soil. Fallowings every other year allowed deeply rooted weeds to dry
out the upper soil, after which accumulated salts were ﬂushed deeper with
heavy applications of fresh water. This meant that only half the available grain
ﬁelds could be cultivated at one time (Gibson 1974; Jacobsen 1982; Powell
1985). Despite the strenuous efforts made in ancient times to slow or prevent
salination, modern experiences suggest that in many areas ﬁelds would have
become uncultivatable after fewer than ﬁfty years (Fernea 1970). Although
debates continue concerning the historical importance of salination (Pollock
1999: 37–38; Yoffee 1995: 296), it has been suggested that, around 1500 b.c.,
the sedentary population of southern Mesopotamia declined rapidly as mas-
sive salination forced ever more people to move north. The short life-span
of backslope ﬁelds, together with high interest rates, may also explain the low
price of land in ancient Mesopotamia (Postgate 1992: 184). Opening new ﬁelds
required not only constructing new canals but also clearing trees, which were
a source of charcoal for cooking and industrial operations.
The Mesopotamians herded sheep and goats on a large scale and apparently
kept and ate large numbers of pigs. Cattle were bred in smaller numbers,
mainly for milking and ploughing, and were given names similar to those of
humans. Donkeys and oxen were used to draw ploughs, and donkeys and asses
pulled carts and carried burdens. Sheep, goats, and cattle spent the summer
and autumn eating the stubble and wild growth from the ﬁelds and fertilizing
them with their droppings as they did so. In the winter, cattle were fed grass
that farmers had accumulated or were pastured in the marshes. Sheep and
goats fed on the wild vegetation that grew in the adjacent deserts or in the
foothills of the Zagros. In the deserts the vegetation was limited, but ﬂocks
of sheep and goats could graze over large areas. These animals were herded
both by shepherds who lived in urban centres and agricultural villages and by
pastoral tribesmen independent of any city-state. The latter kept in contact
with agriculturalists, and many grazed their ﬂocks on the stubble of ﬁelds after
the desert pastures had dried up. Fishing, which was an important source of
protein, was carried out at least in part by full-time specialists (Postgate 1992:
158–66; Zeder 1991).

Food Production
293
Farm work, especially grain cultivation, which involved using animal-drawn
ploughs, was always represented as a male occupation. Commercial texts re-
veal, however, that large numbers of poorer women were employed to winnow
and carry grain, break up clods on ploughed ﬁelds, tow boats, and press oil (Van
De Mieroop 1999: 64). In Old Babylonian economic texts from Sippar, some
female slaves were described as trained ox drivers (R. Harris 1975: 256–57,
337). The use of ploughs and draft animals favoured the development of large
institutions and wealthy landowners as corporate extended families declined in
size and importance. Landless labourers moved from one city-state to another,
helping to harvest grain each spring as the crops ripened from south to north
(Maisels 1990: 183).
Robert McC. Adams (1981: 90) proposes that 107,000 people occupied
4,100 square kilometres of arable land in southern Mesopotamia in the Early
Dynastic I period, and Susan Pollock (1999: 65) suggests that there were
200,000 people in Early Dynastic III times. Adams’s ﬁgure represents a very
low density of only 26 persons per square kilometre. An estimate for the Ur
regionatthisperiodsuggestsapopulationdensityof66personspersquarekilo-
metre of arable land (H. T. Wright in R. McC. Adams 1981: 327). This is about
as high a population as could be sustained if 1.5 hectares of arable land were
needed per person. Adams (1981: 149, 251) estimates a population of at least
500,000 for Mesopotamia in the Ur III period. If the expansion of irrigation
had brought the extent of arable land close to the sustaining capacity of wa-
ter from the Euphrates (12,000 square kilometres, half in fallow), this would
indicate an overall population density of 42 persons per square kilometre.
Richard Hunt (1991: 145) has estimated a maximum sustaining capacity for
agricultural land in Mesopotamia of between 123 and 208 persons per square
kilometre, depending on crop yields. This suggests that a city of 100,000 could
have been fed using the agricultural land located within a radius of 12.4 to
16 kilometres, although the linear arrangement of arable land along river chan-
nels in Mesopotamia would rarely have permitted such an ideal arrangement.
More detailed research is needed on population size and population density,
both of which appear to have been low by comparison with most other early
civilizations. A low population density accords, however, with a subsistence
pattern that produced only one grain crop per year and had only a little more
than 50 percent of arable land under cultivation at any one time.
Ancient Egypt, which was called the Black Land (kmt), was the ﬂoodplain of
the Nile River north of Aswan. This plain varied in width from a few hundred
metres in the far south to 22.5 kilometres in Middle Egypt. The Delta to
the north, where the Nile broke into a fan-shaped series of distributaries,
extended 160 kilometres from south to north and was 240 kilometres wide at

294
Economy
the Mediterranean coast. Even if winter rainfall was somewhat higher in the
Old Kingdom than it is today, it would have been insufﬁcient to grow crops or
even to graze animals outside the Nile Valley, except near the coast. Currently
18 centimetres of rain fall annually at Alexandria but only 2.54 centimetres
at Cairo and one-tenth that amount at Aswan. Humidity also diminishes from
north to south. The Egyptian climate is biseasonal. The average temperature
from the north to the south of the country is seventeen to twenty-two degrees C
in January and twenty-seven to thirty-three degrees C in July. Between March
and June strong winds bring hot temperatures and dust storms from the Sahara
Desert. The rest of the year, cooler winds blow from the north. In ancient times
thenorthwindswereusedtopushsailingboatsupstreamagainstthenorthward
current of the Nile River.
Life in the Nile Valley depended on the annual Nile ﬂood, which arrived
at Aswan in mid-August and persisted there until early October. The higher
waters took a month or longer to reach the north of the country. The average
inundation covered two-thirds of the rich alluvial soil of the Nile Valley, which
amounted to about 17,000 square kilometres. Floods varied in volume, how-
ever, from year to year and over longer periods. Unusually high ﬂoods were as
harmful to agriculture as very low ones. In prehistoric times, the valley south
of Cairo was covered not with forests but with seasonally inundated grasslands.
There were permanent swamps only in restricted, low-lying places. Water was
also temporarily impounded on the ﬂoodplain behind fossil levees that had
been abandoned as a result of lateral shifts in the course of the river. The
Delta was a region of raised sand islands and grass-covered ﬂoodplains. Only
its northern third was covered mainly by swamps, brackish lagoons, and salt
marshes (Butzer 1976).
The ancient Egyptians planted only one cereal crop each year, in the autumn
after the Nile ﬂood had subsided. Barley and wheat were their main food crops.
Beans and chick-peas were also grown in large quantities, along with linen to
make cloth. These were all domestic plants that had come to Egypt from the
north and were ideally suited for growing during the relatively cool Egyptian
winters. The Egyptians also had gardens and orchards, which were located
close to their houses and were walled or fenced for protection from animals.
To lessen the chances of their being ﬂooded, houses were constructed on
high ground – on the tops of levees that ran along either side of the Nile and
its side channel, the Bahr Yusuf, and on abandoned levees that ran parallel
to the river. In gardens cabbages, asparagus, cucumbers, radishes, onions,
lettuce, and other vegetables were grown year-round on plots hand-watered
with buckets ﬁlled from wells, reservoirs, or the river (Eyre 1994). No labour-
saving devices were employed to help raise water, the shaduf (weighted water

Food Production
295
hoist) being unknown before the New Kingdom. Date palms, with their deep
roots, could reach the water table year-round from the tops of levees.
The Egyptians constructed lateral earth banks or dykes between levees or
other natural elevations on the ﬂoodplain and built up levees where necessary
to create agricultural basins (Fig. 14.2). These basins, enclosing between nine
and one hundred square kilometres, were smaller and easier to build in the far
south, where the ﬂoodplain was narrower. Canals conducted water from the
river into the basins as the Nile ﬂood reached its peak. The canals ensured that
even basins located on high ground could be ﬁlled almost every year and water
impounded in them long enough to moisten the soil sufﬁciently to produce a
crop. Basins were equipped with ‘siphon canals’ that drained the remaining
water into progressively lower basins until it returned to the Nile after the ﬂood
had subsided. Systems of interconnected basins extended along the Nile Valley
for twenty-ﬁve to thirty-ﬁve kilometres each, the length of an Upper Egyptian
province or administrative district. Building and maintaining basin systems did
not require direction at higher administrative levels. The central government
did, however, play an important role in maintaining the boundaries between
provinces and thus ensuring that adjacent basin systems did not encroach on
one another (Butzer 1976).
Eachbasinwasdividedintosquareplots.AsinMesopotamia,lightploughing
served not to turn over deep furrows but to loosen the surface of the soil and
cover seed, which was broadcast rather than planted with a seed drill. The
soil was sufﬁciently moistened by the Nile ﬂood that no further irrigation
was necessary for crops to grow and ripen. The crops were harvested in the
spring. This left a long summer period when only kitchen gardens and livestock
required tending. This cycle was not altered until sorghum was introduced in
the third century b.c. Sorghum was drought-resistant and even when planted
after the barley and wheat harvest would grow without irrigation.
The lower water table following the recession of the Nile after the annual
ﬂood drew salt deep into the ground, clearing the ﬁelds of it. Therefore salina-
tion was not a problem. It used to be claimed that the annual deposits of Nile
silt renewed the fertility of the soil, but Nile silt is not particularly rich in nutri-
ents. Egyptians fallowed their ﬁelds or alternated legumes with cereals to ﬁx
nitrogen. Most important, they pastured domestic animals on crop stubble and
fallow grasses so that animal droppings would fertilize the soil (R. Hunt 1987).
The numerous cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, fowl, and donkeys that they raised
were thus vital for crop production. In addition to providing meat, sheep and
goats produced wool, while cattle yielded milk and pulled ploughs. Donkeys
were used as pack animals. These animals had to be fed during the inunda-
tion. During the Old Kingdom, the upper classes also kept gazelles, oryx, ibex,

Natural levees
Artificial levees
Canals
Flow control point
Desert
Plateau
low
basin
medium
basin
high
basin
sypho
n ca
nal
Limestone
Bedrock
Desert
Plateau
Limestone
Bedrock
Desert
Plateau
Alluvium
Pl
eis
toc
ene
Grav
els
low Nile (winter)
Nile flood level
Nile
River
levee
old
levee
levee
old
levee
feeder canal
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
North
Nile River
a
b
14.2. Egyptian agricultural basin system: (a) cross-section of the Nile Valley in Upper Egypt; (b)
plan of a basin system on the west side of the Nile River. An Upper Egyptian province normally
contained two such systems, one on either side of the Nile. Sources: (a), (b) after Butzer 1976:
15, 42; L. Krzyzaniak, Early Farming Cultures on the Lower Nile (Warsaw, 1977), 35.
296

Food Production
297
addax, and hyaenas as semidomesticates and ate them. Cats were the only
indigenouswildspeciesofanimaltobedomesticatedinhistoricaltimes(Butzer
1976: 15, 91). Fishing and hunting contributed signiﬁcant protein to the diet.
Men from the same community worked together to plant and harvest crops.
They shared draft animals for ploughing. Most families probably kept sheep,
goats, fowl, and perhaps pigs. Cattle were owned by more prosperous farmers
and by estates. Large herds of cattle were tended by herdsmen, who led a
harsh, itinerant life. They fed on wild grasses near swamps, especially in the
Delta and Middle Egypt, and some were driven long distances in the course
of a year in search of pastures. As the human population expanded, the use of
the ﬂoodplain for pasturing cattle declined, although this was not a signiﬁcant
development during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. While farming was con-
sidered men’s work, women and children helped with the harvest, gleaning,
winnowing, and sieving grain and pulling up ﬂax. Women probably also tended
household animals and kitchen gardens (Feucht 1997: 318–19) but were not
recorded as having ploughed, reaped grain, ﬁshed, fowled, hunted, or herded
cattle.
Butzer (1976: 83) estimates that in the Old Kingdom, Egypt had a population
of 1.6 million, with an average population density of 93 persons per square
kilometre, and that in the Middle Kingdom its population was 2 million, with
an average density of 108 persons per square kilometre. Other estimates for
the Old Kingdom have ranged as low as 1 million and as high as 3 million
(Strouhal 1992: 134–35). If the population in 150 b.c. was about 4.9 million,
even allowing for the more intensive cultivation practised at that period, it
seems possible that there may have been 3 million Egyptians as early as the
Old Kingdom. This would have produced an overall population density of
165 persons per square kilometre of arable land. Population density varied,
however, by region. During the Old Kingdom, it was higher in the far south
and around Memphis and lowest in Middle Egypt and the Delta. Later the
population increased more rapidly in the Delta than in Upper Egypt, so that
by the New Kingdom most of the population lived in the north (Butzer 1976:
83, 101). T. K. Park (1992) has stressed variability in access to water as a major
factor promoting class stratiﬁcation in ancient Egypt. While this may have been
important in some densely populated regions, Park may have underestimated
the buffering effect of low population density.
The Central Andes, the heartland of the Inka state, is an extremely moun-
tainous area traversed by numerous unnavigable rivers ﬂowing west into the
Paciﬁc Ocean and east into the Amazon drainage. Arable land is scattered in
highland basins and steep-sided river valleys. Along the fog-shrouded Paciﬁc
coast, average temperatures vary from 15 degrees C in August (winter) to

298
Economy
22 degrees C in February (summer). At Cuzco the mean July temperature
is 10 degrees C and the mean January temperature 13.5 degrees C. In the
still higher Lake Titicaca basin, the mean varies from −2 degrees C in July
to 5 degrees C in November. Throughout the highlands, daily temperature
ﬂuctuations are more extreme than seasonal ones, on most days amounting
to from 11 to 17 degrees C. Rainfall generally decreases from north to south.
About 80 centimetres fall each year around Cuzco. The dry season in the high
Andes lasts from April to November, while rain falls from December to March.
The principal highland administrative centres of the Inka state were located
in the quechua (temperate region), between twenty-three hundred and thirty-
ﬁve hundred metres above sea level, a rolling landscape with a moderate
climate and rich volcanic soils. Above it, the suni, a rough, barren region, has
frequent frosts and thinner soils. Still higher, the puna (altiplano), between
four thousand and ﬁve thousand metres, consists of vast tablelands too cold
for trees to grow but covered with thick grasses that are foraged by cameloids.
Still higher, the janca region consists of rock and snow-covered peaks without
vegetation.
Below twenty-three hundred metres is the yunga (hot region). On the west-
ern side of the Andes, numerous river valleys lead down to the arid chala
(coastal plain), which except in El Ni˜no years receives less rainfall than the
Sahara Desert. Where this plain is crossed by rivers are narrow, once forested
valleys. In the valleys that descend steeply from the mountains, rain is fre-
quent, but there is little arable land. On the eastern slopes of the Andes, valleys
covered with deciduous and evergreen forests run down into the Amazonian
lowlands.
Aboriginal Andean farmers lived in a challenging environment. Through-
out the highlands, arable soil constituted only a small part of the total land
surface. Pockets of such soil were usually sharply delineated and separated
from each other by vast stretches of inhospitable terrain. Under these condi-
tions, possessing land and holding onto it were matters of vital importance.
Because of the steep topography, many ecological zones, none of which was
totally reliable for human subsistence, occurred in close proximity to one an-
other. Highlanders confronted extreme diurnal temperature ﬂuctuations, low
annual temperatures, irregular rainfall, and steep valley sides with insufﬁcient
soil cover (Burger 1995: 12–25). In the midst of this diversity, groups as small
as ayllus aspired to self-sufﬁciency in food production.
Farmers expanded arable land by terracing the hillsides, especially the steep
and semiarid lower sides of valleys, where maize and other temperate crops
grew best. Building terraces (pata) required constructing large numbers of
well-anchored stone retaining walls and ﬁlling them with gravel and topsoil

Food Production
299
brought up from the valley bottoms. Channels were often constructed both to
drain the terraces, so that saturation from excessive rainfall would not cause
them to collapse, and to irrigate them in times of drought. Irrigation systems
were also developed in the valley bottoms. The fertility of terraced ﬁelds was
maintained by applying fertilizers, including llama, human, and bird droppings
(Donkin 1979; Rowe 1944: 210). Land at higher altitudes did not require
irrigation or fertilizer but had to be fallowed for seven years after every four
years of cropping (Kendall 1973: 141).
To reduce the danger of crop failure as a result of frost and crop diseases and
to increase the variety of its diet, each family planted many different species
of plants and many varieties of each species. Andean highlanders are said to
have grown more than two hundred different varieties of potatoes (Kendall
1973: 140). They also planted crops with different maturation periods in order
to have a staggered harvest (Zimmerer 1993: 24–25). Fields were prepared
in August and maize was sown mostly in September so that crops would be
ready for harvesting beginning in January. Most potatoes were also planted in
September. While the largest potatoes were harvested in June, more rapidly
maturing varieties were ready to be dug up between January and March, and
there was another harvest in May (Kendall 1973: 149–50; Rowe 1944: 212).
For each family to be able to grow as many different crops as possible, the
ideal location for a farming settlement was about thirty-ﬁve hundred metres
above sea level. Below, terraced and irrigated land produced maize, beans,
squash, and other crops that had been domesticated in warmer regions. Maize
was especially valued as a luxury food and as the main ingredient for alcoholic
beverages (Murra 1960). The colder and wetter zone above produced locally
domesticated tubers such as potatoes, meshua, olluco and oca, grains such
as quinoa, and tarwi, a nutritious legume. Some communities also established
colonies at still lower altitudes to grow chillies, cacao, cotton, lima beans, and
other tropical crops, although these items were also carried into the highlands
for sale by itinerant herders. The desire of Andean groups to be economically
autonomous led them to support the Inka state in return for the state’s protect-
ing arrangements that enabled them to control dispersed eco-niches extending
from high-altitude grazing lands to the tropical forests (Kendall 1973: 140–41;
Masuda, Shimada, and Morris 1985; Rowe 1944: 210). Herders (punaruna)
appointed by each ayllu tended large ﬂocks of llamas and alpacas on the grass-
lands above four thousand metres. These animals provided meat and wool for
making clothes. Wild vicu˜nas were also ﬂeeced of their ﬁne wool in the course
of annual roundups. Ideally, each nuclear family possessed ten llamas. Fresh
meat was more regularly provided by guinea pigs, which roamed free inside
farmhouses (Rowe 1944: 219). Dogs and ducks were also kept and occasionally

300
Economy
eaten. To buffer crop failures, Andean farmers developed elaborate storage
systems, freeze-drying llama meat and tubers to produce ch’arki and chu˜no
and constructing rodent-free but well-ventilated granaries (qollqa).
When ﬁelds were cultivated, men turned over the grass-covered soil with
their foot ploughs and women smashed the clods of earth. At planting time,
men dug holes or loosened the soil while women placed the tubers or seeds
in the ground. Because the earth was regarded as the mother of crops, it was
thought appropriate that women rather than men should place her children
in her womb (Kendall 1973: 142; Silverblatt 1987: 29).
The Inka state controlled 980,000 square kilometres and has been estimated
to have had a population of between eight and fourteen million people (Earle
1987: 65; Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 771). Some have raised this ﬁgure as
high as thirty-seven million (Schaedel 1978: 293–94). If the Inka kingdom con-
sisted of about eighty provinces with an ideal forty thousand families in each,
it would have had a population of sixteen million. A conservative estimate
of twelve million suggests an overall population density of 12.2 persons per
square kilometre. This estimate means little, however, since the total area in-
cludes huge stretches of desert, barren mountains, and puna that were scarcely
inhabited. Today only 2 percent of Peru is estimated to consist of arable land.
Assuming generously that one-tenth of the surface area was habitable, this
produces a population density of 122 persons per square kilometre of arable
land. The fertile area may well, however, have been considerably smaller in the
Central Andean highlands and the population density correspondingly higher.
As a result of herding, the puna was also used to produce food, although it was
not inhabited in a sedentary fashion.
Thus the pressure of population on the relatively small amount of arable
land in the Central Andean highlands and the danger of crop failures led to
the elaboration of a complex and intensive system of agriculture. The Inka state
greatly beneﬁted highland farmers by abolishing local warfare, thus permitting
them to leave their hill-forts and resettle near the thirty-ﬁve-hundred-metre
line where they could grow the widest possible array of crops (Earle and
D’Altroy 1989; Hastorf 1990; von Hagen 1959: 118, 169). In addition, the Inka
state made it easier for highlanders to establish agricultural colonies in lowland
regions, which had come under Inka rule. Both of these developments helped
ayllus to realize more completely their aspiration to be self-sufﬁcient in food
production.
Apart from the Maya Mountains in Belize, the Classic Maya inhabited a
ﬂat to slightly rolling and porous limestone plateau. The region remains hot
throughout the year, averaging twenty-two degrees C in January and twenty-
eight degrees C in July. The northern area of Maya settlement, in the Yucatan

Food Production
301
Peninsula, currently receives 178 to 229 centimetres of rainfall annually, while
the southern lowlands receive up to 300 centimetres. These rains fall between
June and December, although the rainy season is shorter in the north than in
the south. The dry season starts in January and reaches its climax in April and
May (Hammond 2000: 197–204; Henderson 1981: 41–44).
The Yucatan Peninsula was originally covered with scrub forest, including
palm, palmetto, oak, and pine trees. Because surface water is rare, caves and
sinkholes were important locations for human settlement. The southern low-
lands have deeper soils and are naturally covered by a canopy of mahogany,
wild ﬁg, and ceiba trees over 50 metres high. Maya farmers avoided patches
of grassland with stunted trees because they indicated poor soils, but they
periodically burned these areas to open them up and attract deer and other
browsing animals which they hunted (Atran 1993; Fedick 1996a).
There is no more than sixty metres of topographic relief in the southern
lowlands, which has numerous swamps, a few permanent lakes, and many
natural, clay-lined seasonal waterholes. Rivers ﬂow down from the highlands
along the western edge of the region and from the Maya Mountains in the
southeast. In most areas the Maya constructed cisterns and elaborate systems
of catchments and reservoirs to collect and store rainwater for drinking and
gardening during the dry season. These systems frequently utilized plazas as
collecting areas and stone quarries as reservoirs (Lucero 1999; Scarborough
1993). The southern Maya lowlands are dominated by deep mollisols, which
are naturally more fertile than most other soils found in tropical forests (Fedick
1996b: 341; Fedick and Ford 1990: 28). In the north, fertile soil is shallower
and more discontinuous.
The Maya were long thought to have depended on swidden agriculture to
grow maize, beans, squash, and less important crops. The modern Maya grow
one to three crops each year in this manner. In December they cut the trees,
leaving the branches to dry over the winter. In April they burn the ﬁelds,
prepare the soil, and plant maize between the charred stumps of the bigger
trees. The corn is weeded once or twice, in June and July, and harvested in
September or October. In September they sow a second crop, usually beans,
between the cornstalks. This crop matures in December and January. Two
years of cultivation are followed by seven to ten years of fallow (Atran 1993;
Henderson 1981: 41–46).
Archaeologicaldatashow,however,thatClassicMayapopulationdensitywas
considerably higher than could have been supported by swidden agriculture
in its present form (Fedick 1996a; Flannery 1982; Harrison and Turner 1978;
Pohl 1985). It appears that, like the Yoruba, the Classic Maya grew various
root crops, such as manioc and sweet potatoes, together with corn, beans, and

302
Economy
squash. The root crops produced several times as much food per hectare as
did maize (Bronson 1966; Sanders 1973: 339–40), and this diversity helped to
maintain soil fertility even if it did not eliminate the need for fallowing. The
Maya preferred rich, well-drained soils when these were available. In clearing
the forest they preserved wild fruit-bearing trees, especially breadnut (ramon),
which is a highly productive food source, although the Maya consumed it
mainly as a famine food (Atran 1993: 683–86). The Classic Maya also made
extensive use of the wild plants that ﬂourished on their fallows and grew cocoa
and cotton.
In some hilly regions there is evidence of extensive dry-wall terracing on
sloping terrain. Such terraces would have helped to retain soil and moisture.
In other areas, the Maya piled up muck from the bottom of shallow swamps to
create raised ﬁelds separated from one another by narrow waterways (Dunning
1996). They also dug grids of ditches back from rivers to create similar ﬁelds.
These two sorts of ﬁelds absorbed groundwater and could be watered using
buckets. Their fertility was maintained by periodically piling on top of them
vegetation dredged from adjacent canals. Raised ﬁelds constructed in swamps
might produce three or more crops each year, while ﬁelds on a ﬂoodplain,
which would have been inundated between June and November, produced
two (Culbert, Levi, and Cruz 1990; Harrison 1990; Levi 1996: 97). In the
north, cacao and fruit trees, as well as two food crops per year, were planted in
large, natural sinkholes. Terraces and raised ﬁelds now appear to have been less
extensive than was once believed. Terraces are most widespread on the Vaca
Plateau around Caracol and raised ﬁelds in northern Belize and the Candelaria
area. In other regions either ﬂuctuations in water levels were too great or the
soil was too poor to permit intensive agriculture (Fedick 1996b).
An important source of food was the gardens attached to Maya houses.
Clusters of houses belonging to different extended families were widely sep-
arated, even in urban centres, to provide space for these gardens, which were
sometimes enclosed by stone walls (Graham 1999). Gardens were associated
with upper-class residences as well as with the homes of ordinary people. A
study at Sayil indicates that the largest gardens were attached to the most
elaborate residential complexes (Dunning 1996: 60). Gardens contained fruit
trees and probably were used to grow condiments as well as staples, espe-
cially root crops. These gardens appear to have been fertilized with kitchen
and human waste and probably were kept moist with water drawn from urban
reservoirs and household tanks. Kitchen gardens could thus produce three
or four crops each year over an indeﬁnite period. It appears likely that these
inﬁelds were a major source of food for families in both urban centres and the
countryside.

Food Production
303
Swidden agriculture was used to grow food during the wet season on ﬁelds
some distance away from urban centres or permanent rural settlements. Some
of those who cultivated swidden land constructed seasonally occupied houses
near these ﬁelds; however, these living quarters had no accompanying burials
or provisions for storing water for the dry season (Santley 1990: 333; Dunning
1996: 61). There is growing evidence of regional variability in Maya agriculture
and of variation in intensity from one region to another. The most serious
problems appear to have been securing water and controlling labour in a
region where arable land was not strongly circumscribed.
The Maya depended heavily on ﬁshing and hunting as sources of animal
protein. Their few domestic animals were dogs, turkeys, and ducks. They also
kept some semidomesticated peccaries.
The Classic Maya were once believed to have had low population density,
although this made it difﬁcult to understand how they had constructed so many
impressive urban centres. Recent studies of settlement patterns indicate that
large areas had an overall population density of about 180 persons per square
kilometre (Rice and Culbert 1990: 26). In some regions, such as R´ıo Bec,
the maximum population density may have reached 282 persons per square
kilometre, while in the Tikal and Calakmul regions it seems to have been as
low as 120 per square kilometre (B. Turner 1990: 321–23). Overall population
densities were low in areas where there were extensive seasonal swamps that
were unsuitable for agricultural development or too little water to support
intensive agriculture.
The Valley of Mexico is an elevated plain separated from other regions of
highland Mexico by rugged mountain ranges on its eastern, southern, and
western ﬂanks but by only a few broken hills from the Meseta Central to the
north. Until the eighteenth century, when drainage to the outside was artiﬁ-
cially established, the Valley of Mexico was a closed hydrological basin of seven
thousand square kilometres with a series of large but shallow and seasonally
ﬂuctuating lakes at its centre. These lakes were fed by rivers and streams de-
scending from the mountains and from artesian springs. Only two rivers ﬂowed
year-round. The central lakes, which were all interconnected when they were
at their fullest, stood at altitudes between 2,238 and 2,245 metres. The largest
of these bodies of water, Lake Texcoco, was also the lowest and most brackish
(Hassig 1985: 41–46).
The Valley of Mexico is located in what modern Mexicans classify as terra
fria, the cold rather than the temperate or tropical zone. Winters are dry and
cool, averaging eleven degrees C. Frosts occur regularly in most parts of the
valley between November and the end of January and exceptionally between
September and March. Summers are warm, with an average temperature of

304
Economy
twenty-one degrees C, and rain is abundant at that time. While scattered
showers occur from November until the end of April, 80 percent of the an-
nual rainfall takes place between June and October, with July and August
constituting a drier interval. Rainfall varies between 45 centimetres in the
north and 150 centimetres in the south (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979:
81–83).
Back from the lakes, a broad, gently sloping lower piedmont rises to twenty-
ﬁve hundred metres before giving way to a steeper upper piedmont. Soil is
generally fertile and easily worked, although it tends to be shallower in the
upper piedmont than it is lower down. Above twenty-seven hundred metres is
a rugged sierra, where agriculture is impossible. In the sixteenth century, the
upper rim of the valley was covered with forests of oak, cypress, and alder, with
pine at higher altitudes. The rulers of the various states in the valley were able
to regulate the use of these forests sufﬁciently to preserve them as a source
of timber and for curbing soil erosion (Hassig 1985: 207–8; Sanders, Parsons,
and Santley 1979: 84–89).
The Aztec and their neighbours grew corn and amaranth as their main
cereal crops, along with ch´ıa (Salvia), squashes, tomatoes, chillies, avocados,
and many other food plants. Hemp was grown to make cloth, but cotton
had to be imported from the hotter lowlands. Maguey was cultivated for its
sap, which was fermented, and its ﬁbres, which were used to manufacture
textiles.
While some swidden agriculture was practised in the higher and the more
northerly portions of the Valley of Mexico, it does not appear to have been of
great economic importance. Irrigation schemes were developed in the middle
and lower piedmont regions, using water from the mainly seasonal streams
ﬂowing down the sides of the valley. Because of the sloping terrain, high
water tables and salination were much less of a problem than they were in
Mesopotamia. Until around a.d. 1400, these schemes generally sought to irri-
gate areas of only ten to one hundred hectares, but after that time more exten-
sivesystemswithcomplexfeedercanalswereconstructed.Creatingthesemore
extensive systems required larger workforces and skilled hydraulic engineering
(Doolittle 1990). Vast numbers of short, irregular terraces were constructed to
control soil erosion (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 243–48). The number
of crops grown each year was limited by seasonal frosts, but in lower and more
southerly areas two crops could be grown annually.
In 1519, the main agricultural area was located in the southern part of the
central lakes (Fig. 14.3). There, in the ﬁfteenth century, a series of major
dykes had been constructed to impound fresh water and control water levels
in various parts of the lake system. The largest of these was the Dyke of

a
b
canal
chinampa
chinampa
c
Specialized land use
Irrigation systems
Chinampas
Forestry
0
10 km
5
Scale
chinampa
chinampa
obsidian
mining
maguey
production
maguey
production
Lake
Xaltocan
Lake
Texcoco
grain
production
salt
production
canal
Tenochtitlan
14.3. Agriculture in the Valley of Mexico: (a) map showing specialized forms of land use – the
rest of the valley was used for rainfall agriculture, which was more productive in the south than
in the north; (b) detail of Plano en Papel de Maguey, ca. 1523–25, showing a chinampa district;
(c) cross-section and plan of a chinampa ﬁeld. Sources: (a) after Sanders & Price 1968: 192; (b)
after A. P. Maudslay, The True History of the Conquest of New Spain, Vol. 3 (London, 1910);
(c) after M. D. Coe, The Chinampas of Mexico, Scientiﬁc American, July 1964.
305

306
Economy
Nezahualcoyotl, a multistate construction built around a.d. 1450. It created
a large zone of fresh water around the Aztec capital. Within this zone and
in Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco to the south, twelve thousand hectares of
chinampas were constructed. Like the Mayas’ raised ﬁelds, these were long,
narrow ﬁelds constructed of layers of mud, dredged by hand from the shallow
lake bottoms, and waste vegetation. They were raised high enough above the
lake level that roots did not become water-logged, and their edges were re-
inforced by planting trees around them. The ﬁelds were fertilized with fresh
mud and ﬂoating vegetation, as well as with human excrement brought by
canoe from urban centres. The lakes provided year-round moisture for grow-
ing crops, as well as protection against frosts. This permitted three or four
crops to be grown each year, with fallow periods amounting to no more than
a few months every three or four years while the ﬁelds were being repaired
and fertilized. By germinating plants on ﬂoating rafts it was possible to shorten
the growing season for each crop. The exceptional fertility of the soil en-
sured a very high yield. Produce was transported to cities located around the
southern edge of the lakes by canoe (Calnek 1972; 1973; Hassig 1985: 46–53;
Parsons 1976; Sanders 1976: 131–36; Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979:
273–81).
Commoners had substantial garden plots (calmil) adjacent to their houses.
These gardens, while not as big as Maya ones, were intensively cultivated,
weeded, and fertilized with domestic refuse. Men are recorded as cultivating
ﬁelds; it is not known to what extent women were responsible for working or
helping to work garden plots (R. McC. Adams 1960: 287; Berdan 1982: 12–13;
M. E. Smith 1996: 77–78, 189, 195).
Dogs, turkeys, rabbits, and ducks were the only domestic animals kept in the
Valley of Mexico, and all these species were eaten. There was heavy reliance
on beans and other vegetable sources of protein. The lakes were a signiﬁcant
source of meat protein in the form of ﬁsh, migrating waterfowl, and other
aquatic life.
Systematic archaeological surveys of the Valley of Mexico indicate a to-
tal population in the Late Aztec period of more than one million people.
This meant an overall population density of two hundred persons per square
kilometre in the Late Aztec period and of ﬁve hundred persons per square
kilometre in relation to arable land (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 162,
219, 378–80), the highest population density in our sample. Despite a chal-
lenging climate and the lack of large domestic animals, a population of this
density was fed through a combination of irrigation and chinampa agriculture.
While there had been severe famines in the ﬁfteenth century, the subsequent
development of hydraulic works appears to have buffered climatic variations

Food Production
307
and allowed a general increase in food production that was able to support a
rapidly growing population.
intensity of food production
Early civilizations developed in many different geographical settings, some of
which did not naturally or easily support a dense population. Ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia both depended on irrigation agriculture in a desert zone,
but their hydraulic systems were radically different because each region had
its own, environmentally determined requirements for effective water man-
agement. While the Egyptians relied on controlling annual ﬂoodwaters, the
Mesopotamians, because their natural watercourses were elevated, depended
ongravity-ﬂowirrigation,whichmadeagriculturemuchmorelabour-intensive.
Different species of domestic plants and animals were available to various early
civilizations, and their speciﬁc potentials and requirements resulted in radically
different patterns of agriculture and diverse combinations of agriculture and
animal husbandry. Some early civilizations, especially those of Mesoamerica,
depended for subsistence primarily on domestic plants. Others incorporated
caring for animals into routine farm life, while yet others developed herding
as a specialized branch of farming or exchanged produce with independent
herding peoples living along their frontiers. These variations were largely de-
termined by the various sorts of plants and animals that had been domesticated
prior to the rise of civilization, the patterns of caring for them inherited from an
earlier period, and the different ecological settings in which these civilizations
had developed. Success stemmed from the care with which agricultural sys-
tems were adjusted to the needs of different sizes and densities of populations.
The result was nearly idiosyncratic variation. The primary shared requirement
of subsistence patterns in early civilizations was that they be able to feed rela-
tively dense, sedentary farming populations and produce a surplus that could
support an effective government administration and an upper class. A wide
range of subsistence patterns could meet these requirements in many different
types of environments.
The early civilizations of our sample may be rank-ordered in terms of
the intensity of food production (as measured by population density), from
least to most, as follows: Yoruba, Shang China, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Inka,
Classic Maya, and Valley of Mexico. (I acknowledge the speculative nature
of the population estimates on which this ranking is based, especially those
for China and Mesopotamia, but they are the best that available data and
current methods permit.) The higher population densities in the early civiliza-
tions of the Western Hemisphere seem to correlate with a relative absence of

308
Economy
communicable diseases compared with the Old World and the higher produc-
tivity of local cultigens such as maize and potatoes. Therefore these estimates
are probably accurate enough, at least relative to one another, to permit some
theoretical propositions to be examined.
The intensity of food production did not correspond with the number of
food sources exploited. The peoples living in the Valley of Mexico and the
Maya had very weakly developed animal husbandry yet sustained the high-
est population densities of our sample. This may have been possible at least
partly because humans were not competing with domestic animals for plant
food. The Yoruba, however, also raised few large animals, but their largely
vegetable-based subsistence economy was the least intensive. The highland
Peruvians grazed llamas and alpacas in areas that were unsuitable for crops,
but their population density appears to have been less than that of the Maya
and Aztec, who kept no large domestic animals, and greater than that of the
Egyptians and Mesopotamians, who combined the herding of animals in areas
not used for agriculture with grazing domestic animals on the stubble of their
ﬁelds.
The least (Yoruba) and the most (Valley of Mexico) densely populated early
civilizations were both city-state systems, with other city-state systems and
territorial states falling between them in random order. This arrangement casts
doubt on the widely held belief that the development of large, densely settled
urban centres by itself promoted more intensive agriculture (Netting 1969).
Greater intensiﬁcation as a result of urban growth seems to have occurred with
the development of chinampas to feed Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, but kitchen
gardens were associated with country as well as city life among the Maya
and in the Valley of Mexico, while no intensive agriculture is documented for
the Yoruba. Despite its extremely high degree of urbanization, especially in
Early Dynastic times, southern Mesopotamia had neither a particularly high
population density nor a particularly intensive form of agriculture.
Metal tools were employed in agriculture only by the Yoruba and in
Mesopotamia; that both were city-state systems accords with the suggestion
that city-states favoured the production and dissemination of more complex
tools. Yet among the Maya and in the Valley of Mexico wooden digging sticks
supported a more productive subsistence economy than Yoruba iron imple-
ments. Moreover, despite the labour savings that resulted from using ploughs
and draft animals, the early civilizations that employed animal traction for grain
production (Mesopotamia, Egypt) supported less dense populations than some
that did not. That agricultural tools generally remained simple in all early civi-
lizations does not, of course, mean that the introduction of more efﬁcient tools
might not alter the ways in which particular peoples worked the soil. The

Food Production
309
Maya and Aztec probably would have performed agricultural tasks differently
if they had possessed iron hoes and machetes as the Yoruba did. Yet, while re-
ducing labour, having iron tools did not independently enhance productivity.
The least intensive system was that of the Yoruba, who lived in a region of
tropical forests and savannas, but the Maya, who lived in a similar environ-
ment (albeit one with unusually rich soils), used a combination of raised ﬁelds,
irrigation, kitchen gardens, and swidden to support a much denser population
than was achieved by hydraulic agriculture in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The
inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico and of highland Peru, both using a combi-
nation of rainfall and irrigation agriculture, were near and at the top in terms of
productivity despite the severe climatic and topographical limitations of their
environments.
The civilizations that occupied the most clearly circumscribed productive ar-
eas were Mesopotamia, Egypt, highland Peru, and the Valley of Mexico, and all
of them had medium to high population densities. The Yoruba, Shang Chinese,
and Maya, each occupying only part of a more extensive fertile agricultural re-
gion, had low to high population densities. The Yoruba were surrounded either
by powerful states or by small-scale societies denser than their own; so it is not
surprising that in times of crisis Yoruba groups tended to relocate within their
own territory rather than trying to expand it. Thinly settled adjacent territory
did not, however, attract Maya settlement, while the Shang and Zhou popu-
lations maintained a relatively low population density by militarily expanding
into adjacent regions.
Elizabeth Stone (1997) has proposed that, where population densities do
not preclude relocation and agricultural land lacks substantial labour invest-
ment or is quickly exhausted, the control of labour is more critical than the
control of land. The ability of families or small communities to relocate be-
yond the range of a leader’s power may, she suggests, explain the prevalence of
heterarchical rather than centralized governments among the Yoruba, where
traditions of politically disgruntled factions moving to other states or founding
new ones abound, and in Mesopotamia. Within the Valley of Mexico, however,
because of the development of chinampas and forms of irrigation that were less
susceptible to salination than those of Mesopotamia, developed land acquired
high, long-term value, and its owners became increasingly subject to political
control. The Maya’s heavy reliance on kitchen gardens may have made their
owners more susceptible to coercion. While the special vulnerability to salina-
tion of ﬁelds in southern Mesopotamia may to some extent have inhibited the
local development of more centralized forms of government, it appears that in
all other city-state systems land ownership became more important and people
were more easily coerced by governments as population densities increased.

310
Economy
By encouraging the development of more intensive food production, denser
populations increased the vulnerability to political coercion of all those who
possessed land with potential for development. The primary basis of central-
ized power was the ability of rulers to punish uncooperative landholders by
conﬁscating their land. The principal differences between more centralized
and heterarchical city-states thus appear to relate to the presence in hierar-
chical states of higher overall population densities and the ability to cultivate
plots of land intensively and on a long-term basis.
Territorial states offered alternative solutions to the control of land and
labour. Because of its scarcity and high maintenance costs, fertile land became
a contested resource everywhere in the Andean highlands. The Inka state, by
suppressing intergroup conﬂict, was able to guarantee its highland subjects
not only secure tenure of fertile ﬁelds but also conditions under which the
maximum expansion of arable land was possible. Egyptian farmers were still
moving from the south into less densely settled areas of central and northern
Egypt throughout the Old and Middle Kingdoms. The emergence of a single
state guaranteed landowners’ control over farm labour while eliminating the
possibility that defeated political opponents and their followers would ﬁnd
refuge elsewhere, and these may have been among the most important con-
siderations encouraging the development of a territorial state that embraced
the whole of Egypt (R. Allen 1997). Thus, where control of either land or
labour was a problem, territorial states offered alternative solutions to those
offered by the development of city-states. While the development of more
centralized or heterarchical city-states may have an ecological explanation, it
appears necessary to account for the development of either city- or territorial
states politically.
The most obvious correlation is between intensity of food production, with
its attendant higher labour inputs, and population density (Boserup 1965), but
it is not clear whether intensity of food production was the result or the cause
of higher density or the two stimulated each other’s development. It was long
assumed that population increase was an independent variable leading, espe-
cially in ecologically circumscribed regions, to more intensive food production
and the development of early civilizations. Today experts are less certain. The
Ibo, who live next to the Yoruba, had double the Yoruba’s population density
but never developed states or cities. Thus population density does not explain
the development of Yoruba civilization (Bascom 1955: 452).
It is now clear that, even prior to the development of modern methods of
birth control, birth rates were subject to some limitation through infanticide
and abortion and the alteration of patterns of procreative behaviour. In all ﬁve
early civilizations for which data are available, the prolonged nursing of infants

Food Production
311
is reported: two to four years among the Yoruba (Bascom 1969: 57), two to
four years in the Valley of Mexico (Clendinnen 1991: 155; L´opez Austin 1998,
1: 449), three years in Egypt (Robins 1993: 89) and Mesopotamia (R. Harris
1975: 330, 357–58), and for as long as a woman could produce milk while
avoiding sexual intercourse in Peru (Kendall 1973: 75). The Yoruba believed
that children would die if nursed for less than two years, and to ensure the
production of milk Yoruba women avoided sexual intercourse as well. While in
some societies, including ancient Egypt, upper-class women hired wet-nurses
to feed their babies, most mothers in early civilizations seem to have breast-fed
their own children for long periods and practised birth-spacing.
Lengthy nursing of infants is a pattern that anthropologists usually associate
with mobile hunter-gatherer societies and regard as contrary to the desire
of farmers to produce large numbers of children as farm labourers and to
support them in their old age. Prolonged nursing alone increases the interval
between births, although sedentary women regain body weight and hence
the ability to become pregnant faster than hunter-gatherer women (Howell
1979; Lee 1972). The lengthy nursing of infants in early civilizations suggests
that population increase in these societies may not have been as rapid or
families as large as is generally believed. It also indicates that rapid population
expansion cannot be attributed to speciﬁc economic interests that supposedly
were universally shared by the farmers who made up the vast majority of
people in all early civilizations. Behaviour that limited family size appears to
have been as characteristic of early civilizations as it was of hunter-gatherers.
Postgate (1992: 295) suggests that the numerous measures the Mesopotamian
gods were supposed to have taken to slow human population growth reﬂected
a Mesopotamian belief that increased population posed a potential threat to
the stability of their society.
Since population increase is not an independent variable, various differ-
ent reasons may explain why it and more intensive forms of food production
occurred in speciﬁc settings. Ecological changes may occasionally have ne-
cessitated new forms of food production which required more labour input,
and this in turn may have encouraged farmers to have more children. The
development of larger markets for farm produce could also have resulted
in population increase. Perhaps the most important incentives for popula-
tion increase, however, were political competition and warfare. Where such
competition occurred, greater numbers meant more security. Under these cir-
cumstances, families, communities, and whole societies may have been anx-
ious to outnumber their competitors even if feeding more people required
investing greater effort in producing food. For farmers the beneﬁts of larger
families had to outweigh the extra labour needed to feed and care for children.

312
Economy
There is evidence that controls on reproduction can be relaxed quickly and
for short periods when the costs of population increase are low or ordinary
people judge it to be desirable (Warrick 1990). For kings and members of
the upper classes in early civilizations, larger numbers of farmers usually
meant increased productivity and hence more grain surpluses, corv´ee labour,
and soldiers. Almost invariably, they valued having more people under their
control.
Thus, as long as larger numbers of people could be fed without reducing
available surpluses, the ruling classes had a vested interest in seeking to in-
crease their support base by encouraging higher levels of reproduction. Such
strategies might have been frustrated by rising mortality rates or, if there was
inadequate circumscription, by emigration. There is no indication that rulers
understood how to inﬂuence, except by exhortation, rates of reproduction
among their subjects. An alternative option, expansion into neighbouring re-
gions, might have kept the overall population density relatively low but in-
creased the wealth of rulers by giving them control over more people and
natural resources. This appears to have been the course followed in Shang and
Zhou China. Such an option would not have encouraged the development of
new and more intensive forms of food production.
Egyptian kings sought to increase the population by settling prisoners of war
from Nubia, Libya, the Sinai Peninsula, and Canaan in less populated areas
of Egypt. They also welcomed peoples from these lands as refugees in times
of famine and actively recruited them as mercenaries. The Egyptian govern-
ment wanted foreigners as additional sources of labour and of military power.
Throughout ancient Egyptian history there was always room in Egypt for vol-
untary or involuntary newcomers (Eyre 1999: 35). Wealthy Yoruba sought to
increase their labour forces by acquiring many prisoners of war, whom they put
to work as slaves on their farms. Semitic-speaking pastoralists also appear to
have been welcome to settle in southern Mesopotamia, while the immigrants
who moved as individuals and groups into the Valley of Mexico, attaching
themselves to existing states and sometimes founding new ones, were often
viewed as a means of increasing the wealth and power of local rulers.
When population density exceeded the limit sustainable by the existing
system, food production became more intensive. This frequently required in-
vesting more labour. Population growth locked a people into a new system of
food production even if more energy was required for each unit of food that
was produced. This process occurred most quickly where geographical circum-
scription made it hard for people to move elsewhere and where investment
in agricultural land made its occupiers especially vulnerable to government
demands (Boserup 1965; P. Smith 1976).

Food Production
313
When required, intensiﬁcation of food production seems to have occurred
relatively easily. In most cases, the knowledge possessed by local farmers was
deployed to devise more efﬁcient systems. This was so even where the state had
to intervene in order for major objectives to be achieved. The vast expansion
of chinampas in the Valley of Mexico, which was grounded in long-standing
experience of wetland agriculture in Mesoamerica, occurred quickly, even
though it involved undertaking hydraulic projects on a hitherto unprecedented
scale. Mesopotamian irrigation schemes grew more elaborate over time as the
population and state demands for surpluses increased, but each innovation was
based on previous experience. Sometimes, however, expertise was borrowed
from elsewhere. When the Egyptian rulers of the Middle Kingdom wished
to increase their personal revenues by expanding agriculture in the Fayum,
they appear to have employed settlers from the Middle East. The agricultural
expansion of the Fayum required gravity-ﬂow irrigation systems that were
well known in Mesopotamia and the rest of the Middle East but were totally
different from the basin irrigation practised in Egypt. It is probably no accident
that many people of Semitic descent (3m) lived and worked in that area in the
Middle Kingdom (Butzer 1976: 41–47; David 1986: 41, 190–93; Grimal 1992:
166).
labour and surplus production
The agricultural systems of early civilizations were particular heritages from a
regional past modiﬁed to meet the requirements of expanded populations and
demands for surplus production by the government and the upper classes.
Therefore the way in which each civilization organized food production ex-
hibited many idiosyncratic features. At least two crucial features of food pro-
duction were shared by all early civilizations: the production of surpluses that
were in large part appropriated and utilized by the upper classes and the de-
pendence of agriculture on human labour, only supplemented in some cases
to a limited degree by animal traction. Where technology was limited and
production depended mainly on human labour, the agricultural surpluses that
any one farmer could produce were small. Increasing the number of persons
supported by each unit of cultivated soil usually required increased labour in-
put for each calorie of food produced, and therefore an increase in population
density did not necessarily result in per capita increases in food surpluses. It
appears that, regardless of the agricultural regime followed, between 70 and
90 percent of the labour input in early civilizations was, of necessity, devoted
to food production. This means that all early civilizations had to remain pre-
dominantly agricultural. It also means that the surplus resources available to

314
Economy
the upper classes were never large in relation to total production and had to
be used carefully. Because of this, strategies for increasing revenue had to be
mainly political (R. McC. Adams 1960): increasing the number of farmers con-
trolled, creating situations in which ruling groups shared available resources
more disproportionately among themselves according to rank, or persuading
farmers to surrender marginally greater amounts of surplus production without
increasing the cost of the mechanisms needed to ensure social control.

15 Land Ownership
I
n early civilizations surplus crops and, to a lesser extent, livestock were
the most abundant sources of wealth, and controlling these resources was
the key to political power. The study of the production and control of food
surpluses in early civilizations is complicated by vague and conﬂicting schol-
arly deﬁnitions of key concepts, in particular those relating to land ownership.
Some analysts term ‘private’ any land that was not owned by the monarch or
the state, whether it was possessed collectively or individually and whether or
not it could be sold. Stricter deﬁnitions restrict ‘private’ to land owned by indi-
viduals that could be sold to any buyer. To reduce these ambiguities, I propose
to differentiate three broad categories of land ownership in early civilizations:
(1) collective ownership by kinship groups or communities, (2) ownership by
institutions such as temples or the state, including landholding by individuals
or groups as beneﬁces from such institutions, and (3) private ownership. Be-
cause of lack of relevant information, the Classic Maya are excluded from this
discussion.
One of the most persistent myths about early civilizations, which can be
traced back to Montesquieu, is that of ‘eminent domain’ (Isaac 1993: 432).
This is the notion that in early civilizations rulers owned all the land in their
kingdoms and prohibited alternative forms of ownership, making everyone
the tenant or slave of the ruler. The evidence that has been interpreted as
supporting this claim appears to be metaphorical and political in nature. A
Yoruba ruler was often said to own his kingdom, but in reality ownership of all
but the palace and the royal farms was vested in communities and patrilineages
(Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 58). In the Valley of Mexico, high ofﬁcials
asserted that the land utilized by calpollis belonged to the king and the nobility,
who only permitted commoners to use it in return for their services to the
state (Offner 1983: 125). This claim appears to reﬂect the ideology of the
ruling classes rather than what members of calpollis believed. In practical
315

316
Economy
terms, the concept of eminent domain seems to have been no more than
an assertion of sovereignty equivalent to that made by all modern states. Its
primary signiﬁcance was that individuals or groups could not sell or give land
to foreigners in ways that extinguished or diminished the ruler’s authority to
treat that land as part of his kingdom. Among the Yoruba, land could not be
sold, given, or bequeathed to foreigners without the king’s permission. The
new owner had to agree to pay taxes and recognize the ruler’s continuing
sovereignty over the land. A Yoruba king did not, however, have the right to
appropriate or decide what should be done with land that belonged to speciﬁc
communities or kinship groups.
collective ownership
While many anthropologists are inclined to regard collective ownership of land
as evolutionarily ‘primitive’, its main feature is that it is relatively resistant to
economic exploitation by people who do not produce food, whether acting
together or individually. Producers who are constituted as corporate landown-
ing groups have more freedom to deﬁne their relations with the state and the
upper classes than producers acting individually, especially those who lack the
most important means for supporting themselves: land.
Collectively owned land was common in some early civilizations. In the
Valley of Mexico, the most extensive category of land was calpollalli, which
belonged jointly to members of calpollis. Calpollis were, ﬁrst and foremost,
landholding groups. Part of the calpolli land consisted of common ﬁelds that
were cultivated by internal corv´ee labour. The produce from these ﬁelds sup-
ported the calpolli leaders and their families, sustained the calpolli temple and
other communal activities, and was used to pay taxes. The rest of the land
was divided among all the families that belonged to the calpolli, whether their
adult male members were full-time farmers or had another profession. Full-
time artisans, traders, and administrators were allowed to rent their holdings to
landless workers and thus continued to derive at least part of their subsistence
from them. Calpolli land could not, however, be rented to members of the
same or another calpolli, since such an arrangement would have contravened
the legal equality and exclusivity of rights to land that deﬁned calpolli member-
ship (Berdan 1982: 89). In many parts of highland Mexico, calpolli lands were
regularly reassigned to reﬂect changes in family size and ensure that each fam-
ily continued to have a share that was proportional to its needs. In the southern
part of the Valley of Mexico such periodic redistributions did not occur, which
suggests that over time considerable inequalities in land ownership may have
developed. This development may have been offset to some degree by the

Land Ownership
317
expansion of arable land that resulted from the construction of chinampas.
Since calpolli land could not be sold, if a family died out or moved away
its holdings reverted to the collectivity and were available for redistribution
(Berdan 1982: 55–57; Offner 1983: 124–26).
The highland Peruvian ayllu was also an endogamous landowning group.
Each nuclear family received a share of the various kinds of ayllu land that
were required to produce all the basic foodstuffs it required. Every family had
to cultivate parcels of land at different altitudes. A local ayllu leader oversaw
the annual reallotment of land as part of the process of crop rotation and
fallowing. This reallotment ensured that, despite its changing membership,
each family continued to have an equitable share. Ayllu members assisted one
another in cultivating their land and also cultivated land assigned to members
of the ayllu who were sick, crippled, orphaned, or called away for long periods
of corv´ee labour. Land that was set aside to support ayllu leaders and religious
cults was also cultivated collectively by ayllu members. Those who worked
such land were entitled to allotments of food equivalent to their subsistence
needs during the time expended to perform this task.
Yoruba farm land belonged collectively to extended families. However, the
ownership of any land unclaimed by extended families or abandoned if an
extended family died out or moved away reverted to the community. A king
could dispossess an extended family of its land only by banishing that family
from his kingdom. Land could not be sold or alienated in any other fashion at
either the individual or the family level. Royal lineages held their land on the
same terms as others.
Some Yoruba farm land, called ajoyeba (title land) was worked collectively
by members of patrilineal extended families to support their lineage’s head and
corporate activities (K. Barber 1991: 162). The rest was assigned among the
individual, often polygynous, families that made up the extended family. The
amount of land cultivated by families varied according to their size, wealth,
and status. Large families had to cultivate more land than small ones in order
to support themselves. The most important factor that enabled wealthier or
more powerful men to cultivate proportionately more land was the number of
dependents, debtors, and slaves they could assign to agricultural tasks. Prestige
depended on being able to support many armed retainers who had to be
fed. Major ofﬁcials usually had large tracts of lineage land under cultivation
close to the urban centres where they lived (Peel 1983: 57). Women also
invested wealth they acquired from trading in buying slaves, whom they used
to cultivate land belonging to their patrilineage (W. Clarke 1972: 86). Thus
collective ownership of land did not preclude the use of land for economic
and political competition among individual Yoruba. In most Yoruba states

318
Economy
population density was sufﬁciently low that individuals could bring as much
land as they wished under cultivation. Where there was pressure on land, extra
farm land was assigned to the title-holders of patrilineal extended families so
that they could maintain their political power and the prestige of their group.
Lineage heads also rented unused extended land to strangers on a permanent
or short-term basis as a source of income (Lloyd 1962: 83, 89).
Rightstofarmholdingswereinheritedbythesonsanddaughtersofdeceased
male members of an extended family. Land could not, however, be alienated
from the patrilineage by further inheritance through female members. The
slaves that individual men and women acquired during their lifetimes became
the personal property of their heirs, male and female, and this made it possible
fortheseheirstobringlandundercultivationregardlessofitslineageafﬁliation.
The only farm land that a king could transfer to his children was the part of his
lineage’s holdings that he had cultivated prior to becoming king (Lloyd 1962:
18–37).
In Mesopotamia during the late fourth and early third millennia, patrilineal
extended families appear to have collectively owned extensive tracts of farm
land. By the time the oldest readable texts provide detailed information about
economic transactions, all or part of such holdings could be sold to non-kin,
subject to the agreement of all the male members of an extended family. In the
third millennium b.c., a rapid increase in institutional land appears to have
greatly reduced the amount of collectively owned land. Poor harvests and
other economic and ecological crises may have forced less afﬂuent extended
families to pledge their communal lands, as well as the personal freedom of
family members, in return for loans (Diakonoff 1974: 15; Maisels 1990: 151–52;
1993: 172–75; Van De Mieroop 1999: 203–6).
While statewide royal cancellations of debts (amargi), which are recorded as
early as the reign of Entemena of Lagash (ca. 2400 b.c.) and were sometimes
proclaimed to celebrate royal accessions or the thirtieth year of a king’s reign,
helped to counteract the growing economic and social inequality that resulted
from indebtedness, it is uncertain whether early acts of this sort did more than
free persons enslaved for debt. It is not until the Old Babylonian period that
debt cancellation is clearly recorded as returning land sold under duress to its
original owners, and even then there were many exclusions (Hudson 1996: 46–
49; Postgate 1992: 194–98). This left a long period during which collectively
owned land may have passed into the permanent possession of creditors while
its former owners became tenant farmers or landless labourers, perhaps often
after having been temporarily enslaved. The alienation of land possibly began
through the ﬁction of adopting a potential buyer into a family (Yoffee 1988).
He could then purchase a piece of land on the same terms as a single family

Land Ownership
319
member might have bought the rights of multiple heirs to a plot that had
become too fragmented for further subdivision.
As a result of these processes, collectively owned land was transformed into
institutionally and privately owned estates. Land ownership became concen-
trated in the hands of an ever-smaller number of institutions and individuals.
In the course of this transformation, leaders of some extended families may
have become the heads of major institutions or wealthy estate owners (Ellis
1976).
It is agreed that in China land was not bought and sold before the Spring
and Autumn period (722–481 b.c.) (Ke 1989: 52). In Shang and Western Zhou
times blocks of land were occupied and worked by extended families, but it
is unclear whether these families collectively owned the land they cultivated
or whether it belonged to the king or some regional or local ofﬁcial (Wheatley
1971: 66). Government decrees which moved extended families from one part
of the kingdom to another and assigned them to serve new lords suggest that
at least some extended families may have had hereditary access to land but
did not own it. Extended families also tended to split after they grew too
large to be supported by the land that was available to them. At this juncture,
junior branches, with the approval of high-ranking ofﬁcials, went off to occupy
land elsewhere. Regional rulers sent to occupy new territory assigned the land
around their headquarters to their ofﬁcials, household retainers, and soldiers
(Vandermeersch 1980: 43, 131–33). This suggests that land ownership may
have mattered less to descent groups than access to agricultural land through
lineage-mediated political relations, which could be interpreted as evidence
that in Shang and Western Zhou China all land was in some sense regarded
as institutional. Massive relocations of ayllus by Inka rulers did not, however,
undermine the status of ayllus as collective landholding units. It is therefore
possible that some or all rural extended families regarded the land they worked
astheircollectivepossession.Seniorlineages,whichremainedinoneplacefora
long time, may have come to venerate a speciﬁc locale because their ancestors
were buried there. It is also not impossible that, in a fashion analogous to
what happened in parts of the Valley of Mexico, Chinese ofﬁcials regarded all
the land within their domains as their institutional holdings, while commoner
patrilineages simultaneously viewed the land they farmed as their collective
possession.
For Egypt it is difﬁcult to study matters that existed beyond the purview of
the state. It is unknown to what extent, in the late Predynastic and Early Dy-
nastic periods, villagers collectively owned the land they worked and whether
thesearrangementsremainedintactintolatertimesinareasthatwererelatively
unaffected by the government’s creation of agricultural estates (h
• wt). These

320
Economy
unaffected areas would have included the far southern parts of Egypt that
were already heavily populated in Early Dynastic times. It is unclear whether
the creation of estates extinguished the rights of existing farming communi-
ties to own land or these communities were incorporated into estates with
their ancient land rights intact although they were henceforth required to pay
rents to the estate owners. The latter arrangement seems possible if the term
nıwt, which denoted some small rent-paying unit, also referred to a farming
community. The continuation through the Old Kingdom of the titles h
• q3 nıwt
(overseer of a village) and h
• q3 h
• wt (overseer of an estate) suggests the en-
during importance of farming villages as ﬁscal entities (Eyre 1987a: 34; 1999).
One archaeologically well-studied small settlement in Middle Egypt, Naga
ed-Deir, displayed remarkable social continuity through the Old Kingdom,
although it became both less egalitarian and poorer as the economic demands
of the state increased during the Third and Fourth Dynasties. Its wealthiest
family clearly had close relations with the provincial administration. During
the Early Dynastic period its leader had been able to obtain some items of
gold jewellery manufactured at the royal court (Reisner 1932: 185–92). It is
unknown to what extent these possessions were rewards for loyal service to the
government or were purchased using wealth derived from private holdings or
from the disproportionate amounts of land and labour that would have been
available to the head of an established landowning community.
In most early civilizations collectively owned land could not be bought or
sold; it was the common and inalienable possession of a kinship group or an
endogamous community. Evidence of increasing sales of collective land in
Mesopotamia during the Early Dynastic period suggests that in this early civi-
lization collective ownership was in sharp decline. Some collective landowning
groups, such as those found among the Yoruba, in rural areas of the Valley
of Mexico, and in highland Peru, were managed by traditional community
leaders supported by public opinion. Sometimes these leaders were the oldest
male members of a group; others belonged to speciﬁc descent lines. Larger
landowning groups tended to be more hierarchical. They were managed by
councils on which various extended families were represented by hereditary
ofﬁcers. The leaders of such groups were often co-opted by the upper classes.
Differences in the size of collective landowning groups inﬂuenced attitudes
towards land and surplus production. Small-scale units generally strove for
group self-sufﬁciency, while their members enjoyed relative economic equality
and were committed to supporting one another. In larger units, the land and
labour of the group tended to be treated more as a resource belonging to
the group’s leaders. Inequality was justiﬁed as necessary for representatives or
leaders to be able to perform essential acts of hospitality and worship on behalf

Land Ownership
321
of their followers. Maintaining membership in a collective landholding group
remained essential for having inalienable access to land. In cases where the
distribution of land within such groups grew less equitable, richer members
could use prisoners of war or debtors to enlarge their personal productive
labour force, or portions of collectively owned land might be sold to outsiders to
cover individual members’ debts. These situations created circumstances that
eventually might permit all collective land to be transformed into institutional
or private land. An alternative threat to collective land, when its co-proprietors
were not powerful, was expropriation by politically dominant leaders.
institutional ownership
Institutionally owned land in the early civilizations was not public property
(res publica) as deﬁned by Roman law. Rather than being established for the
enjoyment or beneﬁt of the community as a whole it was set aside to provide
revenue for the state, religious cults, ofﬁce-holders, and socially privileged
individuals. Conceptually it was closely related to those portions of collectively
owned land that were cultivated by the whole group to support its leaders and
ﬁnance group activities. Yet those who jointly owned collective land agreed
about what would be done with the common surpluses they produced, while
those who beneﬁted from the surplus production of institutional land had
rights to that surplus independent of the wishes of its cultivators.
Institutional land was not individually owned and therefore could not be
bought or sold. Individual use of a plot of institutional land may or may not
have been hereditary, but inheritance of beneﬁts from it was accompanied by
the transmission of related duties or roles from one generation to the next.
Institutional land assigned to individuals in return for service is often referred
to as prebendary land. In medieval Europe, such land was set aside to pro-
duce rents to support administrative personnel. To avoid the overly speciﬁc
connotations of this medieval terminology, I will call such land ‘ofﬁce land’.
AmongtheYoruba,theonlyinstitutionallandwasthetitlefarmsbelongingto
the king. This land consisted of farms cultivated by palace servants, royal slaves,
and sometimes corv´ee labourers. Like other agricultural land, title farms were
usually located outside cities; however, at Ode Onde such a farm lay within the
sixteen-hectare enclosure of the palace (Lloyd 1962: 72, 112). The produce of
royal farms was used to feed the king, his family, and his large palace staff, to
offer hospitality to citizens and to strangers, and to subsidize royal rituals. This
land was passed down not from father to son but from king to successor.
In the Valley of Mexico, kings held tlatocatlalli, ﬁelds and estates that could
be inherited by their children. Such land was exchanged among rulers of

322
Economy
different city-states when their children married. Major lords and probably
most if not all members of the hereditary nobility held pillalli (nobles’ land).
These two sorts of land provided rulers and hereditary nobles with a source of
income that made them to varying degrees independent of the taxes paid by
commoners. Modern scholars often refer to holdings of these sorts as ‘patri-
monial land’. Such land was set aside for the use of kings and nobles within the
city-state to which they belonged. As a result of conquest and royal intermar-
riage, however, variable amounts of such land were held by kings and nobles
in other city-states (Offner 1983: 129–38).
Jerome Offner (1981; 1983), who maintains that there was a thriving market
in land, asserts that this patrimonial land was private. Pedro Carrasco (1981)
and John Gledhill (1984) assert, in contrast, that the alienation of such land
was highly restricted and therefore it was institutional. It seems to be generally
agreed that such land could not be transferred to individuals who were not
members of the nobility. As a result of divided inheritance, land of this sort
would quickly have become fragmented, although blocks of it could also have
been consolidated by means of strategic marriages among the nobility. Even
so, efforts to maintain or assemble manageable units of land would have ne-
cessitated that nobles exchange holdings, and such exchanges may have given
the false appearance of buying and selling. Because there is no evidence that
patrimonial land could actually be sold, it seems likely to have been institu-
tional rather than private. Patrimonial land existed to support the upper classes
and in their view remunerated them for the political and military leadership
they provided. Yet a numerically expanding hereditary nobility meant that the
amount of land and income available to individual members of this class would
have declined in each generation.
Therewas,inadditiontocalpolli,nobles’,androyalland,landthatwasowned
and operated by the state. It was given various names according to the speciﬁc
usethatwasmadeofit,butallofitwascontrolledandadministeredinmuchthe
same fashion. Palace land (tecpantlalli) was used to pay for the operation of the
royal palace and therefore to feed and otherwise support the king’s numerous
retainers, attendants, and servants. Ofﬁce land (tlatocamalli) supplemented
the incomes of hereditary nobles and provided salaries for eagle nobles, who
did not possess patrimonial land of their own. Other state lands provided
income that kings could direct to temples (teopantlalli), use to subsidize the
operation of the army (milchimalli), and bestow as royal gifts upon calpollis and
commoners. Normally all these types of land were located within the borders of
a city-state. Yet hegemonic city-states appropriated ﬁelds in tributary states lo-
cated near enough that it was economically feasible to transport bulk produce.
The Aztec acquired their ﬁrst state land in another jurisdiction following their

Land Ownership
323
defeat of the hegemonic state of Azcatpotzalco (Hassig 1988: 145–46). Tribu-
tary states were responsible for delivering food at speciﬁed intervals. Such land
wascalledyaotlalli(landcapturedinwar)(Le´on-Portilla1984:23;Offner1983:
126–39; Soustelle 1961: 80–81). States also acquired land by sponsoring major
reclamation projects. While the chinampa land around Tenochtitlan appears
to have belonged to individual calpolli, the chinampa ﬁelds in the Chalco-
Xochimilco region probably belonged to the Aztec and Texcocan states.
Ofﬁcelandconstitutedamajorsourceofrevenueforthenobility,allofwhose
active male members were involved in some sort of state service. Individual
ofﬁce-holders in hegemonic city-states were often allocated speciﬁc ﬁelds in
tributary states. Such grants stiffened the determination of these ofﬁcials to
ensure that their city-state remained militarily dominant. Most of this land,
both at home and abroad, was worked under the supervision of government
ﬁscal ofﬁcers (calpixque) (Soustelle 1961: 41, 49). In the case of high ofﬁcials,
storable surpluses were probably conveyed directly to the residence of the
individual to whom the produce of the land had been assigned. In other in-
stances it was transported to the royal palace, where accountants apportioned
it among lesser ofﬁcials who had rights to a share of it. Beneﬁciaries of state
lands received much more food than they and their families could eat. They
invested the surplus in long-distance trade or used it to buy whatever they
wished at city markets. State land could not be inherited and was reassigned at
the king’s pleasure. While patrimonial land appears not to have been private,
state land deﬁnitely was not.
Both patrimonial and state lands were worked by mayeque (tenant far-
mers), recruited from landless families, rather than macehualtin (collective-
landowningcommoners).Inconqueredcity-statessomemacehualtinmayhave
beentransformedintomayequewhenforeignconquerorsreassignedtheirland
to produce tribute. The portions of the harvest that tenants had to surrender
to their landlords were much higher than the surpluses that the collective-
landowning commoners had to produce for communal use and to support state
projects. While, among the Aztec and their closest allies, calpollis retained
possession of their communal lands and may even have extended them, it
appears that in many adjacent parts of the Triple Alliance tributary network an
increasing amount of land was being used to subsidize the Aztec and Texcocan
states and their ofﬁcials.
Nobles may have tried, where possible, to convert their ofﬁce land into
patrimonial land in order to beneﬁt their families. This appears to have been
done on a massive scale after the Spanish conquest in an effort to prevent state
lands from being sequestered by the Spanish government. Such manoeuvres
may have considerably coloured an understanding of the nature of landholding

324
Economy
at an earlier period (Gledhill 1984: 139). Deception would have been easiest
with ofﬁce land that, as a result of sons’ inheriting their fathers’ ofﬁces, had
remained in the same families for several generations. Prior to 1519, such a
tendency would have been resisted by strong kings, who derived much of their
power over the nobility from their control of ofﬁce land. However, kings must
have endowed eagle nobles who married into the hereditary nobility with land
to ensure that their children might enjoy the same privileges as did those of
other minor hereditary nobles. The patrimonial land assigned to such nobles
probably came from state land.
After the incorporation of a region into their kingdom, Inka ofﬁcials insisted
that each local ayllu work plots of land set aside to support the state and
variousstateandlocalreligiouscultsthattheInkakingspatronized.Whileﬁelds
designated for state and religious purposes were cultivated independently of
one another, both were managed by government ofﬁcials. In order to reduce
the resulting hardship for the local population, at least some of these ﬁelds were
created by new terracing and hydraulic works rather than sequestered from
existing ayllu landholdings. State, temple, and ayllu lands were not established
in equal proportions. Because the food surpluses that it was technologically
possible for each farmer to produce were modest, state and temple ﬁelds
represented only a small portion of the total land that an ayllu cultivated
(S. Moore 1958: 24–38; Murra 1980: 31–34).
While farmers preferred to grow many different crops on their land, it was
the policy of the Inka government to produce only a small number of crops
on state and temple ﬁelds. Its preference for corn rather than potatoes and
other root crops may in part explain its emphasis on constructing agricultural
terraces in annexed territories. Maize, which the Inka symbolically associated
with the sun because of the yellow colour of its kernels, was used to produce
highly prized food and beer that was distributed to work parties and local
people on festive occasions (Murra 1960; Zimmerer 1993: 24). Farmers were
obliged to cultivate state and temple lands before they worked their own plots,
but they were provided with seed from government and temple storehouses
and were fed and provided with tools while they did so. In return, the entire
harvest produced on state and temple ﬁelds belonged to these institutions.
Ayllu members were also drafted to tend the llama and alpaca herds that
belonged to the state and to temples (Rowe 1944: 265–67).
The Inka kings further increased the revenues of the state and of the highest
ranks of the Inka nobility by creating large estates which they assigned in per-
petuity to themselves and their descent groups, to other prominent members
of the nobility, and to the army. Unlike ayllu land, these estates were exempt
from taxes. Wayna Qhapaq established the largest army estate at Cochabamba,

Land Ownership
325
a rich, low-lying maize-growing valley in Bolivia. The original population of
the region was resettled elsewhere and replaced by fourteen thousand labour-
ers. Most of these were corv´ee workers who came in rotation to Cochabamba
to work for a single growing season, but a smaller number of workers were
settled there permanently to supervise the storage of maize and its transporta-
tion to Cuzco. Another, smaller army estate in the low-lying valley of Abancay
employed one hundred to two hundred families (Wachtel 1982).
The large royal estates, such as those of kings Thupa Inka Yupanki and
Wayna Qhapaq in the Yucay Valley, near Cuzco, consisted of elaborate villas
which served as country retreats for the Inka rulers and elaborate agricul-
tural terraces. After the king died, his mummiﬁed body continued to visit his
estates, and their agricultural produce helped to feed his descendants, who
were responsible for maintaining his mortuary cult. Smaller estates assigned
to members of the royal family such as kings’ brothers, uncles, mothers, sis-
ters, wives, and concubines and to other high Inka ofﬁcials were inherited by
these people’s descendants. They could not, however, be sold, transferred, or
divided, and therefore the well-being of the group ultimately depended either
on their numbers’ not increasing unduly or on their ﬁnding additional sources
of revenue. Estates were also assigned to major temples (Murra 1980: 34–42).
The ayllus whose traditional lands were converted into estates were allotted
collective land elsewhere. They moved to their new holdings and were replaced
by permanently assigned labourers (yanakuna). The use of such labourers on
personal estates permitted a larger portion of the crops to be retained for
upper-class or government use than could be extracted from ayllus by means
of a labour tax. There is evidence that estates and government farms were
increasing rapidly in number and importance in the ﬁnal years of Inka rule
(Wachtel 1982). They supported an expanding army and an upper class that
needed more resources to ﬁnance its growing numbers and various projects.
While many royal and ofﬁcial estates were located in the vicinity of Cuzco,
Wayna Qhapaq founded royal estates near Tumipampa, in Ecuador. Royal
estates were also established in the lowlands to grow cacao and tropical fruit.
The Inka rulers granted small allotments of tax-free land to members of
the lesser nobility and commoners to reward them for valour, bridge building,
permanent garrison duty, and various other services to the state. Like the
larger estates, these lands were inherited by all of an individual’s descendants
and could not be sold, divided, or alienated (Kendall 1973: 145). Hence they
cannot be categorized as private holdings.
The Shang kings are recorded as owning large plots of agricultural land near
Anyang. These ﬁelds or estates were given names such as da tian (large ﬁeld) or
zhung tian (centre ﬁeld) and were worked either by corv´ee labour provided by

326
Economy
commoners or by landless workers who permanently served the king (zhong).
At least some of these workers were supplied with tools by their overseers.
Presumably all the food produced on such land belonged to the king. It seems
probable that princes and other high-ranking nobles possessed land of this
sort. As with Inka upper-class estates, possessing such ﬁelds must have greatly
increased the amount of food at the disposal of their owners (Keightley 1969:
109–11).
Later tradition afﬁrms that each block of arable land that was worked by a
lineage contained a central ﬁeld that the members of that lineage cultivated
for the king or lord who controlled the region or for some other designated
beneﬁciary. It was called the gong tian (lord’s ﬁeld) (Vandermeersch 1980:
217). While it is uncertain whether a nine-ﬁeld system ever actually existed
(Creel 1937: 313), the proportion of eight to one falls within the range of
agricultural land that might have been assigned to taxpaying cultivators and
upper-class beneﬁciaries in an early civilization.
The state was divided into jurisdictions which various lords or ofﬁcials con-
trolled and from the tax ﬁelds of which they were entitled to collect revenues
in the form of crops. Each lord could assign the revenues from one or more of
the tax ﬁelds he controlled to a subordinate ofﬁcial, courtier, soldier, artisan, or
retainer. In this way, the upper classes and their dependents obtained a major
portion of the resources that they required to support themselves and their
families and to carry out the functions for which they were responsible. It is
unclear if all the produce of tax ﬁelds belonged to ofﬁcials or their appointees
or some of it went to the head of the lineage that worked it. Alternatively, the
lineage head may have been supported by a share of the food produced on the
attached ﬁelds (Vandermeersch 1980: 210–17, 227). Exchanges of lords’ ﬁelds
are recorded for the Western Zhou period. Such exchanges may have been
essential in a kingdom in which ofﬁcials occasionally were transferred from
one region to another. These ﬁelds could not, however, be sold by those who
beneﬁted from them, since they belonged either institutionally to some level of
government or collectively to the lineage that worked them (Hsu and Linduff
1988: 275–79). Because Shang divination appears to have been ascribed an im-
portant supernatural role in making crops grow, royal exhortations that ofﬁcials
make sure that farmers diligently cultivated the soil need not be interpreted
as administrative orders as opposed to ritual pronouncements intended to en-
courage the growth of crops. Such admonitions may, however, have referred to
the cultivation of ﬁelds that produced crops speciﬁcally reserved for the king
and government ofﬁcials.
Institutional land played an important role in the economy of southern
Mesopotamia during the third millennium b.c. Most temples, as distinguished

Land Ownership
327
from small shrines, were endowed with land that was regarded as constitut-
ing the estate of the presiding deity. In Lagash there were more than twenty
temples of this sort. The main temple and the largest estate were usually asso-
ciated with the patron deity of the city. It has been estimated that 30 percent
of the working population of the state of Lagash was employed by or rented
land from these temples (Tyumenov 1969: 122–24). The temples in Lagash
are estimated to have owned two hundred to three hundred square kilome-
tres of agricultural land, or about one-tenth of the arable land belonging to the
city-state (Diakonoff 1969b: 174). Royal estates were divided into the personal
land of the king and land belonging to the palace (´egal, ‘great house’) (Maisels
1990: 171). As among the Aztec and the Inka, this was a division between
institutional land that supported the ruler and his family and lands used to pay
for administering the state (Gelb 1979: 5).
Temple and royal estates were organized in a similar manner. Both insti-
tutions appear to have been able to acquire land by purchase and seizure
for indebtedness, while temples also received land through donations. While
both institutions may have been able to sell as well as buy and receive land,
the dominant trend was towards accumulating more land, thereby fostering
the growth of what constituted a divinely or royally owned trust. Both temples
and palaces became major centres for the production and storage of agri-
cultural produce. By the time the earliest readable documents appear, about
2500 b.c., much land that formerly had been owned collectively by patrilineal
kin groups appears to have fallen under the control of kings, temples, and
wealthy estate owners (Diakonoff 1969b: 177; Maisels 1993: 172–76; Yoffee
1988).
Temple estates derived income or services from their land in at least three
different ways. The nigenna land, which was used to maintain the temple, was
cultivated by labourers who received rations (ˇseba) of barley, wool, and oil.
These workers were either slaves or free but landless labourers. If the latter
were full-time employees of the temple, they and their families were generally
supported by a combination of food rations and small plots of temple land that
they cultivated in their spare time. In the Ur III period, these sorts of labour
were increasingly supplemented and replaced by individuals’ working solely
for wages (Postgate 1992: 237). Casual, often itinerant, agricultural workers
were hired for the annual peak labour periods (Maisels 1990: 194). All the food
produced on this land belonged to the temple. It must have provided the bulk
of the agricultural produce that the temple used to feed and pay workers, buy
raw materials and manufactured goods, and support its ritual activities.
Gankur land was assigned in varying quantities to year-round manual labour-
ers, minor ofﬁcials, and major temple administrators as a source of income.

328
Economy
The labourers and their families were expected to grow their own food, but
ofﬁcials were assigned sufﬁcient land to support farmers as well as the ofﬁcials
and their families. The highest-ranking ofﬁcials derived enough income from
the land assigned to them to maintain a comfortable lifestyle and engage in
commerce. Wealthy individuals often hired stewards (iˇsˇsakku) to manage their
ofﬁce land as well as any land that they owned outright. Sometimes a single
steward worked for several ofﬁcials (R. Harris 1975: 166). This land could be
neither sold nor inherited by the people who beneﬁted from it, although it
might pass from fathers to sons together with speciﬁc temple administrative
positions. By Ur III times, temple ofﬁces had become saleable commodities
(Postgate 1992: 314). While landholdings were transmitted with the ofﬁces,
the land remained the property of a temple.
Ganaru land was let by the temple on a rental or sharecropping basis both
to farmers who lacked their own land and to commercial entrepreneurs, who
in turn sublet it to farmers. Rentals, which were usually for a period of two or
three years, gave a farmer the right to cultivate a plot of land in return for a
ﬁxed annual payment, normally in grain (Steinkeller 1981). With sharecrop-
ping, the landowner contributed to the costs of production and shared the risk
of a bad harvest but received a larger share of the crop. In good years renters
proﬁted more from their work than did sharecroppers; in bad years sharecrop-
pers suffered fewer losses. Sharecroppers were therefore generally landless
farmers who could afford to risk less than could tenant farmers. Holders of of-
ﬁce land derived revenue by renting it, sharecropping, or working it using paid
labourers. All temple allotments were subject to yearly rotation or redistribu-
tion. Fields which were worked or sharecropped by the temple were supplied
with seed, draft animals, ploughmen, and equipment from central facilities.
Workers on temple estates were subject to the state corv´ees that constructed
and cleaned major irrigation systems, built and repaired city walls, and per-
formed military service (R. McC. Adams 1966: 107–8; Diakonoff 1969b: 176;
Ellis 1976; Falkenstein 1974 [1954]; Foster 1982; Frankfort 1956: 65; Maisels
1990: 151; Postgate 1992: 126; Van De Mieroop 1999: 146–58).
Royal estates were run on similar principles except that the tenants were
mainly ofﬁcials, artisans, and professional or semiprofessional soldiers in
the service of the king. Ordinary landholders either cultivated their small
allotments or had them worked by other members of their families, while high-
ranking ofﬁcials rented or sharecropped their larger allotments. By the time of
Hammurabi many royal soldiers could ‘sell’ their right to allotments, but this
transfer required that the ‘buyer’ legally agree to perform the same services
for the king as the previous allotment holder (Diakonoff 1969b: 197; Yoffee
1977).

Land Ownership
329
It has been observed that both temple and royal estates tended to specialize
in growing grain, while private citizens preferred to invest in orchards and
kitchen gardens (Stein 1998). Grain was easily stored and relatively durable
and therefore a suitable commodity for the commercial transactions of large
institutions. Moreover, because of their large size and abundant resources,
temple and royal estates were better equipped than small-scale cultivators to
manage large irrigation systems, own the equipment and animals required to
plough ﬁelds, and cope with the complicated crop rotations and anti-salination
procedures that were necessary to grow grain crops on the backslopes of river
channels (Postgate 1992: 188–90).
There is much controversy about the order in which various Mesopotamian
institutions developed. Temples are identiﬁed long before palaces in the ar-
chaeological record, and by the middle of the fourth millennium b.c. some
appear to have evolved signiﬁcant bureaucracies that were concerned with
crops, domestic animals, crafts, allotting ﬁelds, procuring raw materials, issu-
ing rations to workers, and constructing large buildings and irrigation works
(Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993). Yet it is not clear to what extent tem-
ples already possessed large estates at that time. Palaces do not appear until
the Early Dynastic period and from the beginning seem to have possessed land
the main purpose of which was to provide kings with the revenues required
to maintain and equip the armies that were needed to defend city-states. The
palace also had to support a large administrative staff that increasingly came
to constitute the central government of the city-state. Kings sought to increase
their revenues by buying or appropriating (often by compulsory purchase)
more land (R. McC. Adams 1966: 142–48; Postgate 1992: 184).
Kings also sought to control temples and their revenues. King Shulgi, of the
Ur III dynasty, placed major temples at Lagash and perhaps elsewhere under
the control of palace ofﬁcials, and Hammurabi assigned state accountants to
temples (Postgate 1992: 300). Under public pressure, however, Urukagina, a
ruler of Lagash in the 24th century b.c., seemingly restored to various gods
the ownership of temple estates that had been sequestered by his predeces-
sors and abolished royal taxes on these estates (Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90).
Some Assyriologists see royal estates, during the course of the third millen-
nium, as competing with and gradually replacing temples as the most powerful
economic and political force in society (Postgate 1972). Others argue that tem-
ple estates expanded as a reaction to increasing royal power and the erosion
of collectively owned landholdings (B. Foster 1981; Huot 1989: 153; Nissen
1988: 147–48). This view is a development of Max Weber’s (1976 [1896]: 188)
suggestion that ordinary people turned to priests for protection against the
despotic power of kings.

330
Economy
It is now argued that spiralling debts may have caused individuals and groups
to donate their land and themselves to temples in return for protection against
creditors and royal administrators. High taxes and the economic hardship that
small groups faced as a result of poor harvests may have encouraged the gradual
disintegration of collective landholdings. Loans made at high rates of interest
often had to be paid off by selling, with the approval of all the male co-owners,
portions of collective land that in earlier times might or might not have been
alienable.Asaresultofthesesales,thepoorestandpoliticallyweakestmembers
of landowning groups would have found themselves unable to subsist on what
remained of their extended family’s collective landholding, and some may have
decided to donate themselves and what remained of their land rights to temple
estates. Other landless individuals may have sought the protection of temple
estates. Arua, the term for free-will gifts to temples, included chattels, ex
voto objects, prisoners of war (donated by kings), and ordinary people, many
of them widows, orphans, and other impoverished individuals (Maisels 1990:
154–55; Postgate 1992: 135). While temple estates do not appear to have been
indulgent institutions, they did provide economic security for marginalized
members of society. Thus palaces and temple estates both may have expanded
as rival institutions as collective ownership of land declined in importance. This
development would have sustained the heterarchical nature of Mesopotamian,
and especially Sumerian, society despite the growing centralization that was
resulting from the increasing power of kings.
Egyptian kings had begun to establish royal estates (h
• wt) long before the Old
Kingdom,andthroughouttheperiodtheycontinuedtocreatelargenumbersof
these institutions. Estates varied in size from one to over ﬁfty hectares. While
the revenues derived from estates were assigned to speciﬁc individuals and
institutions, they remained the property of the government unless their own-
ership was speciﬁcally relinquished. Many estates were intended to support
the monarch and close members of his family. Others (h
• wt k3) ﬁnanced the
funerary cults of kings, female members of the royal family, and high-ranking
ofﬁcials. The revenues from still other estates were assigned to temples or pro-
vided ofﬁcials’ salaries (Eyre 1987a: 22–23). While ofﬁcials received income
from royal estates as payment for the work they did for the government, the
successful transfer of speciﬁc ofﬁcial positions and associated lands from father
to son over several generations blurred the distinction between ofﬁce land and
land that may have belonged privately to ofﬁcials.
Each large estate and perhaps clusters of small ones had a manager (h
• q3
h
• wt), whose substantial residence served as the estate’s administrative centre
and storehouse. At least during the late Old Kingdom, a centralized bureau-
cracy with its headquarters in Memphis collected grain and other foodstuffs

Land Ownership
331
from estates throughout Egypt and distributed them to the various royally en-
dowed funerary cults in the Memphis area (Eyre 1987a: 23, 34; Roth 1991b).
This eliminated the need for individual cults to provision themselves from their
widely scattered landholdings. It also gave the central government consider-
able control over these estates and their produce. By appointing government
ofﬁcials to well-paid but part-time positions supervising the various royal fu-
nerary cults, it was also possible to return to the royal administration some of
the revenues that had been dedicated to these cults, thus making them less
of a threat to the central government’s control of the economy than Egyptol-
ogists used to believe. Funerary cults also provided income for the artisans
who worked part-time for them as priests. While it has been argued that in
the Early Dynastic period the central government provisioned ofﬁcials from
the palace, as the bureaucracy expanded increasing numbers of ofﬁcials were
provided with estates instead of a salary (Eyre 1987a: 23). In at least some
cases the holders would have managed these estates, thereby reducing the
administrative load of the government bureaucracy.
The central government was particularly active in establishing estates in less
densely populated regions, especially in the Delta and Middle Egypt (Kemp
1983: 91). Many estates in the western Delta were devoted to wine production
and raising cattle. These estates were settled by farmers from more densely
populated regions of Egypt and with foreign families who had been captured
in war and were gradually transformed from slaves into free farmers. It is not
clear to what extent Egyptian farmers were permitted to move freely from
one region to another or could be forced to do so. Many individuals may
have been happy to relocate from densely populated regions where land was
becomingscarcetoregionsthatweredevelopingrapidly.Inpartsofthecountry
experiencing economic growth, competition for labour may have resulted in
more favourable working conditions. The distribution throughout Egypt of
estates assigned to support speciﬁc government institutions, major religious
cults, and royal funerary cults must also have given ofﬁcials who derived their
living from working for these institutions a vested interest in keeping Egypt
united.
private ownership
Private land is owned by a single person or by two or more freely associated
partners and can be bought and sold as these individuals wish. It is frequently
subject to taxation by the government and following an owner’s demise may
be inherited, like other personal possessions, according to socially prescribed
rules. Owners can also dispose of such property during their lifetimes and often

332
Economy
can bequeath it to whom they wish. Both unilinear evolutionists and substan-
tivist economists believe that private property is a recent innovation (Polanyi,
Arensberg, and Pearson 1957), but since the right of individuals to possess
goods is recognized in much simpler societies the existence of private land in
early civilizations should not be ruled out. There is, however, no evidence that
such land existed in most early civilizations. It has been claimed that in the
Valley of Mexico land granted to individuals could be sold by them (Offner
1981; 1983), but there is no proof that this was so even with the patrimonial
land that was inherited in noble families. In Peru hereditary estates and those
who worked them could not be sold or exchanged. Among the Yoruba there is
no evidence that land was privately owned, although successful warriors and
traders who invested in large numbers of slaves could bring large amounts of
collectively owned land under cultivation for their personal beneﬁt. Because
of the Yorubas’ relatively low population density, wealth was derived from pri-
vate ownership of the human means of production rather than land. In China,
rights to the produce of ﬁelds that were collectively worked were assigned to
various ofﬁcials and their retainers, but these ﬁelds were owned either col-
lectively by extended farm families or institutionally by the government. That
leaves Mesopotamia and Egypt as early civilizations in which some land might
have been privately owned.
It is believed that in Mesopotamia prior to the third millennium b.c. most
land was owned collectively. In the course of the third millennium, as commu-
nal land rights were pledged for debts, increasing amounts of land fell under
the control of temples or palaces, but some of it appears to have become the
property of individual creditors. The sale of perhaps 263 hectares of land in
four lots, recorded on the Obelisk of Maniˇstuˇsu, which dates about 2500 b.c.,
has been interpreted as evidence that at ﬁrst collectively owned land could be
sold only to a king, but this is far from certain (Maisels 1990: 151–57; Postgate
1992: 41, 94–99). At the beginning of this transformation, leaders of landown-
ing patrilineages were probably in a privileged position to transform collective
holdings into private estates. The senior branches of these lineages may have
accumulated wealth and power at the expense of junior branches, and eldest
sons may have bought out the inheritance rights of younger siblings either
while their fathers were alive or after their deaths. Initially the transfer of land
to non-family members probably required ﬁctional adoptions and the consent
of the extended families of the sellers (Postgate 1992: 182–84). Such legal
ﬁctions grew less necessary as the pawning, buying, and selling of the use of
land and then of land itself continued. Eventually land came to be treated like
other forms of private property. It is also possible that high-ranking ofﬁcials
who made their positions hereditary managed to convert their large personal

Land Ownership
333
grants of temple or palace land into permanent and eventually disposable
holdings (Crawford 1991: 46).
Small privately owned farms that resulted from the breakup of collectively
owned land were extremely vulnerable to ecological or economic crises and to
sickness in a family; hence they were easily lost as a consequence of indebted-
ness. This probably facilitated the development of large private estates, tracts
of which the owners either rented to tenant farmers or sharecropped with
them. In Akkadian times, such an estate might employ several hundred agri-
cultural workers and their families (R. McC. Adams 1966: 107). Although the
extent of privately owned land at any one period is uncertain and it developed
slowly, unsteadily, and in diverse ways out of collective forms of land owner-
ship, it increased over time and probably included most of the best orchards
and gardens.
To possess arable land was the primary goal of all Mesopotamians (Postgate
1992: 183). Collective or private ownership of land made an individual a citizen
(dumugi) and an integral member of a Mesopotamian city-state in a way that
was not open to those who were either landless or worked another’s land.
Declining collective ownership of land would have made individuals anxious to
acquire land in their own name as a way of retaining their status as landowners.
The goal of prosperous Mesopotamian individuals, such as traders, appears to
have been to invest in enough farm land and urban property that they and their
families could live on the revenues derived from renting and sharecropping
(Maisels 1990: 228; Oppenheim 1969: 11). To be supported in this manner
was to imitate the life of the gods.
Yet, as the amount of institutional and privately owned land increased,
the number of people who possessed land constantly declined, and the eco-
nomic and social gap widened between those who owned land and those who
merely worked it. Palace and temple estates emerged as the richest institu-
tional landowners, but considerable amounts of land were either collectively
or privately owned at any period. Wealthy ofﬁcials probably invested much of
their surplus income in land. At the same time, the direct transfer of some
land from collective to private ownership limited the power of temple hierar-
chies and kings and thus helped to maintain the broad, heterarchical nature
of political power in southern Mesopotamia.
It is less certain that private land existed in Old Kingdom Egypt. Christopher
Eyre (1987a: 33) maintains that there is no evidence that a clear distinction
was drawn between privately owned land and ofﬁce land, which implies that
there was no concept of privately owned land. Barry Kemp (1983: 81) asserts
that private ownership of land is well documented for the Old Kingdom. Texts
of this period refer speciﬁcally to ﬁelds or estates that were inherited from

334
Economy
a parent (Malek and Forman 1986: 80–81). At least some of this land could
be alienated from its possessors’ heirs in a variety of ways, including using
it to endow personal funerary cults. Much of this land appears, however, to
have been bestowed on individuals by the king, and it is frequently difﬁcult or
impossible to distinguish between an outright gift and a bestowal that would
eventually have reverted to the king. It is especially difﬁcult to distinguish
privately owned land from ofﬁce land that was held by successive generations
of a family that performed the same or equivalent services for temples or the
state. Possessors of such land had powerful reasons for trying to make their
rights to it appear to be those of permanent ownership. Especially under weak
central administrations, efforts to do this would have created much ambiguity
about the legal status of many parcels of land. Even records of sale, which
became more common in later periods, do not resolve whether freeholds or
use rights were being transferred from one individual to another (Robins 1993:
136). It is also impossible, for lack of evidence, to know whether private land
was being created through the sale to individuals of collectively owned land.
Nevertheless, it does seem as if something closely resembling private land was
already being transferred by sale in the Old Kingdom (Malek and Forman
1986: 82).
Revenues from these different categories of land circulated in highly com-
plex ways. For example, the mortuary cult of a high ofﬁcial might have received
food supplies from royal estates or from a plot of land specially set aside for
this cult by the king. It might also have received endowments from a private
funerary estate established by the deceased or through the endowed purchase
of reversions, or reuse, of food offerings from nearby royal funerary cults,
temples, or more lavishly endowed tombs. This income would have supported
low-ranking ofﬁcials who, among their other duties, would have made regular
food offerings at the dead person’s tomb (Kemp 1983: 85–107).
land ownership and political and
economic variation
Land owned collectively either by patrilineal descent groups or by endogamous
communities played a major role in food production among the Yoruba, in the
Valley of Mexico, and in highland Peru. In Mesopotamia there is circumstantial
evidence that collective ownership had been important at an early period,
but by the time the ﬁrst detailed records appear land was being sold by the
collective agreement of extended families to the king and possibly to other
individuals, as well as being donated to temples. In Egypt collective village

Land Ownership
335
ownership of land, which antedated the development of royal estates, may
have continued into later times. In Shang and Western Zhou China agricultural
land may have belonged either collectively to the patrilineages that worked it
or institutionally to ofﬁcials who were able to assign the surplus production of
such land to themselves and their supporters and retainers. In the Valley of
Mexico and Peru, land was owned collectively by endogamous groups, among
the Yoruba, the Mesopotamians, and perhaps the Shang and Western Zhou
Chinese by patrilineal extended families, and in ancient Egypt by communities.
InstitutionallyownedagriculturallandwasimportantintheValleyofMexico,
highland Peru, Mesopotamia, and Egypt. Among the Yoruba it appears to have
been limited to ﬁelds belonging to the ofﬁce of kingship. In Mesopotamia it
was divided between the palace and various temples, and the rivalry between
them helped to preserve the heterarchy of this society. In the Valley of Mexico
institutional land was shared by the king and the hereditary nobles, but the
king’s control of palace lands enabled him to subsidize the entire nobility and
thus promoted political centralization. Inka royal estates, state farms, and gifts
of land produced income for the king, his close relatives, high ofﬁcials, royal
descent groups, and the army. In Egypt the government developed unused or
underused land as estates that could be assigned to support various institutions,
government ofﬁcials, andother privilegedindividuals.In Chinaat least theking
possessed ofﬁce land that was worked by corv´ee and by landless labourers
who were bound to royal service. Local and regional ofﬁcials expanded their
incomemainlybyincreasingthenumberofcultivatorswhosecommunallabour
produced food surpluses that were at their disposal.
Thus in many early civilizations the upper classes derived revenues from
lands set aside to provision rulers, temples, leading families, and ofﬁcials. A
considerably higher percentage of the food produced on this land went to its
beneﬁciaries than was collected in taxes on equivalent amounts of collectively
or privately owned land. The Inka was not the only early civilization to use
corv´ee labour to produce food for the state and its designated beneﬁciaries
on institutionally owned land. Such labour was also employed in the Valley of
Mexico and probably in China, and these states, together with ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia, also attempted to increase the share of the crops that went
to state institutions and the upper classes by creating special forms of labourers
who were required to work some institutional land on a full-time basis. The
Inka differed from other early civilizations only in the extent to which taxes
were collected in the form of labour.
There is no evidence of private ownership of land among the Yoruba, Inka,
Shang Chinese, and the peoples of the Valley of Mexico. Individual Yoruba
who commanded extra human labour were able to develop large farms on

336
Economy
patrilineally owned land that provided them with the resources required to
promote their political careers. In Mesopotamia, privately owned land ap-
pears to have grown increasingly common as the collective ownership of land
declined. Old Kingdom Egypt displayed a complex mixture of collectively, in-
stitutionally, and (probably) privately owned land, its most striking difference
from Mesopotamia being that most institutional land was ultimately controlled
by the king or by the state. Royal control of institutional land appears to be a
general characteristic of territorial states.
A ﬁnal question is whether there was a developmental sequence from col-
lective to institutional to private ownership of land. There is some evidence
that might be interpreted as supporting this claim. In Mesopotamia it appears
that collective land gradually was transformed into institutional and privately
owned land, and in Egypt a similar development may have occurred. In China,
over a much longer period than we are considering, collective and most in-
stitutional land was transformed into privately owned land, although rights
to private property were never guaranteed in China to the same extent that
they were in countries that adopted Roman law (Ke 1989; Shen 1994). In the
Valley of Mexico institutional land existed alongside collectively owned land
and tended to expand as hegemonic states exploited their weaker neighbours.
The Inka kingdom appears to have been energetically creating institutional
land in a region dominated by collectively owned land in order to increase
the amount of food available for government projects and the wealth at the
disposal of the upper classes. In contrast, the Yoruba had experienced only
very limited development of institutional land.
Increasing proportions of institutional and privately owned land might be
used to arrange these civilizations in a hypothetical evolutionary hierarchy.
The replacement of collectively owned land by increasing proportions of in-
stitutional and privately owned land is correlated with compelling farmers
and farm labourers to produce and surrender increasing amounts of surplus
food. While the state and the upper classes were able to appropriate crop sur-
pluses for their own use from farmers who cultivated land that they owned
collectively, the amount was limited compared with what could be extracted
from landless farmers who cultivated institutional and private land as bound
labourers, sharecroppers, or tenant farmers.
Yet care must be exercised in advocating such an interpretation. The long-
term survival of collective and institutional ownership of land in all early civ-
ilizations and the relatively limited development of private ownership in all
but one early civilization suggest that all three forms of land ownership were
compatible with early civilizations as a general type of society. All of them sup-
plied the food surpluses that were necessary to support the upper classes and

Land Ownership
337
those specialized workers who supplied the upper classes’ particular wants.
It is also clear that speciﬁc combinations of land ownership corresponded
functionally with more general political and economic variations among early
civilizations. In Mesopotamia heterarchical power encouraged the develop-
ment of rival landowning institutions; in Egypt, the Valley of Mexico, and Peru
the development of institutional land ownership was one device among many
for reinforcing royal authority. In territorial states, the king or government
claimed paramount control over institutional land. Finally, among the Yoruba,
where arable land was relatively abundant, wealthy and powerful individuals
used slaves and debtors to work large portions of communal land and kept all
the surplus production for themselves. This arrangement increased the crop
surpluses being accumulated by members of the upper classes as institutional
or private ownership of land did elsewhere. In dealing with land ownership,
we are considering an aspect of social organization in which historical partic-
ularities played a signiﬁcant role alongside a limited range of strategies that
were deployed by the upper classes to encourage the production of larger crop
surpluses and ensure their appropriation of them. These strategies must have
been devised independently as each early civilization developed.

16 Trade and Craft Specialization
E
volutionary archaeologists used to believe that increasing social com-
plexity and intellectual progress resulted primarily from the devel-
opment of more complex technology, in particular increasing dependence
on metallurgy. This view rested on the assumption that in early civilizations
metal was used primarily to manufacture cutting tools. Yet it has long been
recognized that the development of metallurgy was not as crucial to the
evolution of various early civilizations as this view suggested (Childe 1951:
26–27).
The Yoruba were the only civilization in our sample that forged iron on
a large scale. It is generally believed that, because of its greater technical
complexity, iron forging began much later than the working of gold, silver, and
copper. It has also been assumed that knowledge of how to work iron spread
to Africa from the Middle East during the ﬁrst millennium b.c. Nevertheless,
radiocarbon dates which indicate that iron-working was well established as
early as 700 b.c. in Uganda and West Africa and may have been practised
there in the preceding millennium raise the possibility of the independent
invention of iron-working in sub-Saharan Africa. The use of iron appears to
have reached southern Nigeria early in the Christian era (Connah 1987: 113,
141; Holl 2000: 14–15; Shaw 1978: 69–99). Raw materials needed to make
iron, in the form of laterites and iron-rich shale soils, were abundant in Yoruba
territory, although they were more common in the north than in the south (Ojo
1966a: 96–98; Peel 1983: 22–23). Beginning in the sixteenth century a.d., iron
as well as brass ingots were purchased from European traders operating along
the Gulf of Guinea. Because of the abundance of locally produced iron, Yoruba
wereabletomanufactureheavyagriculturalimplements,tools,ornaments,and
ritual objects from this metal. According to archaeological evidence from Ife,
they also beat or cast ornaments and ritual objects from gold and copper or
copper alloys (mainly brass) beginning around a.d. 1000. Casting was done
338

Trade and Craft Specialization
339
using the lost-wax method (Connah 1975; Dark 1973; Forman, Forman, and
Dark 1960; Shaw 1978; Willett 1967).
In southern Mesopotamia during the third millennium b.c., copper, silver,
lead, and gold were used to manufacture bowls, statues, ornaments, and jew-
ellery. Gold objects ﬁrst became abundant in the context of growing royal
power during the Early Dynastic III period (Huot 1989: 115). While arsenic-
copper and other alloys had been used still earlier, by Early Dynastic III times
bronze was being cast as well, using tin that came from Afghanistan and pos-
sibly also from Anatolia (Yoffee 1995: 298). Weapons such as spearheads and
daggers, as well as axes, adzes, and more specialized carpenters’ tools, were
also being manufactured from copper and bronze. Mesopotamian metalwork-
ers were skilled at using single and two-part moulds and the lost-wax casting
technique as well as at hammer-shaping metal. They also produced metal wire
and decorated metal objects with gold leaf, metal granules, and cloisonn´e.
During the third millennium b.c. an increasing number of agricultural tools
came to be made of copper and bronze. Christopher Edens (1992: 126) argues
that, by the end of the Akkadian period, copper had become an ‘industrial’ as
well as an ornamental metal. By Ur III times the standard bronze alloy con-
tained 17 percent tin, although different amounts of tin were being added to
copper for speciﬁc purposes (Crawford 1991: 131–37; Moorey 1985; Postgate
1992: 225–29).
The Inka created numerous luxury goods and religious objects from gold,
silver, copper alloys, and platinum, including jewellery, decorations for clothes,
metal cups and other tableware, and statues. Lead was used as a decorative
inlay. The alloying of copper and tin to make bronze had been invented in
Bolivia about a.d. 700 (Kendall 1973: 167). Metals were mined or panned from
rivers and smelted using crude but effective and quickly learned techniques
(Franklin 1990: 114–15). Many mines occurred in the southern, sparsely set-
tled part of the Inka kingdom, in modern Bolivia and Chile. Rivers in Ecuador
produced platinum that was mixed with gold dust to reduce its high melting
point. Skilled Inka craft workers were familiar with many techniques for work-
ing metal but generally hammered gold and silver objects from sheet metal and
cast bronze ones (Rowe 1944: 246–48). They knew how to gild and plate metal
but preferred to create alloys and then treat their surfaces in ways that would
increase the abundance of the more highly valued metal. Inka weavers like-
wise preferred to weave complicated multicoloured designs into cloth rather
than to decorate it by embroidery or dyeing, and Heather Lechtman (1993)
argues that the two Andean crafts exhibited a unique approach to technology.
The Inka also manufactured numerous weapons, especially battleaxes, from
bronze, as well as crowbars, chisels, knives, and other implements for working

340
Economy
soft stone and wood that were made available to workmen engaged in state
enterprises. Some foot ploughs were provided with bronze blades, but this
treatment was probably limited to ceremonial implements. Other tools were
made of stone, bone, and wood (Rowe 1944: 247–48).
The ancient Egyptians worked gold, silver, copper, and electrum, a natu-
rally occurring mixture of gold and silver. Bronze remained virtually unknown
during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. Jewellery, vessels, and statues were
usually made by beating sheets of metal into shape, although some statues
were made of carved wood covered with gold foil and small ones might be
cast. Weapons such as daggers were regularly cast from copper (Andreu 1997:
68–69), but as late as the Middle Kingdom government forces were supplied
with spears and arrows tipped with expertly worked ﬂint points (Vila 1970).
Whereas carpenters and sculptors who worked for the government were pro-
vided with copper tools, in the remains of Kahun, the town attached to the
funerary complex of the Middle Kingdom ruler Senwosret II, surviving ﬂint
tools outnumbered metal ones (David 1986: 93). Granite and much limestone
were worked using naturally occurring nodules of diorite (a much harder stone)
as hammers. Agricultural tools were generally manufactured from stone and
wood.
The Shang Chinese were superb metalworkers and had easy access to copper
and tin. They cast ritual vessels by pouring bronze into multisectional moulds,
which allowed them to produce extremely complex shapes. The purpose of
sectional moulds does not seem to have been to turn out multiple copies
of the same vessel, since no two vessels appear to have been precisely the
same. Lead was sometimes added to the bronze alloy to alter its colour and
ﬂuidity. Shang metallurgists also manufactured bronze buckles, bells, other
musical instruments, weapons, and ﬁttings and ornaments for chariots and
horse harnesses. The surface of the metal was often extensively worked after
casting and sometimes inlaid with gold and silver (Chˆeng 1960: 156–76). Metal
was not commonly used, however, to make jewellery. The Chinese preferred to
wear smooth, cool stones, such as jade, believing that they promoted calmness;
because of its association with ﬁre, direct contact with metal was considered
disturbing (Franklin 1983: 95; Franklin, Berthong, and Chan 1985). Few if
any bronze tools and no metal agricultural implements have been identiﬁed,
although moulds for making bronze hoes and picks appear to have been found
in one workshop at Zhengzhou. Royal artisans manufactured more arrowheads
from bone than from metal (Keightley 1969: 40, 92). This pattern of metal use
continued during the Western Zhou period. Iron – cast rather than forged –
was used extensively only in late Zhou times, and only then did metal farming
implements and household tools become common.

Trade and Craft Specialization
341
Craft workers in the Valley of Mexico worked gold, silver, and copper by
hammering, open-mould casting, and lost-wax casting. They used these metals
principally to make jewellery, including small bells that were sewn onto clothes.
Copper was frequently combined with gold to produce an alloy called tumbaga
or covered with gold leaf. While they also manufactured some drills, chisels,
awls, axes, sewing needles, and ﬁshhooks from copper, the vast majority of their
tools and weapons were made of wood and bone edged with obsidian blades.
A large obsidian-edged sword (maquahuitl) could cut a human body in two
(M. E. Smith 1996: 171). Some small bronze tools were reaching the Valley of
Mexico from towns located adjacent to Tarascan territory, in western Mexico,
where a knowledge of bronze-working had been introduced from Peru about
a.d. 1200 (96–98). No one in the Valley of Mexico knew how to manufacture
bronze objects. Agricultural tools were not made of metal.
There is no evidence that the Classic Maya worked or had signiﬁcant access
to metal, although imported metal ﬁgurines are occasionally found in ritual
caches (Baudez 1994: 59; Schele and Freidel 1990: 434). That they erected
impressive stone buildings and carved magniﬁcent limestone stelae employing
only stone and bone tools demonstrates that metal tools were not a prerequisite
for creating or sustaining an early civilization.
The evidence suggests that in early civilizations copper was used ﬁrst to man-
ufacture ornaments and ritual objects and only later to fashion weapons, craft
tools, and ﬁnally agricultural implements. Copper and bronze tended to be
used only to manufacture luxury goods, weapons, and craft workers’ tools until
abundant supplies of copper and tin became available with the development of
more efﬁcient mining and more cost-efﬁcient transportation. Iron is far more
prevalent in nature than either copper or tin, and once it was known how to
reﬁne iron ore it became possible to produce a wide range of tools. The eco-
nomic and social potentials of copper-bronze and iron technologies were there-
fore radically different (Heichelheim 1958). While substantial iron-working
developed considerably later than bronze-working in southwestern Asia and
China, in sub-Saharan Africa there is no evidence of a Bronze Age prior to an
Iron Age.
Early civilizations were associated with a wide range of cutting-tool tech-
nologies. There was no obvious correlation between the formal complexity
of these technologies and signiﬁcant measures of social complexity such as
population density or the division of labour, and therefore the development
of metallurgy cannot have been a key factor shaping the development of early
civilizations. Stone tools long continued to be used for agricultural and con-
struction work where specialized craft workers were being supplied with metal
tools. Finally, because obtaining stone to make cutting and hammering tools

342
Economy
sometimes presented the same logistical problems as did procuring metal or
metallic ores, the general impact of the use of metal on the division of labour
in early civilizations was not much different from that associated with the use
of stone. Stone tools persisted not as a result of cultural inertia but because so-
cieties were not convinced that it was worth making the various organizational
changes necessary to adopt a new technology.
What stimulated increased economic interdependence and political inte-
gration in early civilizations seems to have been the trade and craft special-
ization encouraged by the politically motivated demands of the upper classes
for prestige goods and by expanding markets for better-quality mass-produced
commodities as population densities increased.
trade
In early civilizations, most of the goods that people used in everyday life were
produced and sold locally. Long-distance trade differed from local trade in
scale and organization, and because rulers were concerned with its political
ramiﬁcations they related to it differently in city- and territorial states. In
most city-states the decentralized nature of political power encouraged the
development of intercity trade as an independent enterprise. Because city-
states were often at war with one another, major economic advantages were
also derived from conducting such trade at arm’s length from political authority.
In territorial states, government control of long-distance trade and of exotic
goods generally was an important source of power for rulers.
In Mesopotamia intercity trade and trade with more remote regions were
conducted by professional merchants. The merchants in each city-state be-
longed to one or more merchants’ associations (damgar). The head of the
merchant association (gal damgar) was either its highest-ranking member,
who had also been granted a palace title, or a palace ofﬁcial who acted as the
king’s chief liaison with the merchants. Traders received allotments of temple
land and were exempt from performing corv´ee labour (R. McC. Adams 1974a;
Leemans 1960b; Postgate 1992: 211; Silver 1986: 132–33).
It used to be believed that long-distance traders were originally employed
full-time by palaces or temples, which provided them with a ﬁxed income in
the form of an allotment of land. Polanyi (1957) argued that the economy
was so deeply embedded in the political organization of early civilizations that
what modern scholars wrongly imagined was ‘foreign trade’ was in reality gift
exchanges among the rulers of city-states, who did not seek to derive any
economic proﬁt from these exchanges. While few experts would now accept
this interpretation as accurate for the late third millennium, some argue that

Trade and Craft Specialization
343
this was probably the form that intercity exchanges took in Early Dynastic
times (Crawford 1991: 25; Foster 1981). The still later Ur III government
may have engaged in some long-distance sea trade, but even this is uncertain
(Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 160–63; Postgate 1992: 220–21).
The earliest available evidence indicates that, already by the Early Dynastic
period, intercity and interregional trade was being carried on for proﬁt and
that merchants acted as independent agents. By the Old Babylonian period
merchants were establishing joint-stock companies (naruqqu, ‘sacks’) in which
a number of merchants invested capital for a ﬁxed period, speciﬁed a division
of proﬁts and losses, and appointed a particular merchant to conduct the trade
(Silver 1986: 88; Van De Mieroop 1999: 197–202). Merchants traded goods
owned by temples, kings, wealthy landowners, and kin groups on a commission
basis and bought and sold goods on their own account. An important export
from Mesopotamian cities was food staples such as grain and dates. A temple
in Lagash arranged to have a merchant transport over thirteen thousand ﬁsh
caught by its workers to Nippur and sell them there (R. McC. Adams 1974a:
248). Merchants also traded wool, cloth, and other Mesopotamian manufac-
tures with far-off regions in return for metals, wood, semiprecious stones, and
other raw materials. In pre-Akkadian times foreign trade was mainly conducted
to secure raw materials for making luxury goods, but with the growing use of
copper agricultural tools foreign trade also became essential for food produc-
tion (Edens 1992: 126–32). Only small amounts of manufactured goods were
imported from abroad.
Mesopotamian merchants established trading posts near foreign towns in
what is now Turkey and perhaps also in Iran and around the Persian Gulf.
There resident Mesopotamian merchants could trade with the local people
on a regular basis while their subordinates managed the transport of goods.
Long-distance merchants also cultivated good relations with merchants in
other Mesopotamian city-states. Intercity trade was important for securing
goodsfromabroad,sincespeciﬁcrawmaterialsenteredsouthernMesopotamia
from different directions and hence came ﬁrst to different city-states (R. McC.
Adams 1974a: 246–47; Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 157; Van De Mieroop 1999:
185–93). Intercity trade also facilitated more specialized production in indi-
vidual city-states. Isin, for example, was a major centre of leather production,
while Lagash became a centre for the slave trade (Crawford 1991: 124–25).
Hegemonic Mesopotamian cities used their political power to ensure that their
own merchants could trade with foreign regions, unhampered by intervening
city-states.
Merchants belonging to different Mesopotamian city-states developed com-
plex commercial relations with each other. Instead of paying for all goods as

344
Economy
they were received, they built up credit and incurred debts with each other.
A merchant living in Ur could have what he owed to a merchant in Lagash
paid by a third merchant in Nippur who was indebted to him. The success-
ful operation of such a credit system required elaborate record-keeping, in-
cluding detailed contracts and receipts. Given the lack of a single unit of
account, it also required complex accounting techniques. No less important
was the need for mutual trust among trading partners; it was essential that
their good relations survive even wars between their respective city-states
(Larsen 1976; Leemans 1950; 1954; 1960a; 1960b; Snell 1982; Van De Mieroop
1999: 212).
It is also clear that a proﬁt motive was active in long-distance trade. A
Mesopotamian merchant could sell cloth he had purchased in his home town
for several times its original value in Turkey and buy silver there that he could
sell back home for three times what he had paid for it (R. McC. Adams 1974a:
246). Such increases in value more than covered the cost of transporting goods
by river, sea, or donkey. Grain prices also ﬂuctuated according to scarcity,
both on a seasonal basis and depending on the size of the annual harvest. Ef-
forts by governments to control rising prices by decreeing maximum amounts
that could be charged for goods were only partly successful (Silver 1986:
78–79).
No obvious market-places have been identiﬁed in Mesopotamian cities.
Commercialtransactionsappeartohavetakenplacenearthecitygates,insmall
shops, and along a ‘street of purchases’. The city of Sippar had a square (ribitu)
wheretaverns,whichfunctionedasmalesocialclubs,andshopsthatsoldluxury
goods were located (R. Harris 1975: 17; Postgate 1992: 79, 192–93). Specialists
mayhaveproducedgoodsinorneartheirhomesandsoldthemtheretofarmers
and other craft workers. Merchants also may have sold imported goods from
their houses, although they no doubt delivered bulk consignments directly to
temples, palaces, and the homes of rich clients.
In the Valley of Mexico and adjacent parts of central Mexico, long-distance
traders (pochteca) were excusively male, although female members of their
families invested in trading expeditions and looked after their husbands’ busi-
nesses while these men were abroad trading. The pochteca in each major
city-state were organized into one or more traders’ associations, each of which
was also a calpolli. Membership in such a calpolli was hereditary, although
individuals could join it by adoption. Male pochteca were stratiﬁed by age
and wealth. Each pochteca group had its own school (telpochcalli), where its
young men learned to bear arms so that they could defend themselves while
travelling abroad. The pochteca did not, however, serve in the army. Instead
they risked their lives travelling into foreign and even hostile regions to trade

Trade and Craft Specialization
345
for exotic goods (M. E. Smith 1996: 120–23). Some boys from trader families
attended nobles’ schools (calmecacs), where they learned to keep accounts
(van Zantwijk 1985: 144).
Pochteca were highly rivalrous among themselves. Individual traders sought
eminence by investing some of the proﬁts they derived from successful long-
distance trade in lavish, competitive feasting of other pochteca. Once a year all
the traders displayed their wealth at their calpolli temple and each boasted of
his accomplishments, resourcefulness, and bravery. The long-distance traders
also taunted local market traders for their lack of courage and initiative
(Clendinnen 1991: 138–39). Yet they attributed their success to their plain liv-
ing, hard work, solidarity among themselves, generosity to other long-distance
traders, and respect for foreign trading partners (van Zantwijk 1985: 171).
Each pochteca calpolli had two headmen (pochtecatlatoque) who repre-
sented their fellow traders in dealings with the king (van Zantwijk 1985: 143).
Only medium-sized and large cities had resident groups of pochteca, and the
largest cities often had several. There were twelve cities with resident pochteca
in the Valley of Mexico, but the traders from only ﬁve of these cities, includ-
ing Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, were permitted to trade beyond the tributary
system of the Triple Alliance. Pochteca from different regions traded with one
another over the whole of central Mexico and when travelling would stay at
each other’s homes. Farther south, where there were no traders’ associations,
they exchanged goods with rulers and their representatives (Townsend 1992:
190). Goods were transported by human bearers (tlameme), who were usually
free but landless men from outside the valley.
Long-distance traders usually travelled in groups and were armed to defend
themselves. Because of the many uncertainties and dangers they encountered,
trading expeditions were the foci of numerous religious observances. Divina-
tion was practised before leaving to ascertain unsuspected dangers and the
chances of success. Merchants did not wash their bodies until they returned
to their homes, arriving at night to conceal the quantity of goods they had pur-
chased abroad. They celebrated each successful trading expedition by hosting
a communal feast but only after having visited their calpolli temple to thank
their patron deity for their safe return (van Zantwijk 1985: 158–60).
Pochteca did business abroad for kings and nobles on a commission basis
but also exchanged wares with local market traders over a large area. They
brought into the Valley of Mexico exotic raw materials that artisans needed.
For the elites of Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, their most important task was
to obtain exotic luxury goods from outside the tributary network that their
states controlled, especially quetzal feathers. In city-states that did not have
access to tribute, rulers and commoners alike depended wholly on pochteca

346
Economy
to supply foods and raw materials from warmer ecological zones and luxury
products from distant cities. Trading practices among long-distance merchants
were simpler and more direct than in Mesopotamia because record-keeping, if
employed at all, must have been limited to recording ideographically the type,
number, origin, and destination of goods. Merchants had to commit details of
contracts to their memories.
Cities in the Valley of Mexico had large central markets (tianquiztli). Those
in the main urban centres (Tenochtitlan, Tlatelolco, and Texcoco) met daily,
with a larger assembly occurring every ﬁve days. The Spanish estimated that
forty thousand to ﬁfty thousand people attended the Tlatelolco market on
peak days. In the various quarters of large cities and in smaller cities and
settlements, markets usually met every ﬁve days, with a larger and more varied
market being held every twenty days. The biggest market-place in any city was
located near its centre, close to the main temples and the royal palace, and
was usually surrounded by a wall that was colonnaded on the inside. Market
days were arranged so that neighbouring markets did not coincide, giving both
buyers and sellers an opportunity to do business at a number of them. This
arrangement also gave local traders a chance to transport goods from larger
markets to smaller ones (Hassig 1985: 73–84). It has been argued that the
Aztec and Texcocan rulers altered the locations and operation of markets to
reduce the wealth and power of subordinate rulers and increase the size of
the main market in their own capitals. If so, such actions reinforced changes
in marketing patterns that were already being brought about by the collection
of large amounts of tribute by these two cities and by their increasing wealth
and population (Berdan et al. 1996).
At urban markets, buyers exchanged mainly maize and cloth for more per-
ishable foodstuffs, beverages, raw materials such as wood, hides, and salt,
goods manufactured locally or in nearby parts of the Valley of Mexico, and
exotic raw materials and manufactured items imported from more remote ar-
eas by the pochteca. Female traders played an active role in the operation
of local markets, where they sold food and manufactured goods produced by
their male relatives or purchased wholesale from long-distance traders (van
Zantwijk 1985: 131–32).
Some markets were noted for particular specialties: Alcolman for dogs, Az-
catpotzalco for slaves and birds (which were valued for their feathers), and
Texcoco for clothes, pottery, and painted gourds (Hassig 1985: 73). Markets
were also frequented by barbers, porters, craft workers, and prostitutes seek-
ing customers. Kings and nobles, through their agents or ofﬁcials, used the
markets to exchange the large amounts of food and cloth they received as trib-
ute and from their estates for any items they needed or wanted. It was illegal

Trade and Craft Specialization
347
for individuals to buy or sell goods elsewhere than at a public market, where
the state imposed a tax on all transactions (Townsend 1992: 173).
Different sections of markets were reserved for particular categories of
goods. This arrangement made it easy for buyers to compare what was being
offered for sale. While Aztec sumptuary laws determined who could publicly
wear or display certain products, every kind of goods could be sold at public
markets. The markets were patrolled by ofﬁcers and presided over by judges
who maintained order, settled disputes, and punished theft and fraud. At the
great market at Tlatelolco these powers were delegated to the city’s pochteca
(Hassig 1985: 67).
Yoruba itinerant or long-distance traders (alajapa) were less formally consti-
tuted than were the pochteca. Long-distance traders came from many different
classes. They included the wives and sons of kings who were seeking to acquire
wealth from trade because royal children could not hope to inherit much from
their fathers. Royal traders’ goods were free from transport and sales taxes,
and they could expect to be provided with free lodgings and food wherever
they travelled. Yet anyone was free to become a long-distance trader, the main
prerequisite being the ability to amass enough capital to get started. Women
played a major role in Yoruba trade at both the intercity and the local level.
Because they were not as likely to be attacked by soldiers, it was less dangerous
for women than for men to engage in intercity trading during wartime. Thus
women could ensure that essential commodities continued to circulate among
states. Capital to begin trading was often provided by a woman’s husband
(Bascom 1969: 65). Slave trading and trading beyond Yoruba ethnic territories
tended to be done by men, some of whom were organized in special associa-
tions (Law 1977: 210).
To travel more safely through dangerous regions, merchants formed cara-
vans and hired soldiers to protect them. They bought slaves or engaged porters
to carry their goods or carried them themselves. Each trader could join or leave
a caravan at any point along the way. While many traders, especially female
ones, travelled relatively short distances, a single caravan might journey from
the Guinea coast as far north as the Nupe and Hausa markets, transporting
slaves, horses, and natural produce from one region to another. The circula-
tion of manufactured goods encouraged specialization in weaving and dyeing,
pottery manufacture, and gold and silver working in Yoruba cities or regions
(Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 46). By transporting goods from one place to an-
other, traders could increase the value of these goods by up to ﬁvefold (Falola
1991). Long-distance traders bought and sold goods not at urban markets but
through local brokers (alarobo), and this allowed them to handle goods in bulk
quantities. Foreign merchants sometimes were explicitly forbidden to trade

348
Economy
at local markets. Government ofﬁcials, associations of local merchants, and
commercial brokers provided lodging and storage facilities for traders from
other towns (Falola 1991: 131).
Yoruba cities normally had several markets (oja). The main market was
located in the centre of the community, usually in front of the royal palace. It
was referred to as the oja oba (king’s market), and it normally met twice daily
or every second day. Smaller markets, each controlled by a local ofﬁcial called a
bale oloja, met in various wards of a city and in smaller communities every eight
or sixteen days. In general, local products predominated at neighbourhood
markets, while both local and imported goods were traded at the central urban
markets and at other major ones that developed along important trade routes,
especially near the borders of states and at transition points between ecological
zones. The establishment of a new market had to be approved by the local king
(Bascom 1969: 25–26; Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 19–96).
Much food, both raw and cooked, was sold at Yoruba markets. Because of
the remoteness of many farms from urban centres and the problems involved
in storing most Yoruba agricultural produce for long periods, it was probably
expedient for families to sell much of their farm produce in bulk through the
markets and to buy fresh food as they needed it (Krapf-Askari 1969: 155).
While most of this food was sold by women, a woman normally turned the
proﬁt over to her husband on the ground that he had grown it (Bascom 1969:
25). Because of the long time and the large amount of fuel required to cook
many types of Yoruba food, even poor people found it more economical to buy
such food already cooked (Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 103). Local market women
bought goods at main markets in order to resell them at smaller community
markets and kept these proﬁts for themselves.
Markets were policed by the local traders’ association. The woman who
headed this association often had the palace title iya oja (market mother)
and served as the chief palace liaison with all the craft associations in the
city (Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 55). Minimum sale prices were established
each market day among the sellers, but how much each item actually sold for
was determined by haggling. Food and other goods were sold by number or
container size rather than by weight.
The king of Benin, unlike neighbouring Yoruba rulers, controlled his peo-
ple’s trade with Europeans at the seaport of Ughoto (Gwatto). He claimed a
monopoly there over all trade in slaves, ivory, palm kernels, and pepper. Ofﬁ-
cials and commoners could trade other goods with Europeans but only after
senior palace ofﬁcials had ﬁnished conducting the king’s business (Bradbury
1957: 25).
The Maya rulers and nobles of historical times controlled interstate trade
(Coe 1993: 170), and it may be signiﬁcant that ‘God L’, who was associated with

Trade and Craft Specialization
349
the western Maya region in Classic Maya times, is iconographically identiﬁed
as a merchant of royal status (Taube 1992: 79–88). Archaeologists have failed
to identify market-places in Classic Maya urban centres. If considerable food
was being grown around house clusters in urban centres as well as elsewhere,
there may have been less stimulus for exchange between the urban nobility
and craft specialists, on the one hand, and farmers, on the other, than there
later was in highland Mexico. This, combined with the more dispersed dis-
tribution of Maya urban centres, might have encouraged classic Maya rulers
to control interstate trade (Schele and Freidel 1990: 93). Trading networks
were able to distribute substantial quantities of obsidian originating in Central
America throughout the Maya lowlands, where it was transformed into blades
that reached farmers as well as the urban elite (Sidrys 1979). This broad distri-
bution of imported raw materials differs from distribution patterns in territorial
states.
Among the Mesopotamians, the people living in the Valley of Mexico, and
the Yoruba, long-distance traders derived substantial proﬁts from transporting
various types of goods from regions where they were abundant and relatively
cheap to places where they were scarcer or did not naturally occur. In the
Valley of Mexico, pochteca were able to exchange the surplus food and cloth
thattheupperclassesderivedfromtheirlands,taxes,andtributeforrare,exotic
items that these people highly prized. They also acted as spies and agents for
their king, observing political and economic conditions in the various states
they visited both within and beyond the Triple Alliance’s tributary system. In
return, the Aztec king undertook to avenge traders from his own state who
were killed or molested by foreigners; attacks on pochteca travelling abroad
provided him with a good excuse to declare war on hostile or uncooperative
states. Pochteca also were exempt from corv´ee labour (Berdan 1982: 31).
Yet relations between merchants and other Aztec males were characterized
by antagonism. The Aztec believed that social mobility or conﬁrmation of high
status was legitimate only as a reward for outstanding military service. The
proﬁts merchants derived from peaceful, long-distance trade, usually with real
or potential enemies, were stigmatized as ignoble. Whereas individual warriors
proclaimed their high status publicly and proudly, however rich a merchant
became and however close his semiclandestine dealings with the palace and the
king, he was required to appear in public as a simple commoner, barefoot and
dressed in maguey-ﬁbre clothes. Merchants who ﬂagrantly disregarded this
regulation risked conﬁscation of their property or execution (Clendinnen 1991:
136; Soustelle 1961: 64). Merchants were also forbidden to hold public ofﬁce
or marry into the noble class. Successful merchants sought to acquire public
prestige by ritually sacriﬁcing foreign slaves they had purchased. Sponsoring
such a sacriﬁce was necessary to become a slave trader or the head of a pochteca

350
Economy
calpolli. Yet a long-distance trader could carry out this sacriﬁce only if he could
secure the cooperation of a high-ranking warrior, and this required feasting and
giving many costly presents to the warrior and his friends (Clendinnen 1991:
136–40; van Zantwijk 1985: 148). Thus even this ceremony dramatized the
social and political superiority of warriors over traders. Despite their wealth,
the pochteca were effectively deprived of an autonomous public role in Aztec
political and community life.
In Mesopotamia there is evidence of an analogous though much less marked
prejudice against merchants. Long-distance traders had close relations with
temple administrators and palace staffs, but they worked and may have lived
in walled-off ‘harbour’ (karj; Akk. karum) areas located along the outer walls
of cities rather than inside the city proper. These ‘harbours’ were centres of
foreign trade, where visiting merchants from other city-states and foreign lands
were lodged. They had separate legal status and their own courts and enjoyed
a degree of administrative independence under an ‘innkeeper of the harbour’
who looked after and may have been held responsible for the behaviour of
foreign traders. As in the Valley of Mexico, the close contacts that long-distance
traders had with merchants in other, often hostile, communities rendered them
suspect among their own people. Mesopotamian merchants invested their
proﬁts in land and houses, and when they could live comfortably from such
investments and lending their surplus wealth they seem to have abandoned
trade and moved into the city (Oppenheim 1969: 6, 11).
Among the Yoruba no stigma appears to have been attached to being a trader.
Traders included the wives and sons of reigning kings. In towns where there
were no merchants’ associations, local notables frequently acted as brokers and
landlords for long-distance traders. Successful traders, no less than success-
ful military leaders, were able to invest their proﬁts in slaves and develop an
agricultural base for supporting retainers. Yet a large number of long-distance
traderswerewomen,andmaletraderscamefromabroadsocialspectrum.Suc-
cessful trading appears to have been a less certain way to seek political power
and obtain titles than was military prowess. Thus the social situation of Yoruba
traders may not have been so different from that of traders in Mesopotamia
and the Valley of Mexico.
If interstate trade among the Maya was directly controlled by the upper
classes, their arrangements were signiﬁcantly different from those found in
other city-state systems. Benin demonstrates, however, that direct control of
some aspects of trade by rulers occurred in other city-states.
Territorial states appear to have replaced long-distance commercial trade
with the controlled acquisition of key resources by the central government. In
these states monopolistic control of exotic raw materials and of the production

Trade and Craft Specialization
351
and distribution of coveted luxury goods were important for reinforcing gov-
ernment authority.
In Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, foreign trade was carried on by the
government. Large government ships were sent to Byblos, in what is now
Lebanon, to purchase commodities such as silver, which, because it had to be
imported, was worth more than gold in Egypt. They also obtained at Byblos
lapis lazuli from Afghanistan and local Lebanese cedar wood and tree resins.
Olive oil was imported overland from Canaan. In the Old Kingdom, Egyptian
ofﬁcials led donkey caravans south into the Sudan to obtain ivory, ebony, gold,
and animal skins from local rulers, while ships sailed south along the Red Sea to
Punt, in the Horn of Africa, to trade for myrrh for religious rituals and embalm-
ing and many other African products. Cattle may have been purchased from
the Libyans. While the state paid for the goods it obtained from neighbour-
ing peoples, all exchanges were subject to the threat that the more powerful
Egyptians might attack these peoples if they did not cooperate. The govern-
ment also sent expeditions to quarry various kinds of stone and to mine gold,
electrum, and copper in the eastern and western deserts adjacent to Egypt
and Lower Nubia and copper and turquoise in the Sinai Peninsula. In the
Middle Kingdom, Nubian traders coming from the south were compelled to
unload their cargoes and exchange them with ofﬁcials at border fortiﬁcations
near the Second Cataract. Asian merchants appear to have brought goods to
Egypt, but they too had to pass border control points and trade with Egyptian
ofﬁcials. Only later, in the New Kingdom, do Asian traders appear to have done
business with Egyptians who were not government ofﬁcials (Frankfort 1956:
118–19; Kemp 1989: 172–78).
When the central government collapsed at the end of the Old Kingdom, the
privileged classes lamented their inability to obtain the cedar wood needed
to manufacture cofﬁns to bury their dead properly (Lichtheim 1973: 152).
Control of materials that were valued because they were used to manufac-
ture luxury goods and perform rituals was a source of power for rulers. By
monopolizing foreign trade and the procurement of exotic raw materials, the
government was able to restrict access to these materials to artisans in its own
employ.
Internal trade was limited to everyday objects that part-time craft workers
made from local materials. Such trade occurred in villages, small towns, and
provincial capitals. Markets (mryt) appear to have been small, informal assem-
blies at quaysides that were of little concern to the government except perhaps
as a minor source of tax revenue. In depictions of Old Kingdom markets, the
traders were mostly men (Kemp 1989: 255), but in the New Kingdom female
traders were frequently shown. The main items that were traded appear to

352
Economy
have been cooked food, drinks, vegetables, fruit, ﬁsh, and household goods
such as mats, baskets, and pottery (Eyre 1987a: 31–32). Some low-value goods
from settlements bordering the Nile Valley may also have been sold at these
markets. Natron, which was mixed with water for daily ablutions and used
to embalm the dead, was brought into the Nile Valley from nearby oases at
least partly by ordinary farmers who were also entrepreneurs (Lichtheim 1973:
170). In the New Kingdom traders (ˇswty) travelled along the Nile exchanging
agricultural products for other goods needed by temples and private persons.
They appear to have worked for temples or for one or more individuals, but
it is not clear whether they were paid employees, operated on a commission
basis, or kept a share of the proﬁts. They were neither wealthy nor high-status
persons, and some may have been slaves (Kemp 1989: 257–59). There is no
evidence that such traders had existed before.
The Inka rulers reluctantly allowed entrepreneurs to continue trading be-
yond the borders of their kingdom, especially to the north (Salomon 1986;
1987). Some of this trading involved voyages on large balsa rafts northward
along the Paciﬁc coast. These traders obtained goods that were not available
within the Inka kingdom, such as spondylus shells, which played an important
role in religious rituals (Gose 1993), and they provided the Inka rulers with
intelligence that helped them to expand the kingdom. One of the main places
where these long-distance traders interacted with the government was the
northernmost Inka administrative centre of Quito. Llama herders continued
to trade produce in the course of their travels between the southern highlands
and the coast as they had done in pre-Inka times (van Buren 1996), but in gen-
eral the government appears to have discouraged interregional trade within
the Inka kingdom. Inka ofﬁcials monitored the transport of luxury goods from
one region to another at provincial administrative centres, ofﬁcial rest stops,
and bridges. The movement of people and goods into and out of the Cuzco
district was carefully controlled. Individuals had to have ofﬁcial authorization
to travel from one province to another. All gold that was mined had to be sent
to Cuzco, and removing gold objects from the city without ofﬁcial permission
was a capital offence (von Hagen 1959: 148). Interregional trade was further
discouraged by satisfying the traditional desire of highland ayllus for economic
self-sufﬁciency – extending zones of cultivation down valley sides and provid-
ing highland ayllus with secure access to plots of land at lower altitudes (Earle
1987; Rowe 1944: 233). Large areas south of Lake Titicaca that had little agri-
cultural potential but were rich in gold, silver, copper, and tin were annexed,
and mining and reﬁning in the state-owned mines were supervised by local
leaders who forwarded the metal they produced to provincial administrative
centres (D’Altroy and Earle 1985; Earle 1987: 74).

Trade and Craft Specialization
353
While it has often been asserted that the Inka had no markets, both Thupa
Inka Yupanki and Wayna Qhapaq were reported to have ordered or sanctioned
their presence in all provinces and towns. A market was held every ﬁve days in
Cusipata, one of the two main squares in central Cuzco, while another market
ﬁve leagues from the city centre occurred every nine days, probably to serve
the ring of service settlements that surrounded the upper-class urban core.
The Spanish described the goods that were exchanged at these markets as
being triﬂes of low value that people purchased in small quantities. Most sales
were made by women, and no market tax was collected (Earle 1985; La Lone
1982; S. Moore 1958: 86, 133; Murra 1980: 142–47). In modern times Andean
women tend to barter within communities and men in broader contexts (Urton
1981: 21). Presumably these markets, like Egyptian ones, were places where
ordinary people exchanged food and local handicrafts and hence were a vital
aspect of village life.
Very little is known about trading in Shang and Western Zhou China,
although in later times merchants were called shang ren (Shang people)
(K. Chang 1980: 241; Creel 1937: 316). Raw materials such as the turtle shells
used for divination appear to have been imported from beyond the borders
of the Shang kingdom. Men who belonged to certain lineages seem to have
worked as commercial agents, although it is not clear whether they were in-
dependent traders or government ofﬁcials. As in highland Mexico and Peru,
long-distance traders are said to have acted as spies for the government (Creel
1937: 317). Cowrie shells were used to store wealth, for gift-giving, and to pay
for the manufacturing of valuable objects.
Exchanges between individuals in early civilizations were done by barter.
Although the buyers and sellers in each early civilization must have possessed
roughly equivalent understandings of the relative value of most goods, the
value of food varied according to scarcity, both seasonally and from year to
year. Skilled or highly reputed artisans demanded more for their wares than
ordinary workers. Individual exchanges involved haggling and were compli-
cated by the need for the buyer to provide items that the seller was willing to
take in exchange. Often the purchase of an item involved the seller’s accepting
a variety of goods, measured by number, size, or weight, in exchange (Kemp
1989: 248–50).
To simplify exchanges, ‘currencies’ were used to pay for items. In the Valley
of Mexico, hollow quills ﬁlled with gold dust, T-shaped copper bars, standard
pieces of cotton cloth (quachtli), and cacao beans, singly or in bags, provided
units of exchange of different values. Depending on their size and quality,
pieces of cloth used in commercial transactions were equivalent to between
sixty-ﬁve and three hundred cacao beans. These ‘currencies’ were used to even

354
Economy
out differences in the value of goods that were being exchanged (Berdan 1982:
43; M. E. Smith 1996: 124–26; Soustelle 1961: 81–82). The Yoruba and the
Chinese employed cowrie shells to pay for purchases. In Benin brass bracelets
and pieces of cloth were also used (Bradbury 1957: 46). In Mesopotamia pieces
of copper and silver stamped by the king to certify the quality of the metal were
used in trading, but these were still weighed individually to determine their
value, and pieces of metal could be broken off to cover a lesser amount. In
early times, Mesopotamian traders calculated the value of goods in relation to
barley, copper, or tin, depending on the worth of the transaction, but by Ur III
times silver had replaced copper as a signiﬁcant measure of value. In the Old
Babylonianperiodmerchantswereusingsilverastheirprimaryaccountingunit
in dealings among themselves and with major institutions. The government,
for its part, sought to convert surplus wool into silver, even though this involved
selling wool in bulk to merchants at less than its market value (R. Harris 1975:
49). Yet, while prices were often calculated and quoted in silver, payments in
this metal appear to have been rare. Most silver made its way into and stayed in
palace and temple treasuries (Oppenheim 1964: 87; Postgate 1992: 200–204).
In the Old Kingdom the Egyptians used the unidentiﬁed ˇsty as a standard
unit in connection with bartering (Kemp 1989: 255). It has been suggested
that in the New Kingdom this unit was a silver disk weighing about 7.5 grams
(Strouhal 1992: 198–99), but this seems unlikely to have been the case earlier;
a Fifth Dynasty market scene indicates that a single piece of cloth was worth
six ˇsty (Kemp 1989: 255). Most of these ‘currencies’ (cacao beans being a
conspicuous exception) were not only a means for facilitating exchanges but
also a way to store value. There is no evidence that in any early civilization a
single commodity came to be used as the sole measure of value for everything
else that was bought and sold.
Long-distance trade was embedded in political processes to varying degrees.
In the two adequately documented territorial states, both foreign trade and the
mining of stone and mineral resources were controlled by the central govern-
ment. In three well-documented city-state systems, foreign trade was carried
on by individuals or groups operating independently of the state, and therefore
trade was possible among states that were hostile or even at war. Political power
was the principal way to acquire wealth, while wealth was essential to main-
tain political power. Wealth acquired from trade could not easily be translated
into power. The Aztec value system stigmatized as dishonourable wealth that
was not acquired through warfare. Mesopotamians downgraded merchants by
comparison with property owners. Even the Yoruba limited the political role
of successful female traders to supporting male aspirants for high ofﬁce, while
such men sought to distinguish themselves as soldiers. If Classic Maya rulers

Trade and Craft Specialization
355
monopolized long-distance trade, their political prominence facilitated such
control; it did not result from it. In city-states merchants were able to acquire
wealth but were to varying degrees politically constrained; in territorial states,
long-distance traders were largely replaced by government ofﬁcials.
communication networks
Intercity trade depended on transport. Yet, in general, the transport of goods
continued, like agriculture, to rely on relatively simple and labour-intensive
means. In Egypt and Mesopotamia boats played a signiﬁcant role in transport-
ing goods by river and sea and donkeys were used to carry loads overland.
While wheeled vehicles were constructed in Mesopotamia, there is no evi-
dence that carts played a signiﬁcant role in long-distance trade. Although the
Egyptians were familiar with the principle of the wheel as early as the Old
Kingdom, no wheeled vehicles of any sort were used in Egypt until after the
Middle Kingdom. In highland Peru llamas carried loads of medium weight,
and in Mesoamerica canoes were used wherever possible. Yet, in highland
Mexico and among the Maya and Yoruba, human carriers transported most
goods over long distances. Mountainous and swampy terrain and the absence
of large domestic animals (or the problems involved in breeding them in un-
favourable climates) explain the heavy reliance on human carriers in these
regions. Human labour was also important for transporting goods in Peru. In
Mesopotamia and China, rulers and some soldiers drove chariots, and among
the Yoruba leaders and elite soldiers rode horses. In other early civilizations,
upper-class people travelled either on foot or in boats and litters.
In most early civilizations relatively little effort was expended on the con-
struction and maintenance of roads or footpaths. In central Mexico, despite
the importance of trade and the absence of navigable waterways (except for
the large lakes in the centre of the Valley of Mexico), there was little emphasis
on road construction. The causeways leading into Tenochtitlan from the adja-
cent mainland were impressive feats of engineering. The wooden bridges that
could be taken up at various points along the causeways served a defensive
role as well as allowing for essential water ﬂow and canoe trafﬁc. Yet, while the
streets of Tenochtitlan and other major cities were broad and straight, even the
main thoroughfares were paved only with compressed earth. Corv´ees drawn
from various calpolli kept streets clean and in good repair.
In the highland Mexican countryside, roads were nothing more than beaten
paths that varied in width according to how much they were used. Local au-
thorities, who were responsible for such care as was taken of roads, probably
feared them as avenues of invasion as much as they valued them as a means

356
Economy
to facilitate trade. Despite such fears, all settlements were connected by roads
to neighbouring communities. Rather than running straight, each major road
linked a maximum number of urban settlements. There was no main road
directly linking any community on the Gulf of Mexico with Tenochtitlan but
rather a series of alternative routes running through different intervening ur-
ban centres. This arrangement was adapted not to the needs of an empire or
even of a hegemonic system but to those of warring city-states. It permitted
alternative routes to be used for trade and communication if any particular
segment of the road system was blocked by intercity conﬂict. Travellers spent
each night in closely spaced urban centres (Hassig 1985: 171; Santley 1991).
All Yoruba roads were unpaved. The principal roads, along which most trade
movedwiththepermissionoflocalrulers,rannorth-souththroughmajorurban
centres. These roads were linked to smaller communities by east-west feeder
routes which also joined larger communities to one another. Along the main
roads were caravanserais (aroje) where traders spent the night if they were
unable to reach the next town (Falola 1991; Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 27–29).
In Mesopotamia most goods were probably transported from one city to
another by water, but urban centres were also linked by dirt roads. Shulgi,
a king of the Ur III dynasty, boasted of having created a system of messen-
gers and road stations as part of his increasing bureaucratic control over the
whole region (Postgate 1992: 42). Private travel between cities appears to have
been infrequent and dangerous, and even the sending of personal letters was
uncommon (Oppenheim 1964: 120).
The Egyptians depended largely on the Nile for travel and transport. The
river was connected by canals and loading basins to major temples and palaces
and, at least during the ﬂood season, to the royal pyramids, which were located
just beyond the edge of the ﬂoodplain. Canals also permitted water transporta-
tion into the heart of major cities such as Memphis and Thebes. In addition,
trails located in the adjacent deserts cut across bends in the Nile Valley, joined
the valley to the western oases, the Red Sea coast, and desert quarries and
mining sites, and probably ran parallel to the Nile the whole length of Egypt.
These trails permitted messages to be conveyed more quickly by runners than
by water and would have allowed government soldiers to approach communi-
ties from the desert as well as from the river.
The most complex road system in any early civilization was constructed by
the Inka, in part by incorporating already existing roads. This network ran from
Quito in the north to the Mendoza River in Chile in the south and is estimated
to have consisted of a total of forty thousand kilometres of roads. Of these,
twenty-three thousand kilometres were part of the main lattice, while the
rest led to speciﬁc communities. Although the Inka conceptualized four main

Trade and Craft Specialization
357
roads extending from Cuzco through the primary divisions of the kingdom,
there were in fact two major roads running north-south that were connected
by a series of shorter east-west roads. The main road through the highlands
was strategically more important than the one that ran parallel to it along the
coast. The Inka rulers regarded it as the artery that allowed them to dominate
both the highland and lowland portions of their kingdom. The widest and
best-constructed portion of that road ran between Cuzco and Quito.
Roads were built and maintained by local corv´ee labour under Inka super-
vision. While only short sections of roads were paved, the Inka rulers made
an effort to keep the entire system passable during all seasons. Roads were
regularly cleared of stones and were provided, where required, with drainage
channels and stairways. Rope bridges were used to cross deeply incised rivers
and balsa rafts to cross unfordable coastal ones. In general, the Inka sought
to build roads that were as straight as possible and to do that skirted irregular
terrain. The principal roads also avoided mountain passes that rose above ﬁve
thousand metres. Where possible, the main north-south route ran through
major highland administrative centres.
The main purpose of the Inka roads was to transport state information, gov-
ernment troops and corv´ee labourers, and government supplies (Gose 1993:
483); they were not intended for private use. Government inns (tampu), well
stocked with food and clothing, provided overnight lodging for soldiers, corv´ee
labourers, and ofﬁcials travelling on government business. Whether located in
administrative centres or in the countryside, these service centres were one
day’s journey apart. In addition, runners’ stations (chaskiwasi) were established
every three to six kilometres along the main roads, and runners stood ready
there to relay messages or goods. In addition to facilitating government busi-
ness, the royal road (qhapaq ˜nan) was a substantial and pervasive symbol of
the Inka state (Hyslop 1984; von Hagen 1959).
For Shang and Western Zhou China, oracle-bone inscriptions suggest that
travel by kings, ofﬁcials, and armies over an extensive road network played a
major role in maintaining the integrity of the state (Keightley 1979–80). Roads
are said to have been kept in good repair and provided with rest houses for
the use of government ofﬁcials (Creel 1937: 316).
Important as intercity trade may have been in some city-state systems, it
did not encourage the development of complex transportation and commu-
nications systems. The value of such systems for trade was counterbalanced
by the fear that they would facilitate attack by neighbouring states. Only a
hegemon seeking to unify a region might attempt to construct a more efﬁcient
road system. In contrast, government activities in ancient Egypt and China
and especially in the Inka kingdom led to considerable investment in the

358
Economy
construction and maintenance of transport systems. In the Andes, the con-
trolled movement of people and goods was essential for maintaining the unity
of the state.
craft production
Many everyday goods used in early civilizations were produced by farmers
in their spare time. Farm labour was often seasonal, and during slack peri-
ods farmers and their families manufactured tools, baskets, sandals, clothing,
furniture, and ornaments for themselves and to exchange with their neigh-
bours. If individuals or families concentrated on manufacturing a single type
of product, they could hone their skills and produce higher-quality goods. The
development of part-time specialization required broader exchange networks,
with exchange usually occurring at markets located in villages and small towns.
Still better-quality goods were produced by full-time specialists. Full-time
metalworkersmightmanufacturebronzeorirontoolsthatotherpeopleneeded
but lacked the equipment, raw materials, and technological knowledge to make
for themselves. Other full-time craft workers might produce pottery, basketry,
or leatherware superior to what part-time craft workers could manufacture
but inexpensive enough that most people could afford them. These goods
were sold at village and city markets, and both the volume of goods produced
and the degree of specialization increased with population density and the
size of urban centres. Full-time craft workers functioned as individuals or in
family groups. Some potters and leather workers and a larger percentage of
metallurgists might be employed full-time by temples, palaces, and private
patrons.
At the top of the craft hierarchy were the elite craft workers who specialized
in producing goods of exceptional quality and high value for the state and the
upper classes. These goods were frequently manufactured from imported raw
materials. Teams of full-time specialists possessing a variety of complementary
skills often worked together to create these objects. The intrinsic value of the
raw materials from which such goods were made and the time-consuming
labour needed to manufacture them made possession of such goods a sign of
high status or royal favour. Some elite craft workers sold such goods on the
openmarket,andotherscombinedindependentproductionwithworkingpart-
time on commission for upper-class individuals or institutions. Still others were
employed full-time by governments, temples, or wealthy patrons and, though
treated with considerable respect, were bound to their employers in much the
same manner as were less skilled craft workers or household servants (Trigger
1968: 54).

Trade and Craft Specialization
359
Cross-cultural studies indicate that in preindustrial societies particular crafts
were performed either by men or by women but not by both. When men and
women worked at the same craft, they usually performed different tasks. The
same craft was not, however, practised by the same gender in every culture
(Costin 1996; Murdock and Provost 1973). In early civilizations, both cross-
cultural regularity in the gendering of crafts and male professionalization ap-
pear to have been more pervasive than in less complex societies. As most
crafts grew technologically more complicated and were practised in workshop
settings rather than in the home, they tended to become male activities. In
manufacturing ceramics men generally replaced women as mass production
and the use of the potter’s wheel increased. Men also dominated tasks that did
not have a domestic origin, such as metallurgy. Large numbers of women con-
tinued to be involved in domestic tasks such as brewing and baking when these
became full-time occupations within palaces, temples, and state institutions.
Such tasks provided employment for lower-class women in Egypt and were
among the duties assigned to chosen women in Peru. In Egypt, however, men
soon became professional brewers and bakers and monopolized speciﬁc forms
of food processing, such as the drying and cooking of ﬁsh and meat (Feucht
1997: 336–37). Among the elite feather workers (amanteca) in Tenochtitlan,
women cleaned and dyed feathers while men sewed and glued them onto cloth
or wood to produce costumes and decorations (M. E. Smith 1996: 100–102).
Craft knowledge tended to be passed from generation to generation within
families. Girls learned from their mothers and aunts, boys from their fathers
and other older male relatives. There was little chance for outsiders to learn
crafts, although apprenticeship occurred, sometimes in the guise of adoption.
Most craft workers could not read or write, and therefore knowledge relating
to their work was transmitted orally, sometimes as trade secrets. Because of
this, much of the speciﬁc craft lore even of literate early civilizations has been
irretrievably lost.
The production of cloth was a major activity in all early civilizations and
played as great a role in the lives of most women as agriculture did in men’s
(E. Barber 1994). It remained a domestic task but also underwent consider-
able specialization. It was one area of production in which women played a
signiﬁcant role in ‘industrial’ as well as household production, although men
as well as women became involved in the production of cloth for commercial
and other special purposes.
While large amounts of ordinary cloth were needed for clothing and other
domestic purposes, high-quality cloth became an important status symbol.
Cloth of this sort was woven from valuable raw materials, such as silk in
China or cotton, which had to be imported from the lowlands, in the Valley

360
Economy
of Mexico. It could also be richly ornamented with special colours and designs,
very ﬁnely woven, or woven in complex patterns. Among the Inka, fancy cloth
(qumpi), decorated with complex patterns and bright colours and ﬁnished on
both sides, was manufactured for the government. The Maya upper class, es-
pecially women, are shown wearing richly patterned robes, while upper-class
Egyptians prized very ﬁnely woven linen.
Cloth also had ritual signiﬁcance in some early civilizations. The Inka burned
cloth as offerings to the gods and used large amounts of it to wrap and peri-
odically rewrap the bodies of their ancestors (Murra 1962). Egyptian priests
were allowed to wear linen but not woollen clothing while serving in temples.
Clothing of special patterns or styles emphasized the divine qualities of kings,
and particular types of vestments were regarded as appropriate to be worn
while performing particular rituals. Because cloth weighed little, was highly
variable in design, and required much labour to produce, it was also a major
commodity in long-distance trade. While every woman knew how to produce
ordinary cloth, the production of fancy cloth required special training, time,
and often access to better-quality materials. It also encouraged an enhanced
division of labour.
In all early civilizations cloth was manufactured from plant ﬁbres. Linen
was used in Egypt and Mesopotamia, maguey ﬁbres, hemp, and New World
cotton in the Valley of Mexico, hemp and cotton by the Maya and the Inka,
Old World cotton by the Yoruba, and hemp and linen by the Chinese. Woollen
cloth was woven from sheep and goat hair in Egypt and Mesopotamia and
from llama, alpaca, and wild vicu˜na wool and even bat hair in Peru (Rowe
1944: 240). The Chinese produced silk from insect cocoons. All forms of cloth
production required considerable labour to grow or collect the raw materials
and to process, spin, dye, and weave them.
Women generally produced the ordinary cloth that was worn by their fam-
ilies (Fig. 16.1). In most societies the role of women as domestic cloth pro-
ducers was the symbolic counterpart of the primary role claimed by men as
food producers. In Inka society, where women were acknowledged to play an
important role in agricultural production, elderly men helped to spin thread
(Rowe 1944: 241). Although they did not join in many other forms of household
labour, upper-class women supervised and even participated in the production
of clothes for their families.
The Inka required all the married women of commoner families to spin
and weave ﬁxed quantities of wool that were assigned to them each year from
state and religious herds. Producing ordinary cloth was a form of labour tax.
The state issued this cloth to soldiers and other corv´ee labourers who were
away from their homes for long periods (Murra 1980: 68–70). The Egyptian
government may have collected one-tenth of the cloth produced by each

Trade and Craft Specialization
361
a
b
c
d
16.1. Female weavers in early civilizations: (a) Inka woman weaving on a backstrap loom (from
Guaman Poma de Ayala); (b) bird’s eye view of Egyptian women using a ground loom, tomb of
the Middle Kingdom provincial ruler Khnumhotep II at Beni Hasan (BH 3); (c) a seven-year-old
Aztec girl being taught to spin by her mother (Codex Mendoza); (d) a fourteen-year-old Aztec
girl learning to weave using a backstrap loom (Codex Mendoza). Sources: (a) after Pomo de
Ayala, 215; (b) after P. T. Nicholson & I. Shaw (eds.), Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology
(Cambridge, 2000), 277; (c), (d) after J. Cooper-Clark, The Codex Mendoza (London, 1938).
household as a tax, and estate owners had tenants’ wives weave cloth that the
owners could sell. It is unclear whether this weaving constituted part of the pay-
ment for renting land or these women were remunerated for their work (James
1962).
In addition, the state and large institutions in some early civilizations de-
veloped weaving as an industry. In Mesopotamia as many as 750 women were
assigned to individual workshops belonging to temples, palaces, and private es-
tates to weave both ordinary and high-quality cloth. Many of these women were
slaves; others belonged to indebted families. They usually worked in teams of
twenty under a male or female supervisor. Weaving shops were recorded as
early as the Early Dynastic period, and in Ur III times, six thousand weavers

362
Economy
were working in such establishments, many of them under very poor condi-
tions, in the city of Girsu alone (Postgate 1992: 235; R. Wright 1996b). The
cloth they produced was distributed to temple and palace staff and used for
foreign trade. Among the Inka fancy cloth was woven by the chosen women
and by full-time male specialists (qumpikamayoq) attached to the state or
the upper classes (Costin 1998b). Whereas ordinary cloth was produced by
farm women using backstrap looms, fancy cloth was woven on vertical looms
(Kendall 1973: 179–80). In Egypt, secondary royal wives, concubines, and their
female servants, who lived in royal palaces scattered throughout the country,
wove cloth for the king, sometimes on a large scale (Kemp 1989: 222). Many
smaller estates belonging to Egyptian ofﬁcials also had weaving shops. In the
Old and Middle Kingdoms weaving was done both at home and in workshops
by women using horizontal looms. In the New Kingdom, following the intro-
duction of the vertical loom, men gradually replaced women in workshops
(Andreu 1997: 71–72). David Keightley (1969: 48–49) believes that in Shang
China high-quality textiles, especially those made of silk, were produced by
specialized artisans working in royal workshops.
Finally, many Aztec and Egyptian women wove cloth at home and sold it
in public markets. Yoruba men and women produced cloth for sale on both
a part-time and a full-time basis. Yoruba men used horizontal or belt looms
to weave narrow bands of highly decorated cloth, while women wove wider
sheets on vertical looms. The Yoruba believed that if men or women used
each other’s looms they would change sex. Male involvement in commercial
weaving was most common in the northern part of the Yoruba country, where
farm labour was more seasonal (Ojo 1966a: 86–87).
Thus in all the early civilizations, the manufacture of cloth was an important
aspect of domestic production. In addition, it was a widespread household
industry. In some early civilizations, weaving was also the most ‘industrialized’
form of production in terms of the number of people working in a factory
setting.
The rulers of early civilizations are often said to have sought to control the
production of luxury goods in order to increase their political power (G. Stein
1998: 21–22). It has been assumed that they did this by requiring craft spe-
cialists to work for them and by monopolizing the supplies of raw materials
that craft workers required. Childe (1965 [1936]: 212–13) further argued that
the role played by palace and temple ofﬁcials in setting production targets
and evaluating production stiﬂed innovation and inhibited the further devel-
opment of craft skills. This view is, however, partial and misleading. Relations
between craft workers and ofﬁcials varied considerably among early civiliza-
tions, especially between city- and territorial states.

Trade and Craft Specialization
363
In Mesopotamia there were many different types of full-time craft workers
(giˇskinti). Ordinary craft workers, such as woodworkers, basket makers, rope
makers, house builders, boat builders, leather workers, and potters, have to
be distinguished from more highly skilled smiths, stone carvers, and ivory and
wood carvers (Moorey 1994; Postgate 1992: 232). Different categories of work-
ers worshipped particular patron deities and seem to have had spokespeople
who represented their interests, but it is unclear if, like the merchants, they
belonged to formal associations (Postgate 1992: 229; Van De Mieroop 1999:
183–85).
Mass-produced wheel-made pottery already predominated in southern
Mesopotamia by the start of the third millennium b.c., and copper and bronze
tools slowly replaced stone ones over the course of the next thousand years. In
thethirdmillennium,ensuringtheproductionofspecializedweaponrybecame
the responsibility of palaces, while temples employed increasing amounts of
metal cult equipment. Both palace and temple estates needed large numbers
of metal implements and agricultural tools. Groups of smiths (simug) fre-
quently worked for temples and palaces under the direction of a foreman who
was responsible to the general overseer of the institution. Among the foreman’s
duties was checking the weight of the metal supplied to smiths against the
weight of the objects that the smiths produced. In the Old Babylonian period
some smiths and stone workers were full-time employees of temples, but it is
not clear if this had been the case in earlier times. Gold workers were employed
on a part-time basis and sometimes recruited from other cities (Postgate
1992: 229). The only clearly documented manufacturing by workers wholly
controlled by palaces and temples was that performed in weaving factories.
Major institutions may not have tried so hard to control labour that supplied
ﬂuctuating needs as opposed to producing goods they used or sold on a regular
basis.
Archaeological evidence indicates major workshops in residential areas of
Mesopotamian cities. While the largest potteries and stoneworking sites were
located on the leeward side of cities, in order to reduce smoke and dust pol-
lution, copper and gold workers, who used already smelted metals, had work-
shops along streets near urban centres. There is also evidence that each ward
had resident potters, smiths, and lapidaries who supplied local wants (Silver
1986: 119; Stone 1997: 20). This indicates that all urban dwellers had access
to most if not all major types of craft specialists working in their own neigh-
bourhoods. It also suggests that ordinary people could obtain manufactured
goods directly rather than having to purchase or receive them as payment from
temples. Since there is no evidence that the people who worked for a particular
temple or for the palace were residentially segregated in Mesopotamian cities,

364
Economy
it appears unlikely that these craft workers were the full-time employees of
a temple or palace. Independent craft workers would have been able to pur-
chase supplies of copper, tin, and other imported raw materials directly from
long-distance traders (Van De Mieroop 1999: 176–83).
J. N. Postgate (1992: 225–29) maintains that temples, with their great corpo-
rate wealth and demand for luxury goods, played a major role in encouraging
technological development in Mesopotamia. Robert McC. Adams (1966: 140–
43) has argued that the growing need of palaces for more effective armaments
had the same effect. It remains to be determined whether these institutions
exerted their inﬂuence mainly as purchasers or as the actual organizers of pro-
duction. Except for hegemonic states such as Akkad and Ur III, whose rulers
patronized the production of outstanding works of art, the quality of stone
carving and metalwork does not suggest a sharp division between elite craft
workers labouring exclusively for major institutions and full-time specialists
producing for a broader market. State efforts to control production may have
been focused on palace workshops and on the role of supervisory personnel.
Yet, while many ordinary Mesopotamian craft workers may have worked full-
time for institutions and institutions may have provided the major market for
more specialized goods, it seems unlikely that most craft workers were legally
or contractually tied to these institutions (R. Wright 1998).
In the Valley of Mexico utilitarian goods such as pots, reed mats, woodwork,
leather goods, and canoes appear to have been produced both by full-time craft
workers in urban centres and by farmer-craft workers in rural as well as urban
areas. Elite craft workers lived almost exclusively in urban centres, where they
could most easily obtain exotic raw materials and sell their products to the
upper classes and the pochteca at large central markets. The most skilled craft
workers tended to gravitate towards Tenochtitlan, which, being the valley’s
largest and wealthiest city, provided the most buyers for their goods.
Craft specialization was organized by calpollis. In some calpollis all men
specialized in a particular craft; in others some worked as full-time craftsmen
while others were farmers or combined farming and part-time craft work
(Brumﬁel 1998). The urban calpollis that produced luxury goods may have
been composed largely of elite craft specialists. These producers of luxury
goods were called toltecca, implying that their skills were derived, like the
institutions of nobility and kingship, from the ancient city of Tollan, where
they had a supernatural origin. These specialists included goldsmiths, who
produced jewellery, feather workers, who manufactured fans, shields, warriors’
costumes, capes, headdresses, and tapestries, and lapidaries, who ground lip
and ear plugs, beaded necklaces, bracelets, and other ornaments from jade,
obsidian, and other attractive stones (M. E. Smith 1996: 99–107). Sons of gold

Trade and Craft Specialization
365
workers and feather workers received some training in the schools for nobles
or at their own versions of such schools to familiarize them with the details
of Aztec religious iconography (Clendinnen 1991: 132). Also included among
these specialists were mural painters and sculptors, who carved stone both in
the round and in relief (Berdan 1982: 153).
While most Aztec elite craft workers obtained raw materials and sold their
products in market-places, the most skillful were also commissioned to pro-
duce goods for the king, sometimes in special workshops in royal palaces.
Most stone sculptors and mural painters probably worked for the king most
of the time, since there was little other demand for their specialized prod-
ucts. In hegemonic states, especially Texcoco and Tenochtitlan, royal patron-
age encouraged the carving of stone statues, ritual bowls, altars, cult objects,
and decorative plaques, some of which were works of great size. These arts
achieved exceptional levels of reﬁnement. Kings presented such objects to
major temples and used them to adorn their palaces (Townsend 1979). They
also distributed to the nobility and to outstanding warriors luxury goods that
other craft specialists sold to or manufactured for the palace. Skilled craftsmen
were lavishly rewarded for their services to the king (Brumﬁel 1987).
Luxury goods were also produced in smaller cities, and there was some re-
gional specialization. Azcatpotzalco, for example, was renowned for its silver-
smithing, while the best-quality pottery came from Cholula, outside the Valley
of Mexico; the Aztec king would use no other. Craft workers in still smaller
centres tended to specialize in utilitarian crafts. Masons from Coyoacan and
carpenters from Xochimilco were in much demand for major construction
projects in Tenochtitlan (Berdan 1982: 176). The production of household
pottery, obsidian blades, and textiles was carried on in rural and urban settings
throughout the Valley of Mexico. Elizabeth Brumﬁel (1980: 466) argues that
increasing craft production in urban centres in Late Aztec times resulted in
a decline in craft production and a growing emphasis on food production in
rural areas.
Among the Yoruba, particular crafts were practised by extended families.
Depending on demand, craft production might be full-time or part-time, but
all extended families included full-time farmers. Specialists who practised the
same craft in a particular city but belonged to more than one patrilineage
formed craft associations that set standards, established prices, and regulated
other matters of common interest. There were associations of brass-workers,
iron-workers, wood- and ivory-carvers, calabash-carvers, mat-weavers, leather-
workers, drum-makers, and potters, as well as of doctors, hunters, and traders
(Eades 1980: 85–86; Ojo 1966a: 80–102; R. Smith 1969: 118). Most were
associations of male craft workers, but potters’ associations and those of the

366
Economy
broadcloth weavers were female. The distinction between luxury and utilitar-
ian crafts was less marked than in the Valley of Mexico and more resembled the
situation in Mesopotamia. Each craft association had its patron deity, and its
leaders were in contact with palace ofﬁcials about matters of mutual interest.
In Benin, each craft association was located in a separate ward of the ‘town’,
as distinguished from the ‘palace’, district of the city (Bradbury 1957: 34).
While most skilled Yoruba craft workers laboured in urban centres, crafts
such as smithing, potting, and mat-weaving were also practised in villages (Peel
1983: 74–75). Ritual and utilitarian pottery was brought to Benin from villages
to the north and west (Bradbury 1957: 26). Craft specialization also occurred
regionally: the Ijebu area was noted for its gold and silver work, Oyo for its
leather and calabash-carving, Ogbomoso for its dyeing and weaving, Ilorin for
its pottery, and Ife for its brass-casting and production of glass beads (Ojo
1966a: 102). Most craft work was done within family compounds, but kings
sometimes commissioned famous metalworkers and wood-carvers to carry out
special projects at their palaces. The royal palace at Old Oyo was famous for
the one hundred brass-covered posts that hold up a roof running around the
four sides of one of its courtyards or long corridors. In Old Oyo there was also
a group of craft workers whose sole employment was to sew and embroider
with beads crowns, staffs, robes, and leather work for the palace (S. Johnson
1921: 45, 153, 258). The role of blacksmiths in forging weapons created close
economic relations between them and kings, high ofﬁcials, and other military
leaders, but these links did not prevent them from producing identical weapons
for general sale.
The king of Benin had special relations with members of the city’s brass-
workers’ association. During the installation of a new ruler, these specialists
were required to come to the palace, where, with the ritual assistance of the
new king, they cast brass portrait heads and other regalia that would be used
in the cult that was being established for the previous ruler. Creating these
objects required an exceptionally high level of skill in making moulds and
casting and polishing metal. The smiths were forbidden to cast similar ritual
objects for anyone else; other families had to use less prestigious wooden or
ceramic heads for their ancestral cults. The same craft workers also produced
elaborate brass plaques and other decorations for the royal palace. Their largest
castings weighed as much as twenty-two kilograms and required many cru-
cibles of molten metal (Garrard 1983: 19). The king lavishly rewarded these
craft workers with farms, slaves, cowrie shells, and other gifts. The brass-
smiths’ slaves and other dependents worked farms that provided them with
food and an income that was independent of their craft work (Bradbury 1957:
34). The smiths also manufactured jewellery and other goods in their own ward

Trade and Craft Specialization
367
for general sale. While the work they were permitted to do was limited by the
king’s insistence on monopolizing their ﬁnest creations, royal ﬁnancing sup-
ported a division of labour and levels of expertise that could create works of
exceptional quality whenever required.
The king of Benin also regulated all ivory-carving, which could be done only
for him. He distributed ivory staffs to ofﬁce-holders, including village leaders,
who in the absence of his special favour had to be content with wooden ones.
In addition, the ruler of Benin employed weavers from the Onwina Nido ward
of Benin City to produce cloth with special patterns that could be worn only
by the king and high-ranking ofﬁcials. This work was done both in the weavers’
ward and at the palace (Bradbury 1957: 26).
Maya craft specialization appears from archaeological evidence to have been
associated with residential groups and therefore perhaps with extended fami-
lies. As among the Yoruba, it seems that not all members of a residential group
were craft workers; craft specialists may have lived with upper-class patrons
or with kinsmen, servants, or retainers who produced food for them. There is
evidence that at least some elite craft workers were attached to and supported
by high-status households, including those of kings. Some elite craft workers,
such as master vase-painters and stela-designers, are inferred from their ti-
tles to have belonged to royal lineages, although these titles may have merely
signiﬁed royal support or patronage. Less skilled craft workers seem to have
belonged to commoner extended families (Aldenderfer, Kimball, and Sievert
1989; Haviland 1974; Inomata 2001; McAnany 1993: 71; Reents-Budet 1998;
Tate 1992: 20, 47).
The known distribution of different craft specializations in Maya urban set-
tings does not suggest a geographical clustering of speciﬁc occupations. Nor
do particular craft specializations correspond to the differential elaboration
of houses in residential clusters or the locations of house clusters in relation
to urban centres. While utilitarian crafts may for the most part have been
part-time ones, upper-class patronage would have allowed many forms of elite
production, such as jade carving and the production of the most elaborate
painted pottery, to have developed into full-time occupations (Becker 1973;
Moholy-Nagy 1997).
Smaller Maya communities, such as Colha, in Belize, specialized in pro-
ducing stone tools for export (Hester and Shafer 1994). Individual workshops
produced different stages or types of tools (King and Potter 1994). Utilitar-
ian pottery was made in small villages on the peripheries of urban centres,
especially in agriculturally less productive areas. This pottery appears to have
circulated directly to the area around its production site rather than through
nearby urban centres. Maya potters specialized in making particular styles of

368
Economy
pottery rather than a limited range of functional categories (Ball 1993: 244–45;
Potter and King 1995). This, together with the lack of concentration of elite
craft production near the centre of cities and the absence of any physical evi-
dence of market-places, casts further doubt on the existence of a hierarchical
market system among the Classic Maya.
There is ﬁnally the question of whether some Maya artisans worked ex-
clusively for the king. Except near the end of the Classic period, only kings
appear to have erected carved stone monuments, which were clearly the work
of master designers and master stonemasons. Some stelae are inscribed with
the names of several craft workers. Master craftsmen seem occasionally to
have worked in more than one polity and may have been free to move from
one state to another. Alternatively, they may have been despatched by royal
patrons to produce monumental works for friendly rulers or been carried off
by victorious kings (Schele and Miller 1986: 219; Tate 1992: 40–49). While
palaces controlled the work of some craft workers in other city-state systems,
upper-class control of elite production among the Maya would have been
greater overall if kings and nobles had monopolized long-distance trade and
the acquisition of luxury raw materials.
In at least three of the four city-state civilizations we have examined, craft
production was closely linked to markets and long-distance trade, which pro-
vided exotic raw materials and a means of selling surplus produce to buyers
over a large area. In general, market prices determined what products were
available to people of differing means. In the Valley of Mexico and Benin and
perhaps among the Maya, rulers imposed sumptuary regulations on certain lux-
ury goods or directly controlled their production and distribution. Because of
their abundant wealth and their ability to sponsor highly skilled craft workers,
hegemonic rulers were especially effective patrons of the arts. Public markets
encouraged more ordinary full-time production, which made better-quality
goods available to most people. City-state systems gave farmers easy access
to such goods. Rulers in city-state systems that had powerful hereditary class
systems (Valley of Mexico, Maya) seem to have intervened more directly in
the production and distribution of craft products, especially luxury goods, than
the rulers of city-state systems that lacked them (Mesopotamia, Yoruba). In
Benin, however, there was considerable royal intervention despite the absence
of hereditary classes.
In territorial states there tended to be two tiers of craft production. During
their spare time, farmers used locally available materials to produce what they
and their neighbours needed, with each household aiming at self-sufﬁciency
or producing for a local market. Mass-produced and specialized goods were
manufactured in royal workshops by artisans who worked full-time for the

Trade and Craft Specialization
369
state. Their royal employers supplied them with raw materials, and in return
they were expected to produce weapons, tools, and storage vessels for people
who performed special tasks for the state, as well as luxury goods for the
use and enjoyment of their upper-class patrons. The cost of producing luxury
goods was of less concern to elite craft workers’ patrons than the quality of
those goods. The ability of kings to display and distribute status symbols that
no one else could emulate was a major source of prestige and power. While
only a few of these coveted goods trickled down to local leaders as rewards
for their loyalty to the state, the possibility of such rewards reinforced that
loyalty.
In Egypt the most skilled craft workers (h
• mwt) worked for the king, usually
near the royal court (Andreu 1997: 58–69). Some groups of goldsmiths, sculp-
tors, painters, and elite carpenters were assigned to a wbt (pure place), which
was, or had attached to it, a workshop, for producing funerary goods. Craft
workers laboured in teams under the supervision of two ‘great controllers of
craftsmen’ (wr h˘ rp h
• mwt) and a hierarchy of overseers (Eyre 1987a: 26–27) to
decorate tombs, carve statues and stone vases, and manufacture jewellery and
ﬁne furniture for the upper classes, as well as cult objects for temples. Dwarfs
and hunchbacks were responsible for either manufacturing gold objects or
caring for them. Sometimes artisans of the royal residence were despatched
to work on the tombs of high ofﬁcials.
The most skilled craft workers were rewarded with minor part-time palace
or temple ofﬁces, land, servants, slaves, cattle, and other material goods
(Strouhal 1992: 167). While few of these craft workers were buried in tombs
as large and substantial as those of some doctors, hairdressers, and mani-
curists who personally attended the king, they were invited to participate in
upper-class banquets and hunts. Some artists were permitted to portray and
name themselves among an ofﬁcial’s valued retainers when they decorated
his tomb (165–66). In better-documented examples from the New Kingdom,
royal tomb-builders and the sculptors who carved colossal royal statues re-
ceived state housing, substantial salaries, living expenses, and servants to ﬁsh,
grow crops, and grind grain for them and their families. They were also al-
lowed to work for private clients in their spare time (Eyre 1987b: 168–83). In
the Old Kingdom the monarch was able to reward high ofﬁcials with luxuri-
ous presents produced by elite craft workers: stone cofﬁns, statues, inscribed
doorways, and other ﬁttings for their tombs, as well as personal jewellery and
high-quality furniture (Eyre 1987a: 21–22). The consistently high quality of the
art and jewellery produced by royal craft workers during the Old and Middle
Kingdoms testiﬁes to the sustained achievements of these royal artisans and
of the institutions in which they worked.

370
Economy
Also labouring for the government in provincial administrative centres as
well as at the royal court were the full-time craft workers who manufactured
utilitarian goods for the state. They included coppersmiths, who cast chisels,
knives, and other metal tools for government craftsmen; carpenters, boat-
builders, tanners, and leather-workers; and potters and bricklayers (both des-
ignated qdw) (Strouhal 1992: 141). The boat-builders constructed large royal
ships and seagoing vessels as well as the barges used to haul government
grain from one part of Egypt to another. In the Middle Kingdom, govern-
ment boat-building near This, in Upper Egypt, was closely supervised by the
vizier who resided in far-off Memphis (Kemp 1989: 130). Craft workers of this
sort were also attached to private estates, temples, and pyramid towns, where
they worked part-time as priests of the local royal mortuary cult and supported
themselves as coppersmiths, carpenters, and other craft workers or by farming
(David 1986: 165–70).
The most esteemed luxury goods in the Inka kingdom were produced by
full-time specialists (kamayoq), the most skilled of whom lived and worked
near Cuzco. Most of them were bound to the service of institutions and high-
ranking individuals. When the Inka conquered the north-coast state of Chimor,
which was noted for the excellence of its metallurgy, its most celebrated
metalworkers were resettled near Cuzco and ordered to produce goods in the
Inka style. The output of elite gold- and silversmiths included statues of kings
and gods and life-sized replicas of llamas and plants that were placed in temple
and palace ‘gardens’ as fertility symbols. Skilled metallurgists also produced
gold and silver cups, tableware, and jewellery, which the Inka king distributed
as royal gifts to members of the nobility and occasionally to commoners who
served the state well. Even small gold or silver bangles and pins used to fasten
garments (tupu) were treasured indications of royal favour (Earle 1987: 73;
von Hagen 1959: 214). A royal monopoly of gold bullion facilitated concentrat-
ing the working of this precious and symbolically charged metal in the Cuzco
area, while silver was worked at Cuzco and other centres such as Hatunxauxa
(Earle 1987: 73–74; Kendall 1973: 171–72; Murra 1980: 157; von Hagen 1959:
107). The main Inka potteries at Sanyo, near Cuzco, turned out handmade pol-
ished cups, plates, and bottles decorated with repetitive geometrical patterns
and stylized animals. This pottery was a highly valued though less prestigious
substitute for metal vessels (Kendall 1973: 174–77).
The decorated pottery and fancy cloth produced near Cuzco were copied at
government workshops throughout the Inka kingdom. Fancy cloth was woven
by chosen women, who resided in all the provincial administrative centres,
and by yanakuna, who served government ofﬁcials. Male and female dwarfs,
hunchbacks, and cripples, who were unsuited for agricultural labour, were also

Trade and Craft Specialization
371
set to work as full-time weavers. Standard Inka-style pottery was produced at
provincial centres and elsewhere both by specialists and by corv´ee labour-
ers (Costin and Hagstrum 1995). Yanakuna likewise manufactured bronze
tools and weapons at Cuzco and in provincial centres (von Hagen 1959: 157).
Throughout the kingdom craft workers alloyed bronze according to a standard
formula (Earle 1987: 74).
State-directed craft production was assigned to specialist communities of
artisans as well as to yanakuna. Specialist communities, while continuing to
be organized as ayllus and feeding themselves, were exempted from the agri-
cultural labour tax and other forms of corv´ee. They were also fed from state
supplies for as long as they worked on government projects. At Millerea, on
the north shore of Lake Titicaca, one thousand Aymara weavers wove cloth
for the Inka army (Earle 1987: 72). These production enclaves permitted the
government to control the design and quality of goods, which were intended to
be copies of what was being produced under high-level supervision at Cuzco.
These arrangements ensured that state ofﬁcials controlled the production
and distribution of all luxury goods, as well as of specialized weapons and
tools, while the king personally controlled the distribution of the most val-
ued prestige objects. While local rulers had weavers and smiths attached to
their households, they depended on the king and on provincial governors to
provide them with more highly valued luxury goods. At the village level, part-
time craftsmen specialized in producing different types of goods which were
exchanged among nearby households or at local markets. Because of govern-
ment curbs on interregional trade, the raw materials used by local craft workers
must have been of local origin.
Most of what is known about the organization of craft production in Shang
China comes from only a few archaeological sites and relates to the production
of luxury goods. Bronze vessels, which were used to offer sacriﬁces to ancestors,
were among the most treasured possessions of the upper classes; less privileged
families had to make do with ceramic or wooden vessels. Bronze-workers, like
other producers of luxury goods, lived in their own small communities, each of
which was probably inhabited by a single patrilineage and its retainers. Com-
munities of this sort were located near the royal administrative compounds
at Zhengzhou and Anyang. The bronze-workers lived in comfortable houses
built, like upper-class ones, on stamped-earth platforms. They appear to have
been divided into master craftsmen, assistants, and apprentices and were prob-
ably assisted in menial tasks by humbler retainers and slaves. Many different
skills were required to produce high-quality bronze objects: processing ores,
creating and decorating sectional moulds, assembling the moulds, casting the
vessels, and ﬁnishing them. Carrying out such projects required numerous

372
Economy
specialists to work in teams and therefore a high level of economic support.
It is estimated that about three hundred people had to cooperate to cast an
eighty-seven-kilogram ritual vessel (Franklin 1990: 20–24; Hsu and Linduff
1988: 18–19; Treistman 1972: 85–92).
The demand for bronze weapons and ritual vessels among the upper classes
was constant. Groups of bronze vessels hidden in times of crisis suggest that
family shrines contained a current set of ceremonial vessels, together with
some earlier vessels that were especially esteemed. Less valuable earlier sets
and single vessels that had particular personal signiﬁcance for the deceased
were buried with the dead, presumably so that they could use them to continue
sacriﬁcing to their ancestors. Vessels interred with women of high status were
generally less elaborate than those buried with men (Rawson 1993).
Bronze-casting appears to have been carried out across northern and central
China in Shang times. It is widely assumed that the best-quality bronze vessels
were made in one or a few royal centres. Some modern experts claim to
be able to distinguish vessels produced at Anyang from contemporary but
clumsier and more old-fashioned ones made in less important centres (Kane
1974–75: 80). Robert Bagley (1980: 98) states that, while Zhengzhou-period
vessels were uniform in style and therefore perhaps were produced at only
a few royal workshops, those dating from the later Anyang period that are
found in outlying regions differ in type, style, and motifs from those produced
at Anyang. Robert Thorp (1985: 54–55) cautions, however, that few stylistic
differences are exhibited by vessels produced within the known borders of
the Shang state and therefore presumably by specialists working for different
lineages of the Shang ruling class. Gina Barnes (1993: 124) suggests that only a
small number of Anyang-style bronzes were produced at Shang royal capitals
and the rest were local copies. It is possible that craft workers trained at Anyang
were sent to work for various regional ofﬁcials.
In the Late Shang period, the Zhou rulers produced bronze vessels that
initially copied Shang prototypes. Soon, however, their vessels acquired their
own distinctive style (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 41–42). To date, the early Zhou
capitals are the only places except Anyang where abundant traces of writing
have been recovered. These Zhou texts date from the Late Shang period.
While the Shang writing system was used in both societies, surviving examples
of Zhou writing are distinguished by the smaller size of the characters and by
different calendrics (46–49). Thus both writing and bronze-working exhibit
a rapid divergence from Shang prototypes. By contrast, the relative stylistic
unity of bronze vessels within the core of the Shang kingdom seems to reﬂect
political control similar to that which the Inka central government exerted over
the production of luxury pottery and cloth.

Trade and Craft Specialization
373
Pottery was also produced in specialized communities near the great admin-
istrative compound at Zhengzhou and probably near provincial administrative
centres throughout northern China. Much of the Zhengzhou pottery consisted
of high-quality utilitarian wares, fashioned with only limited use of the potter’s
wheel but ﬁred using elaborate kilns in which the furnace was separated from
the baking oven. A small amount of the pottery produced at Zhengzhou con-
stituted luxury wares, including heavily decorated ritual vessels made of white
clay and water-resistant stoneware vessels covered with a glaze that had to be
ﬁred at a minimum temperature of twelve hundred degrees C (Chˆeng 1960:
137–55). Still other communities of craft workers around Zhengzhou consisted
of stone- and shell-carvers, stoneworkers, and carpenters. The stonework-
ers not only manufactured jade and marble luxury products but also mass-
produced stone arrowheads for the army and stone knives and sickles for state
labourers.
An important craft that could have been practised only with upper-class pa-
tronage was the production of chariots, which began in the thirteenth century
b.c. Sophisticated carpentry was needed to produce eighteen-spoke wheels
that were 125 to 140 centimetres in diameter and therefore considerably larger
than those made in the Middle East in the Late Bronze Age. Zhou rulers are
recorded as presenting elaborately decorated chariots as gifts to regional ofﬁ-
cials (Lu 1993). The large numbers in use suggest that they must have been
manufactured in regional centres as well as at the royal court.
The artisans who worked for the royal court were supervised by a large
number of full-time artisan ofﬁcials (gong), who also performed court rituals
and accompanied military expeditions, perhaps to oversee the maintenance
of equipment. It is unknown to what extent these artisan ofﬁcials coordinated
specialized production throughout the kingdom and whether similar adminis-
trators worked for regional and local ofﬁcials (Keightley 1969: 8–65). What is
known about the Shang court suggests that it managed elite production much
as it was managed in Egypt and Inka Peru.
specialization in city- and territorial states
In territorial states the goods used by the upper classes and the government
tended to be made by full-time and elite craft workers employed by the state.
These goods circulated separately from goods made and used by commoners.
In this manner, the central government created a monopoly of high-quality
goods that reinforced its political control. The most luxurious goods were
produced, often from exotic raw materials, at or near the royal court, and
distributing them was a prerogative of the king. Less valuable luxury goods

374
Economy
and utilitarian items required by the state were produced both around the
royal court and in provincial administrative centres. Farmers generally had to
rely on goods manufactured from local raw materials by part-time rural craft
workers.
In city-state systems only the rulers of hegemonic states possessed economic
resources that approximated those that were regularly available to the rulers
of territorial states, and their power ﬂuctuated and was often short-lived. Full-
time craft workers tended to sell most of their products publicly, and exotic
raw materials were available to artisans from long-distance traders and at local
markets. This meant that better-quality goods of all kinds were available to
anyone who could afford them. If the quality of the luxury goods produced in
city-state systems rarely matched the best that was created in territorial states,
the overall quality of goods available to everyone was higher. In city-states that
were divided along hereditary class lines and in some other hegemonic city-
states,theupperclassesattempted,byenactingsumptuarylawsandcontrolling
long-distance trade, to regulate the distribution of goods in ways analogous to
those found in territorial states, where goods circulated at the commoner and
the upper-class levels but only rarely passed from one level to the other. Among
the Classic Maya, upper-class control of interstate trade may have constituted
a mechanism of political control that resembled those found in territorial
and some hegemonic states, but exotic goods such as obsidian were widely
distributed in Maya society.

17 Appropriation of Wealth
A
deﬁning feature of all early civilizations was the institutionalized appro-
priation by a small ruling group of most of the wealth produced by the
lower classes. Economists commonly deﬁne wealth as the stock of goods and
claims that individuals or corporate groups can give away or use to purchase
goods and services. In modern industrial societies, where almost everything
can be bought and sold, any sort of asset constitutes wealth (Polanyi 1944). In
early civilizations, however, some types of goods did not circulate freely. Com-
munal land, which could be inherited but not alienated, was clearly a source
of wealth that economically advantaged its owners by comparison with groups
that were landless. Agricultural workers who lacked their own land had to pay
to use other people’s, usually by surrendering a substantial portion of their
production to its owners. Yet, while inalienable communal land constituted
a source of wealth, it was not a form of wealth. In Peru the king gave gold
objects to individuals as testimonials of his esteem for them or as rewards for
service. Although these objects could be inherited, they could not be bought
or sold. Thus, while they were valuable social assets, they too were not com-
modities, and hence did not constitute wealth. Palaces, temples, and tombs,
which expressed the power of the upper classes, also fell into this category.
In some early civilizations, such as Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Valley of
Mexico, metal bullion and cloth were commodities that were easily stored for
long periods and facilitated exchange; hence they constituted important forms
of wealth, as did many exotic raw materials. Nevertheless, the most common
and economically important forms of wealth in early civilizations were agricul-
tural surpluses.
Farmers and artisans did not accumulate large amounts of wealth, although
they created virtually all the wealth that existed in these societies. Most of
them lived only slightly above the subsistence level and had to depend on their
own sustained labour to support themselves. Food is reported to have become
375

376
Economy
scarceinthemonthpriortotheannualmaizeharvestamongmanyofthepoorer
families living in the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan (Clendinnen 1991: 66). Some
merchants accumulated great riches as a result of their trading activities, but
theygenerallylackedpoliticalpowerandthereforehadtocultivatethegoodwill
and protection of rulers and ofﬁcials. Most of the wealth produced in early
civilizations was controlled by powerful individuals, families, and institutions.
Producers, as far as they could, sought to beneﬁt by personally disposing of
their surplus production. Some ancient Egyptian farmers habitually tried to
conceal part of their harvest to avoid having that portion taxed by government
ofﬁcials. Tax collectors, for their part, sought to stop such evasion by calculating
harvest yields as accurately as possible and forcing farmers who claimed to have
produced less to reveal their hiding places (Lichtheim 1976: 170–71). Farmers
must have disliked having to produce more surplus grain than they and their
families required only to have most of it appropriated by landowners and
government ofﬁcials. At the same time, the upper classes and the government
would have liked production to increase so that they might have still greater
wealth at their disposal.
Members of the upper classes competed among themselves for the control
of surplus wealth, and this competition gave rise to many different types of
appropriation. One of the main forms of obligatory wealth transfers in early
civilizations was taxes, which had to be paid to the state. Surplus wealth was
transferred to individual members of the upper classes as rents paid to owners
for the use of land and as fees and bribes offered for various services, such as
rendering legal decisions. Corv´ee, indentured, and slave labour were yet other
means by which the state or upper-class individuals could enrich themselves
at the expense of the less powerful. Other important wealth transfers in early
civilizations took the form of payments that rulers of weaker states were com-
pelled to make to rulers of more powerful ones. Many scholars, when dealing
with early civilizations, use the terms ‘taxes’ and ‘tribute’ interchangeably or
refer to the obligatory transfer of wealth both within and between states as
‘tribute’. The latter usage is exempliﬁed by expressions such as ‘tributary mode
of production’ (Amin 1976). The unjustiﬁed implication of this usage is that
in early civilizations both forms constituted a surrender of wealth by subjects
to rulers that was fundamentally different from the payment of taxes in mod-
ern societies. I will use the term ‘tax’ in the conventional manner to refer to
obligatory wealth transfers from individuals or groups to states and ‘tribute’ to
designate wealth transfers between states. While the two were not necessarily
terminologically differentiated in all early civilizations, Egyptian ofﬁcials of
the New Kingdom distinguished between the tribute (ınw) paid to them by
conquered Syrian and Canaanite principalities and the taxes (b3kw) collected

Appropriation of Wealth
377
within Egypt and Nubia, which was by then an extension of the Egyptian state
(Priese 1974). Whether or not it had an emic referent in each early civilization,
the distinction between taxes and tribute is a heuristically useful one.
taxes, corv ´ees, and rents
It used to be argued that the appropriation of foodstuffs in early civilizations
was achieved as a result of the control that the upper classes exercised over
arable land. Some scholars surmised that farmers were bound to the land
much as peasants were in medieval Europe. Others believed that, by owning
all the agricultural land, the upper classes forced peasants either to rent it from
them or to enter into sharecropping relations, thus ensuring that they would
receive most of the surplus (Weber 1976 [1896]). The alternative concept of the
Asiatic society postulated that members of egalitarian farming communities
owned the land collectively and the upper classes used the threat of force to
extract surplus production from them in the form of taxes or tribute (Isaac
1993). It is now clear, however, that land ownership in early civilizations was
considerably more complex than either of these models and that, when it
came to transfers of wealth, it was economically less important than the right
to appropriate agricultural production and the surplus labour of the lower
classes.
The ways of appropriating food surpluses were varied. Taxes might be paid
to the state by farmers who collectively owned and worked the land or by
institutional or private landowners. They could be levied in kind on all types
of agricultural produce or only on grains and other easily stored crops. They
might be paid entirely or in part with something of equivalent value such
as metal bullion or cowrie shells. A ﬁxed amount of tax might be collected
annually for a particular amount of arable land, a different rate might be set
annually depending on varying crop yields, or a ﬁxed percentage of the total
yield might be levied. Privately or institutionally owned land was taxed in some
early civilizations but exempt from taxation in others.
Privately, institutionally, and even collectively owned land might be worked
by slaves or by farmers who were bound to the soil in return for their subsis-
tence. It might also be cultivated by landless labourers for a ﬁxed daily wage
(often paid in foodstuffs), rented to landless farmers for a ﬁxed amount, or
sharecropped with tenant farmers. Each of these arrangements resulted in
the return of a substantial share of the crop to the landowners.
Commoners could also be required, as a form of labour tax, to work plots
of land that were assigned to local ofﬁcials, temples, or the state and to pro-
vide corv´ee labour for government mining operations, build temples, palaces,

378
Economy
and royal tombs, clean and maintain public thoroughfares, provide domestic
service for kings and lords, and participate in military operations. Taxes were
frequently collected on handicraft production, market sales, and goods being
transported from one place to another. Sales taxes could either be collected
in addition to or substituted for direct levies on production. Taxes of all sorts
were paid to various levels of government and sometimes by the same people
to more than one level.
In Shang China, if later traditions are correct, rural lineages handed over
approximately one-ninth of their agricultural production to the upper classes
by cultivating ﬁelds to produce harvests that were assigned either to the king or
to regional governors, local leaders, and various stipendiaries who worked for
these ofﬁcials (Vandermeersch 1980: 215–17). After the annual harvest, they
may also have had to perform a month of non-agricultural corv`ee labour for
their lord (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 349). Oracle-bone texts reveal that kings and
perhaps other high-ranking lords mobilized ordinary people to perform various
forms of corv´ee labour for themselves or the state: preparing agricultural land,
planting and harvesting millet on special estates, building fortiﬁcations and
palaces, assisting at hunts, performing military service, and helping the army
to transport supplies. These were the same forms of public works that were
performed by landless labourers who worked full-time for the king. Both types
of labourers served under ofﬁcers with ‘military’ titles, which suggests that no
distinction was drawn between military service and other forms of corv´ee
labour. All the food produced by these workers would have belonged to the
king or high-ranking lords (Keightley 1969: 66–144; 1999b: 281, 284). Thus
Shang commoners appear to have paid taxes mostly in the form of labour. There
is no evidence, however, that payment in kind was ruled out or regarded as
inappropriate.
Subjects of the Inka ruler were unique in our sample in that they paid all
taxes in the form of labour rather than goods. In addition to cultivating their
own ﬁelds and ones that supported the corporate activities of their ayllu and
its leader, farm families had to work separate plots of land that belonged to
the Inka state and to religious cults sponsored by the Inka government. The
seeds and tubers sown in these ﬁelds and perhaps the tools that were used
were supplied by the institutions to which the harvest belonged. Working this
land was justiﬁed as reciprocity for the king’s permitting ayllus to keep most of
their land following their incorporation into the Inka kingdom (Kendall 1973:
145–46; Murra 1980: 31–33). Despite the integral involvement of women in
agriculture, the Inka state also represented agriculture as a form of permanent
bride service owed to the Inka ruler, who claimed control over all women. A
similar logic was applied to ﬁsh and other natural resources by claiming that

Appropriation of Wealth
379
they belonged to the king, who granted ordinary people the right to use them
provided that they supplied these items to government ofﬁcials whenever they
were asked to do so (Gose 2000: 85). By accumulating resources only through
the appropriation of labour, the Inka monarch avoided having anything given
to him by his subjects, which would have implied that he was inferior to the
givers. Farmers had to transport the produce of the state and temple lands
they cultivated to government and temple granaries located as far away as their
provincial administrative centre. Ayllu, state, and temple land constituted the
basis of three separate systems of production, each of which depended on the
same people’s labour. All the food produced on government land belonged to
the state, while all the food grown on temple lands was devoted to the service
of the gods (LeVine 1992).
Farmers also had to provide the corv´ee (mit’a) labour required to tend state
and temple herds of llamas and alpacas, construct and repair government
roads, mine and reﬁne metals, erect buildings, manufacture various sorts of
goods, and perform military duties. Hereditary lords and governors had a
right to the labour of one person from every hundred families under their
control, this labour being provided by each family in turn. A governor could
summon four hundred workers from all parts of his province to labour at the
administrative centre; a hunu kuraka (head of ten thousand families) could call
on one hundred of his subjects to perform domestic and agricultural tasks, a
waranka kuraka (head of one thousand families) on ten subjects, and a pachaca
kuraka (head of one hundred households) on one subject (Julien 1988; LeVine
1987). Rotating corv´ee labour produced grain on large state farms to support
the army and the upper classes. Far more grain was produced for the upper
classes on these farms than on an equivalent amount of farm land worked by
members of ayllus for themselves, the government, and temples (S. Moore
1958: 49–53, 61–67). Married women each year had to spin and weave ﬁxed
amounts of raw materials supplied by the state.
While no goods were actually transferred from farming communities to the
state, farmers produced large amounts of surplus food that, along with corv´ee
labour, belonged to the government, state-sponsored religious cults, and the
upperclasses.Ofﬁcialsreciprocatedwithhospitalityintheformofcookedfood,
maize beer, and entertainment and, if the workers were away from home for a
long time, clothing. These exchanges were modelled on the traditional usages
of Andean agriculture. Farmers regularly called upon neighbours, relatives,
and friends to help them accomplish major tasks on the understanding that
they would reciprocate whenever the latter needed help, and the women of the
group for whom the work was being done supplied all the workers with food,
drink, and entertainment for the duration of their toil (Murra 1980: 90–91).

380
Economy
Corv´ee labour done for the state and for state-sponsored temples differed from
local reciprocity mainly in the highly asymmetrical nature of the exchange and
the emphasis laid on the special obligations that subjects owed the king. Much
more labour was supplied by commoners to the state than went into providing
them with food and entertainment. Moreover, all the food, drink, and clothing
that were distributed to labourers had been produced for the state by unpaid
male and female workers. Token reciprocity facilitated the production of large
amounts of goods for the use of the upper classes (Morris and Thompson
1985).
Inka ofﬁcials’ appropriation of a small number of girls and boys from each
ayllu was yet another form of tax. The king eventually made some of the
young women who were not used as human sacriﬁces his secondary wives
and concubines and bestowed other women as extra wives on nobles and
commoners who had served him or the state well. The majority of these women
spent the rest of their lives secluded in the houses for chosen women, where
they assisted in religious rituals, wove fancy cloth, and cooked and brewed
for the state. The food they prepared was not only offered to the gods and
distributed to participants in religious festivals but also supplied to corv´ee
labourers working for the state or travelling from one part of the kingdom to
another (Kendall 1973: 192–93; Zuidema 1990: 58–59). The boys who were not
sacriﬁced were bound hereditarily to the king and other ofﬁcials as household
servants, craft workers, specialized retainers, and farm labourers. Their ranks
were swelled by whole groups of conquered peoples subjected to this form of
service. They had to turn over all their produce to the ofﬁcial for whom they
worked and by whom they and their families were fed, clothed, and housed.
While some came to enjoy positions of trust, they kept a much smaller portion
of the food they produced than did members of ayllus. Estates constituted
a small enough portion of all agricultural land that the government did not
have to tax their production to protect its own ﬁscal structure (Murra 1980:
168–75). This resulted in higher returns for individual members of the Inka
nobility who had been granted such lands. Estates and their bonded labourers
greatly enhanced the revenues of the king, of royal descent groups, and of
other individuals on whom they were bestowed.
In Egypt many individual farmers or farm communities paid a portion of
their crops as rents to men and women who owned estates or had been granted
the use of them by the government. Estate-holders included government ofﬁ-
cials, funerary cults, nobles, temples, the king, and the central government. In
dealing with their landlords, villagers were represented by their headmen. Un-
less estates belonged to the king or the state or had been declared tax-free by
the king, their owners or managers had to pay taxes to the central government.

Appropriation of Wealth
381
Farm villages that were not attached to estates seem to have paid taxes directly
to the government (Andreu 1997: 109).
During the Old Kingdom, a nationwide biennial cattle count provided the
basis for the government to levy a tax in kind on living animals and the hides
of dead animals belonging to individuals, communities, and institutions (Kees
1961: 87–90). Systematic records were also kept of what land was held by dif-
ferent institutions and individuals and who was responsible for paying the taxes
on the crops that each plot of land produced (Kemp 1983: 82). To assess the
productivity of land, the presence of ponds, canals, wells, trees, and swamps,
and anything else that might enhance or reduce its value was recorded (Eyre
1987a: 6). Already in the Old Kingdom, the amount of the grain tax appears to
have been determined in some general fashion by the level of the Nile ﬂood,
which was carefully recorded each year. If the ﬂood rose too high and destroyed
irrigation works or was too low for crops to be grown on higher ground, the
tax rate was reduced (Andreu 1997: 106–8; Eyre 1999: 45). The produce of
trees was also taxed (Kees 1961: 80). In addition, the government sought to
collect a tax on goods produced by part-time craft workers and by the wives
of commoners, of which cloth was probably the most important item. This tax
may have consisted of one of every ten items produced (Kees 1961: 53; Kemp
1983: 82–83).
Government ofﬁcials collected grain, dates, domestic animals, and man-
ufactured goods as taxes in the countryside and conveyed them to provin-
cial administrative centers, where they were placed under the control of the
local overseer of the granaries (ımy-r ˇsnwt) and the overseer of the treasury
(ımy-r pr h
• d). Much of what was collected remained stored at the provincial
administrative centres and was used to pay resident ofﬁcials and their assis-
tants, sustain government-employed craft workers, support local government
projects, feed corv´ee labourers in transit from one part of the country to an-
other, and provision royal visits. Other goods were forwarded as needed to
the national capital (Hassan 1993: 564–68; Strudwick 1985: 276–99). Temple
estates were usually located near the cult centre to which they belonged,
but those of an important one might be scattered throughout Egypt, as were
those assigned to royal funerary cults. Kings derived revenues from personal
estates, state-owned land, and taxes. Goods passed as rents from farmers to
estate-holders and as taxes from landowning farmers and estate-holders to the
government.
Egyptian farmers were also required to perform corv´ee labour. Tasks in-
cluded constructing and maintaining irrigation systems, erecting buildings
(including royal tombs), quarrying and mining, transporting goods, and par-
ticipating in military expeditions. Some of this work was done near where

382
Economy
farmers lived; other corv´ees were performed away from home, often near
the royal capital and sometimes outside the Nile Valley. Military and mining
expeditions and pyramid-building might require groups of men to be away
from their villages for three months or more at a time. Corv´ee workers were
organized into units of one hundred men, divided into groups of ten, each
with its own leader. Expeditions, some composed of over seventeen thousand
men, were sent into the Eastern Desert to quarry stone under the leadership
of expedition commanders (ımy-r mˇs) or royal (literally ‘divine’) treasurers
(sd3wty ntr). In addition to corv´ee labourers, state craftsmen (h
• mwt pr 3),
millers, and brewers accompanied such expeditions. Still larger groups of
labourers were assembled to help construct royal pyramid complexes (Andreu
1997: 29–36; Eyre 1987a: 10–20; Kemp 1989: 129). Corv´ee labourers were
fed, housed, and clothed when they were away from their homes for long pe-
riods. The selection of individuals for successive tours of duty must have been
worked out between low-level government scribes and village leaders. Severe
punishments were inﬂicted on people who attempted to evade corv´ee duty or
deserted their work parties. In the Middle Kingdom, they and their families
were conﬁned to government prisons (h˘ nrt) and might be condemned to per-
petual slave labour on government estates or those belonging to government
ofﬁcials (Andreu 1997: 27–28; Kemp 1983: 83–84).
Aztec calpolli members had to cultivate land specially designated for the
support of calpolli ofﬁcials, temples, schools, and regiments. Urban calpollis, in
particular, tended to be larger and less egalitarian than were Peruvian ayllus.
Their leading families and most successful warriors were usually members
of the nobility; hence collective labour helped to support the upper classes
within calpollis as well as those organizations’ corporate activities. Members of
calpollis also had to provide corv´ee labour for the state, helping to construct
public buildings and to clean and repair streets and public places as well
as serving as soldiers. It has been suggested that calpollis were required to
surrender one-third of their harvest to the state (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 75), but
it is unclear whether this was a direct tax or included all the food resources that
calpollis expended training their regiments, supporting military campaigns,
and performing other state duties. Nor is it even certain that a harvest tax
was levied (van Zantwijk 1985: 283). Public institutions, the king, nobles, and
successful warriors were granted land worked by landless farmers who were
allowed to keep only enough of the food they produced to feed themselves
and their families. No tax appears to have been paid on these lands or their
produce. Goods sold in public markets were subject to a tax that may have
amounted to 20 percent of the value of what was sold and could be paid either
in kind or with cloth or cacao beans. Because of the high volume of market

Appropriation of Wealth
383
exchange, this tax greatly enriched the palace and enhanced the power of the
king (Berdan 1982: 42).
In Mesopotamia much institutionally and privately owned land was rented,
sharecropped, or worked by wage labourers, and all these arrangements en-
sured that most of the food produced belonged to the land’s owners or des-
ignated beneﬁciaries. Kings controlled the revenues from palace lands and
taxed cultivated ﬁelds, crops, and herds belonging to individuals, kin groups,
and sometimes temples. Various kings attempted to increase their control over
temples and temple revenues, but some of these attempts were unsuccessful
(Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90; Postgate 1992: 185–87, 300).
In addition, kings and possibly city councils imposed various taxes on the
sale and movement of goods; the city administrators may, however, have been
acting only as agents for the king. There are references to taxes on goods
leaving and entering cities (which were collected at the city gates), taxes on
land, an annual tax that in Old Babylonian times was paid in silver by well-
to-do people, including merchants, priests, and ofﬁcials, and an annual tax
collected in kind on grain and animals from ofﬁcials, merchants, shepherds,
soldiers, scribes, tavern keepers, and cookshop operators (R. Harris 1975: 40–
45). Taxes were also levied on burials and divorces. These taxes were collected
by a wide variety of ofﬁcials, including gatekeepers, city administrators, and
judges, in return for a commission. The right to collect taxes, rents, and dues
was also sold to entrepreneurs in return for a portion of their value, usually
paid to the government in silver. These same entrepreneurs often made loans
at a high rate of interest to farmers and others who were experiencing short-
term ﬁnancial difﬁculties and had problems meeting tax payments. The king
also had the right to call on all free men to perform corv´ee labour. In later
times, corv´ees, including military service, appear to have been commutable by
payments in silver or grain (Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90; R. Harris 1975: 40–45;
Van De Mieroop 1999: 203–6).
Kings, temples, and landowners accumulated substantial wealth as the result
of their ability to appropriate crop surpluses. Although kings had to bear most
of the costs of managing the state, their large landholdings and their ability
to collect a wide range of taxes made them the wealthiest and most powerful
individuals in each city-state.
The Yoruba acknowledged that they owed taxes and corv´ee labour to com-
munity leaders and kings but viewed them as payments for the services, both
natural and supernatural, that leaders provided for their community. A lineage
that refused to pay such taxes would have been expelled from a community
(Lloyd 1962: 63). Relatively little food was collected as a direct tax on land
or produce. Each household presented a few yams as token offerings to local

384
Economy
ofﬁcials and the king at the beginning of the annual harvest (Law 1977: 229;
Lloyd 1962: 128). It is possible that no greater effort was made to collect har-
vest taxes because yams and other Yoruba crops could not be stored for as long
as the grain crops of other early civilizations (Bradbury 1957: 23). Large areas
were brought under cultivation using hereditary slaves, prisoners of war, and
debtors, all of whom laboured in return for basic necessities while the kings
and wealthy men and women who controlled their labour lived in luxury and
supported numerous armed retainers. In addition to offering token gifts of
food to the king, Yoruba men were required to perform corv´ee labour, which
was deployed to build and repair the royal palace and city walls, to tend sacred
groves, and sometimes to work palace farms. Such labourers expected to be
provided with food and drink by the ofﬁcials responsible for these corv´ees
(Ajisafe 1924: 25; Ojo 1966b: 63–66).
Most taxes were probably collected on market sales (Hodder and Ukwu
1969: 108). Taxes were also levied on craft production and on the movement of
goodsbetweenonestateandanotherandinandoutofcities.Thetollsthatwere
collected on food being brought into cities (Bascom 1969: 37) constituted a
more important source of revenue than did the agricultural produce presented
as gifts to the king at harvest time. These taxes were paid either in goods or
in cowrie shells to gatekeepers who kept a portion of what they collected as
payment for their work. The rest was shared by the king and a small number
of leading non-royal ofﬁcials such as the members of the state council in Oyo.
Each such ofﬁcial was authorized to collect taxes, together with the king’s
agents, at different city gates and along different roads. This prevented the
palace from appropriating too much wealth at the expense of those with whom
the king shared political power.
The king and a much greater number of ofﬁcials shared the many fees that
were levied for hearing legal cases and the ﬁnes that were imposed at various
levels. Ofﬁcials received presents and bribes for helping to settle disputes and
assisting petitioners in various ways. The king and the chief ofﬁcials of militar-
ily successful Yoruba states also shared a large portion of the booty, including
prisoners, captured during military campaigns. Whether these prisoners were
kept as labourers or sold as slaves, they constituted an important source of
income. The king also received fees for permitting certain rituals to be per-
formed at shrines he controlled, collected death duties on the properties of
wealthy citizens, and received payments for sanctioning the installation of ofﬁ-
cials and agreeing to bestow titles on individuals (Bascom 1969: 37; Law 1977:
229–31; Lloyd 1960: 229).
The king of Benin was supported by a more robust and centralized version
of the Yoruba tax system. The palace organization and state rituals were funded

Appropriation of Wealth
385
by presentations of palm oil, meat, and livestock twice each year by all ward
and village leaders. These contributions were assembled by local leaders from
every household in their ward or community. In addition, the king could call
on taxpayers to help repair and extend the royal palace and for extra levies
of goods when special sacriﬁces were deemed necessary for the good of the
nation. The king also derived considerable revenue in return for granting the
numerous titles that were under his exclusive control, exerted considerable
control over revenue from legal ﬁnes, and claimed ownership of all prisoners
taken in war, although he returned most of them to their captors (Bradbury
1957: 41–43).
AlmostnothingisknownabouthowtheMayaupperclassesextractedsurplus
wealth from commoners. The vastness of state projects and the opulent life
of Maya rulers suggest, however, that the Maya upper class, and kings in
particular, did it very effectively.
In all early civilizations a small privileged class appropriated, in ways that
were deemed to be socially acceptable, a disproportionate share of the avail-
able wealth. Ownership of land was not the key to this process. In most early
civilizations, agricultural produce and manufactured goods were appropriated
by the state in the form of taxes in kind, while surplus labour was appropriated
by imposing corv´ees. While the more intensive forms of appropriation asso-
ciated with institutional or private ownership of land were practised only to a
limited extent in most early civilizations, they appear to have predominated
in Mesopotamia and Egypt and to have been rapidly increasing in the Inka
kingdom and at least some of the more powerful states in the Valley of Mexico.
The amount of food available for appropriation would have varied accord-
ing to the environmental settings and the differing overall productivity of the
agricultural regimes of various early civilizations. Yet, as a result of the general
simplicity of the technology and the predominant role played by human labour
in every sector of agricultural production (except Egyptian and Mesopotamian
grain production, for which cattle traction was also used), the per capita range
of variation in intensity of food production was not great. Nevertheless, the ap-
propriation of even slightly larger amounts of food produced on institutionally
or privately owned land would have substantially increased the food resources
available to a minuscule upper class.
Substantialamountsoffoodandmanufacturedgoodswerealsoappropriated
by imposing market, sales, and transportation taxes and charging fees to use
state services such as the legal system. Such taxes and fees appear to have
been especially common in city-state systems, where trade and marketing were
important aspects of the economy. It also may have been more practical to tax
foodstuffs in this fashion in societies where food was produced continuously

386
Economy
over much of the year, as was the case with chinampas and kitchen gardens
in Mesoamerica, rather than where there was a single annual grain harvest, as
in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The Mesopotamians appear to have taxed grain
being brought into cities as well as ﬁelds and crop yields. Increasing the range
of taxable items and the diversity of ways in which revenue was collected
disguised the total amount that was being appropriated from the producer
and probably facilitated its extraction.
Some of these strategies may have been more appropriate than others in
particular ecological settings, and some combinations of strategies may have
been generally more effective than others. To the extent that resources ﬂowed
into the hands of various segments of the upper classes, the power of the
monarch was limited. The Yoruba, whose taxation arrangements ensured that
most of the resources available to the central government would be shared by
the king and a few high-ranking non-royal ofﬁcials, had a much less centralized
government than the Aztec, whose monarch controlled substantial revenues
derived from patrimonial and ofﬁce lands and market taxes. Even the king of
Benin did not succeed in controlling wealth and its distribution to the same
extent as the most powerful rulers in the Valley of Mexico. The Egyptian and
Inka bureaucracies made it possible for central governments to collect and
store goods for their own use in capitals and administrative centres in all the
regions they controlled. In China regional ofﬁcials appear to have controlled
the collection and distribution of surplus resources in regions that were under
their direct control and, like the king, probably received tax payments from
ofﬁcials who ruled smaller areas subject to their authority. Yet, because of
the delegational nature of political organization, they had to cede economic
control of various subregions to these subordinate ofﬁcials.
Because of their low per capita productivity, early civilizations did not have
the capacity to monitor and tax resources as is done today. The government
of Old Kingdom Egypt appears to have gone farthest in keeping detailed reg-
isters of land ownership and rights to beneﬁt from its produce, but there is
no evidence of detailed reckonings of the total revenue received by the cen-
tral government (Strudwick 1985: 251–300). The Inka organized taxation in
accordance with a decimal system based on multiples of one hundred nuclear
families. Among the Yoruba, assembling revenues from different social groups,
especially those living outside the capital, was a complex, decentralized opera-
tion. In the kingdom of Ife ﬁve ofﬁcials who lived in towns some distance from
the capital collected contributions from the heads of nearby settlements, which
they subsequently shared with the king (Bascom 1969: 29). The king of Benin
collected taxes through agents living in Benin City who were responsible for
dealing personally with the representatives of various communities scattered

Appropriation of Wealth
387
in different parts of the kingdom. The agents kept a share of these taxes as
a commission and forwarded the rest to the palace (Bradbury 1957: 42–43).
In Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico, different kinds of agents collected
different sorts of taxes. Although high-level ofﬁcials established targets for
tax collection, the manner in which speciﬁc sums were collected appears to
have been determined by highly speciﬁc personal and political considerations,
including bribery.
There is no evidence that even states which developed elaborate systems
of food storage, such as those of ancient Egypt and the Inka, assumed major
responsibility for public welfare in times of famine. The Egyptian government
may have lowered taxes on grain when harvests were poor, and local ofﬁcials
occasionally claimed to have shipped food from areas of plenty to nearby areas
where people were starving. There is, however, no indication that food was
stored with the speciﬁc intention of eventually using it for famine relief. Even
the biblical folktale of Joseph, often interpreted as evidence of such storage,
says that Joseph, as a royal ofﬁcial, accumulated surplus grain for seven years
so that the king might become rich by selling it to his subjects at a high price
duringatimeoffamine.LettersfromtheearlyMiddleKingdomspeak,perhaps
rhetorically, of people in one part of Egypt being driven to cannibalism while
people in other regions had sufﬁcient food to eat (James 1962: 33; Lichtheim
1973: 87). In the devastating famine of a.d. 1450–54, the Aztec king was able
to provide only minimal food relief. In order to survive, many Aztec had to sell
themselves or their children into slavery to traders bringing food from outside
the Valley of Mexico. The later expansion of wetland agriculture in the Valley
of Mexico and the subjugation of warmer, maize-producing areas outside the
valley may have been intended in part to improve the long-term food supply
and protect the Aztec against the recurrence of such famines (Davies 1980:
92–93). There is no evidence, however, that Aztec kings ever contemplated
the need for the state to stockpile food for this purpose. The main reason the
Aztec state appropriated food was to enable the king and his ofﬁcials to enjoy
a luxurious lifestyle and subsidize his efforts to enhance his power.
Sharecropping and rental rates suggest that under optimal conditions a hard-
working farm family might have been able to produce up to 50 percent more
food than was required to meet its minimum subsistence requirements. Taxes
collected directly from free farmers always seem to have been considerably
lowerthanthat,amountingtoroughlyone-tenthtoone-ﬁfthofthetotalamount
of food produced. The suggestion that an Aztec calpolli surrendered as much as
one-third of its crop yield seems unlikely and may have been invented to justify
higher exactions during the colonial period. While in some early civilizations
farmers consumed extra food of their own while performing local corv´ees, in

388
Economy
Peru corv´ee labourers were always fed by the state, and in Egypt they were
fed at least while they were away from home. Elsewhere at least some corv´ee
labourers expected food and entertainment from those who directed their
work, so even in these cases corv´ee labour was not the direct equivalent of
an additional transfer of food resources from taxpayers to the state. It would
appear that about ten farm families normally were willing to support one or
at most two non-food-producing families without subjecting the social and
political order to undue strain.
Farmers must have appreciated the protection from external attack, the
maintenance of local order, and the water-management systems that govern-
ments provided. In return, they would have been prepared to pay taxes if they
believed these taxes were not extortionate and were imposed reasonably equi-
tably. An effective ruler had to curb abuse of the tax system by his ofﬁcials and
keep his own expenses and those of the upper classes within reasonable limits.
To collect increasing amounts of taxes would have required more coercion,
which would have increased the cost of managing the state. By comparison
with some later preindustrial societies, such as the Roman Empire, early civ-
ilizations seem to have kept both taxes and expenses low. Max Weber (1976
[1896]: 63–64) observed that hereditary rulers generally preferred a ‘prudent
and durable rate of exploitation’ and security of revenues to trying to maxi-
mize capital accumulation. Other forms of economic exploitation were also
kept under control. Slaves were relatively few, and their treatment was only
rarely characterized by the brutality associated with Late Republican Roman
Italy or early modern colonial plantation economies. The most widespread
form of exploitation was that of landless farm labourers, who were generally
compelled to surrender a higher percentage of their production to landowners
than were farmers who owned their own land. The many forms of appropria-
tion that were practised simultaneously and the widespread private ownership
of land suggest that the economic exploitation of landless people may have
been harsher in Mesopotamia than in any other early civilization. Even there,
however, government interventions, in the form of periodic cancellations of
some debts, seem to have kept economic inequality and exploitation within
socially manageable limits.
That it was less important who owned land than who had a right to appro-
priate agricultural production and control surplus agricultural labour explains
why a variety of landowning and landholding practices and many different
techniques for taxing goods were able to support systems characterized by
generally similar levels of sociopolitical inequality. The material asymmetry of
thesetransfersjustiﬁesthesuggestionthatallthesesocietiesshareda‘tributary’
mode of production (Amin 1976: 9–16), so long as it is understood that the

Appropriation of Wealth
389
term ‘tributary’ refers to the payment of all forms of taxes. The key features
of this mode of production were the ability of the upper classes to extract
substantial surpluses from commoners and the signiﬁcance of the control of
surplus wealth as opposed to the ownership of property. Because most wealth
was produced by farmers, who constituted the vast majority of the popula-
tion, the amount of wealth available to the upper classes tended to be directly
proportional to the number of people they could exploit.
tribute
The upper classes in some early civilizations were further enriched by trib-
ute extracted from weaker neighbouring states. This was accomplished by
the use or threat of military force. While some of this wealth was widely
distributed within dominant states, encouraging broad support for a policy of
hegemony,itsdispersalwasdirectedbythekingorwhoevercontrolledthemili-
tary. The ability to distribute these resources increased the authority and power
of such leaders. Most of the wealth that was received as tribute was distributed
among members of the upper classes, thus increasing their power in relation to
commoners.
In territorial states most of the wealth that supported the upper classes was
producedinternally.InEgypttributeappearstohavebeenofeconomicandpo-
litical importance only in the New Kingdom. The rulers of subject city-states in
Canaan and Syria supplied the Egyptian king with slaves, manufactured goods,
olive oil, and wood without receiving payment in return. Nubia, which, unlike
Canaan and Syria, was colonized and directly administered by Egyptians, was
important economically as a place where Egyptians could mine gold and trade
for ivory, ebony, and other products coming from south of the area of Egyptian
domination (Trigger 1976a: 110–14). Shang rulers may have imposed the pay-
ment of tribute on states located beyond their borders, such as that of the Zhou
rulers, whom they forced for a time to acknowledge their dominance but were
unable to incorporate into the Shang state. The Inka do not appear to have
collected tribute from any groups living beyond the borders of their kingdom,
probably because such groups were too poor and often too mobile to be worth
trying to dominate.
In contrast, in city-states tribute played a major role. The more power-
ful militarily a ruler was and the more states he dominated, the more sur-
plus wealth he controlled. The more wealth a ruler possessed and the more
soldiers and retainers he could support, the more powerful he was. Tribute
allowed a ruler to increase his general revenues and sometimes to obtain
goods that were not available in his own kingdom. It was also a way to gain

390
Economy
control over interstate trade routes and markets and rearrange these to the eco-
nomic advantage of a hegemonic state. While dominant city-states interfered
to varying degrees in the internal government of tributary states, for the most
part weaker states were allowed to remain self-governing. This meant that, if
hegemonic power declined, a tributary system could disintegrate very quickly.
When either a hegemonic ruler’s wealth or his power started to diminish, the
feedback loop linking the two unravelled and hegemonic status was gravely
threatened.
The Aztec and their partners in the Triple Alliance controlled the largest
and best-documented tributary system in our sample. They had compelled
the whole of the Valley of Mexico and large areas of central Mexico from the
Gulf of Mexico to the Paciﬁc to pay them tribute. Different sectors of control
were assigned to each of these three city-states, with Tenochtitlan controlling
the largest and most diverse region. Beyond the Valley of Mexico, the Triple
Alliance’s power had spread along major trading routes and embraced city-
states in all ecological zones from the temperate highlands to the tropical
lowlands. They did not bother to subjugate some poorer and more isolated
states and were unable to subdue some stronger ones. The Tlaxcalans, living
to the east of the Valley of Mexico, although unconquered, were completely
encircled by the Triple Alliance, and all interstate trade with them in salt and
exotic luxury goods had been cut off (Barlow 1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hassig
1985).
Tributary states in the valley supplied the Aztec, Texcocans, and Tlacopans
with food and cloth as tribute. The nearest states also provided labour for
building projects as well as stone and gravel, which were in short supply in the
marshy setting of Tenochtitlan. States within an eighty-kilometre radius of the
valley supplied large amounts of maize, which had to be carried to Tenochtitlan
and Texcoco by human bearers. The high cost of transportation made hauling
bulky items, such as food, from farther away uneconomical (M. E. Smith
1996: 174). Beyond that radius some states did not pay regular tribute but
were required to provide military service and present Triple Alliance leaders
with gifts at irregular intervals. These states were exempt from regular tribute
either because it was hoped that they would provide defence against common
enemies located beyond the tributary system or because Triple Alliance control
was not yet strong enough to incorporate them fully into the system. Other
city-states were forced to pay tribute in amounts that varied according to their
political relations with the Triple Alliance. Weaker states located near the
centre of the tributary network tended to be taxed more heavily than stronger
or more distant ones that could rebel more easily. States that had submitted
without ﬁghting might pay only token tribute, while other states paid larger

Appropriation of Wealth
391
amounts according to how hard they had resisted the alliance or how often they
had rebelled (Barlow 1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hassig 1988: 174–75; M. E.
Smith 1996: 175–82).
All the tribute from distant city-states consisted of valuable, low-bulk ma-
terial, much of it exotic. Raw cotton, sheets of fancy cloth, ﬁnished clothing,
elaborate suits of armour made of quilted cotton, and ornate shields were stan-
dard items of tribute. Tributary states also supplied copper and bronze objects,
pieces of gold, jade, turquoise, and ornaments made from these substances,
chocolate, rubber, incense, feathers, live birds, and exotic animals. Some of
these goods originated outside the Triple Alliance’s sphere of control, and the
states that supplied them had to obtain them by trade (M. E. Smith 1996:
178–82).
Stipulated amounts of tribute were collected by the rulers of subordinate
city-states and forwarded every eighty days to a pair of Aztec or Texcocan ﬁscal
agents stationed in each of thirty-two city-state capitals that served as centres
for tribute collection. Located between and beyond these tributary units were
twenty-three more centres for supervising relations with subordinate states
that did not pay regular tribute. In areas nearer the Valley of Mexico, ﬁscal
agents and their assistants also supervised the cultivation of ﬁelds that had
been ceded to the Triple Alliance and arranged to have the surplus produce of
these ﬁelds transported to their alliance capitals. Transport costs were borne
by subordinate states as an additional form of tribute (Hassig 1985: 105–10;
M. E. Smith 1996: 175–80). In each of the Triple Alliance capitals the tribute
became the property of the king and was stored in the royal palace. Successive
Aztec kings built new palaces, and the abandoned ones may have been used
for storage and administrative purposes.
Tributary networks gave the city-states of the Triple Alliance access to vast
amounts of raw material and manufactured goods that they otherwise would
have had to purchase or do without. The tribute collection area of Coayxt-
lahuacan, in the modern state of Oaxaca, annually forwarded to Tenochtitlan
4,000 textiles of various speciﬁed designs, 2 feathered warrior costumes,
2 strings of jade beads, 800 quetzal feathers, 40 bags of cochineal dye, 20 gourd
vessels ﬁlled with gold dust, and a royal feather headdress. Each year the Aztec
received a total of 665 warrior costumes, 147,200 pieces of cloth or items of
clothing, and 4,400 loads of raw cotton (M. E. Smith 1996: 178–81). Tribute
provided a major economic stimulus for Tenochtitlan to become the largest
city in central Mexico. This wealth economically subsidized upward social mo-
bility, provided skilled craft workers with cheaper raw materials, and directly
or indirectly beneﬁted all of Tenochtitlan’s inhabitants. It was no accident that
the Triple Alliance’s tributary network expanded along major trade routes.

392
Economy
The Aztec rulers used tribute to help provision the army, reward valiant
soldiers, pay public ofﬁcials, subsidize lavish public works, and support temples
and public rituals. Every day the king fed hundreds of lords, ofﬁcials, armed
retainers, priests, artisans, pages, servants, and visitors at the royal palace.
He paid and rewarded ofﬁcials and professional soldiers with pieces of cloth
that they could use to purchase anything they wanted at public markets. He
exchanged some of the maize and cloth that he received with the pochteca in
return for the highly esteemed luxury goods that they obtained from beyond
the farthest zone of tribute collection. He also distributed food and clothing
to ordinary people at a festival that occurred just before the annual harvest,
where commoners had to line up and wait patiently for their share of gruel and
tamales while the upper classes feasted and danced. Even this public display
of royal generosity emphasized the deference and submission that the Aztec
nobility expected from commoners (Clendinnen 1991: 66–67).
The Aztec king’s control over the distribution of tribute greatly enhanced his
power amongst his subjects. They looked to him for material rewards and social
advancement. He used his wealth to support and expand state institutions,
feed a large palace staff, and reward and win the support of ofﬁcials and
warriors (Berdan 1982: 12, 39–40). Conversely, having to pay tribute weakened
subordinate rulers. They could not reward warriors or patronize craft workers
to the same extent as they had before, and to cover the cost of paying tribute
they had either to lower their own standard of living or to increase taxes. Very
often tributary rulers had to rely on their Triple Alliance overlord to keep them
in power by quelling local opposition. Conquered states became politically
more factionalized and less able to resist foreign domination (Hodge 1984).
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, defeated city-states had to pay tribute or
indemnities to victorious neighbours and cede disputed border lands and wa-
ter rights to them. This resulted in the transfer of considerable agricultural
potential. Entemena, the ruler of Lagash, exacted over 10,800 metric tons of
grain from the neighbouring state of Umma as reparations for a ‘rebellion’
(R. McC. Adams 1966: 149). Booty, reparations, tribute, ransoms, and prison-
ers of war greatly increased the wealth and power of successful Early Dynastic
Mesopotamian kings, even if they shared much of this wealth with their sol-
diers and with temples, as thanks offerings for the supernatural support they
had received.
The tribute that had to be paid to Sargon of Akkad on a monthly or yearly
basis allowed a vast expansion of that hegemon’s palace staff and military forces
(R. McC. Adams 1966: 143; Jacobsen 1970: 191). Ur III rulers sought to control
and unify key sectors of the economy throughout the region they controlled.
By contrast, the Old Babylonian hegemons apparently encouraged economic

Appropriation of Wealth
393
decentralization but used many different techniques to collect revenues from
the city-states that fell brieﬂy under their control. The extraction of wealth
from subordinate city-states brought great wealth to Mesopotamia’s hege-
monic cities. Leo Oppenheim (1964: 117) stated that ‘real prosperity came
to a Mesopotamian city only when it had in its midst the palace of a victorious
king’. While ordinary cities were poor and fell prey to victorious armies, the
sanctuaries and palaces of dominant cities were sumptuously adorned, and
traders, craft workers, and retainers ﬂocked to them to serve their kings.
Tribute was delivered to Oyo, which had created the largest of the Yoruba-
speaking tributary systems, by subordinate kings and other community heads
who gathered with their followers at several tribute-collecting centres before
attending the bere festival held at Oyo each January. The tribute consisted of
bere grass (which was used to rethatch the palace), cowrie shells, live rams,
dried meat, yam ﬂour, and a ﬁxed share of taxes collected on goods passing
through the gates of tributary cities. This tribute was presented to the king
through titled ofﬁcials in Oyo city who were appointed to act as patrons (baba)
for particular groups of tribute bearers. In return for doing this, these ofﬁcials
were allowed to keep a share of these payments. Besides collecting tribute
on a regular basis from this ring of subordinate city-states, the king of Oyo
occasionally demanded and received tribute from more distant states. After
Oyo defeated Dahomey in 1730, Dahomey was required to send a portion of its
annualbooty,includingslaves,cowrieshells,andcoralbeads,totherulerofOyo
(Law 1977: 99–109; R. Smith 1969: 40–43). Within Oyo, tribute, like taxes, was
shared between the king, who supernaturally ensured military victory, and the
sevenofﬁcialswhocomposedthestatecouncilandcontrolledthearmedforces.
The king of Benin personally beneﬁted to a far greater extent from Benin’s
hegemony than the king of Oyo did from Oyo’s preeminence. He appears to
have carefully monitored the collection of taxes throughout the entire region
he or his predecessors had conquered and maintained a monopoly over the
trading and sale of ivory and certain other commodities. These monopolies
greatly augmented the wealth that was available to the king and increased his
political power.
In all city-state systems, conquests resulted in the transfer of wealth from
weaker states to dominant ones. This wealth enhanced the power of the top-
ranking ofﬁcials who received it. In the Valley of Mexico, Mesopotamia, and
at Benin, the recipient was the king. In Oyo, as in other Yoruba states, tribute,
like war booty and taxes, was shared by the king and the non-royal members
of the state council who controlled Oyo’s army. The key factor in determining
who beneﬁted most from receiving and hence controlling the distribution of
tribute appears to have been control of the army.

394
Economy
appropriation and political organization
In early civilizations the upper classes appropriated wealth from commoners
in many different ways. Invariably these appropriations involved some form
of corv´ee labour. The transfer of wealth was also accomplished by assigning
prime agricultural land to upper-class individuals or institutions, charging rents
for the use of land, sharecropping, imposing taxes on land or agricultural pro-
duce, taxing the sale or transport of goods, and levying fees for rendering legal
decisions and other services. Using various combinations of these appropria-
tions to collect revenue, the upper classes in all early civilizations succeeded
in transferring most of the surplus wealth produced by commoners to them-
selves. The differing impacts that these transfers had on social organization
were determined by the extent to which wealth was controlled by the king
or passed directly to a broader spectrum of the upper classes. In delegational
polities much wealth fell directly under the control of regional ofﬁcials, forcing
the king to rely on them for support.
Among territorial states control of wealth may have been less centralized in
Shang China, with its delegational administration, than it was in Old Kingdom
Egypt and Inka Peru, with their more bureaucratic forms of government.
Nevertheless, the Shang kings carried out vast construction projects (Keightley
1969: 126–40). Among city-states, the Yoruba king was forced to share state
revenues with the titled representatives of leading non-royal lineages, whereas
the Aztec kings derived much greater power from their ability to control the
collection and distribution to their subjects of most of the wealth derived from
taxes.Therulingclassesinpowerfulcity-statesfurtherincreasedtheirrevenues
by forcing rulers of weaker states to pay them tribute. Tribute was a transfer of
wealth from one segment of the upper class to another, and it usually resulted
in pressure on commoners in weaker states to work harder and pay more taxes.
It strengthened the control exercised by the highest-ranking military leaders
in powerful city-states, since it was they who were able to distribute it. In the
more centralized city-states the king distributed tribute among his followers;
among the heterarchical Yoruba, kings shared the right to collect tribute with
other leading ofﬁcials.

18 Economic Constants and Variables
A
general precondition for the development of early civilizations was
the upper classes’ ability to ensure that farmers produced substan-
tial agricultural surpluses and that most of these surpluses be at the disposal
of a small ruling group. Because agricultural surpluses constituted the main
form of wealth in early civilizations, this control resulted in marked economic
inequality.
The early civilizations were all low-energy societies, human labour being the
principal and often the only source of energy for agricultural production. Fur-
ther, while the Yoruba employed a wide range of iron agricultural implements
and the Mesopotamians increasingly used copper and bronze ones, farmers
in the other early civilizations made all their agricultural implements of stone,
bone, and wood. The complexity of tool technology was not correlated with the
intensity of food production or with the densities of population supported in
the various early civilizations. The main factors determining intensity of food
production were the farming techniques employed and the amount of labour
invested in producing crops. The general simplicity of agricultural technol-
ogy meant that early civilizations were conﬁned to areas that had light, easily
worked soils.
Unexpected variation has been found amongst these societies, however, in
environmental settings, population density, intensity of agriculture, and the
geographical mobility of people. Some, such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, de-
veloped in river valleys located in zones of low rainfall, where all but the sim-
plest agriculture depended on some form of irrigation. They also developed
in temperate river valleys such as that of the Yellow River in northern China,
in mountainous areas such as the Valley of Mexico and the Andean highlands,
and in tropical forests and savannas, as did the Yoruba and the lowland Maya.
All except the Yoruba used hydrological works to some extent, but the archae-
ological record disproves the claim that early civilizations invariably began in
395

396
Economy
arid regions where agriculture relied wholly on irrigation and only secondary
civilizations developed in other ecological zones (Sanders and Price 1968;
Wittfogel 1957). There were, however, important differences in the nature of
hydrological works even in environments that were generally similar in type.
Most early civilizations developed in regions that remained warm to tem-
perate throughout the year. Such climates did not require a heavy investment
in providing substantial shelter, heating, and warm clothing for the entire
population, and this greatly reduced the ecological cost of supporting early
civilizations. Nevertheless, northern China has cold winters, and living in the
Andean highlands requires warm clothes and substantial housing. Thus, while
the higher costs involved in sustaining human beings in colder climates may
have inhibited the development of early civilizations, they did not conﬁne them
to tropical and subtropical regions.
The many different environmental settings in which early civilizations devel-
oped imposed speciﬁc requirements and limitations on subsistence patterns.
An important example of such limitations was the absence of any large domes-
ticable species of animals in Mesoamerica. Most of the domestic plants and
animals that early civilizations relied on and most agricultural practices were
continuations of what had been present in each region at an earlier stage of cul-
tural development. Cross-cultural parallels in subsistence patterns reﬂected
general biological similarities in the kinds of plants and animals that were suit-
able for domestication and how they were handled. The numerous speciﬁc
differences in agricultural practices from one early civilization to another in-
dicate that practical and locally adaptive knowledge concerning agriculture,
often acquired long before the development of civilization in a region, re-
mained important despite signiﬁcant sociopolitical change. Regionally speciﬁc
agricultural knowledge was among the most valuable forms of cultural capital
that early civilizations inherited from the smaller-scale societies out of which
they developed. Because this knowledge had been developed to cope with
speciﬁc local conditions, it was effective and therefore resistant to change un-
less crops or technologies that turned out to be locally more productive were
introduced from elsewhere (Boyd and Richerson 1985).
intensity of production
Average population densities in our sample ranged from perhaps sixty per-
sons per square kilometre among the Yoruba to ﬁve hundred persons per
square kilometre in the southern part of the Valley of Mexico. There appears
to have been a close correlation between population density and the intensity
of agriculture, as measured by the elimination of fallowing and the increasing

Economic Constants and Variables
397
number of crops grown on the same plot of land each year (Boserup 1965), but
the causal direction and precise nature of this correlation have not yet been
determined.
It is frequently assumed that farming groups in preindustrial societies were
characterized by a high rate of population increase because a sedentary lifestyle
facilitated women’s becoming pregnant at short intervals and farmers wel-
comed children as a source of labour (Lee 1972). Yet data on nursing in ﬁve
early civilizations in our sample suggest that the rate of population increase in
early civilizations was not as high as often has been assumed. In all of them
children were nursed two to three years or longer and in some women avoided
sexual intercourse to ensure that they did not become pregnant while they
were nursing. This reproductive restraint may have conﬂicted with the desire
of rulers for population growth among the lower classes to expand the tax base
and increase the supply of soldiers and corv´ee labourers. Because they had
multiple wives and concubines, many upper-class men had numerous chil-
dren (Betzig 1986), but upper-class women do not seem to have had more
children than lower-class ones.
Natural population growth was not, however, the only source of increasing
density. In the southern and politically most dynamic part of the Valley of
Mexico, a rapidly growing population partly fueled by immigration from other
parts of Mexico encouraged increasingly intensive agriculture that culminated
in the chinampa development of the ﬁfteenth century. Feeding the expanding
city of Tenochtitlan encouraged more intensive agriculture in order to reduce
the cost of transporting large amounts of food to that megacity. Yet, despite
claims to the contrary (Netting 1969), there is no obvious correlation between
the development of large urban centres and generally higher population
density.
Intensiﬁcation could occur quickly if additional labour was available and
there was a growing demand for food. While governments played a leading
role in developments such as the multistate dyke-building projects to control
water levels and concentrate fresh water in the southern lakes of the Valley
of Mexico, productivity ultimately depended on the knowledge, labour, and
skills of individual farmers. Their thorough familiarity with locally effective
agricultural techniques and the local environment allowed these farmers to
increase productivity fairly easily when social conditions required them to
do so or rewarded their efforts. Traditional agricultural knowledge provided
a basis for its own elaboration and development. Still more radical changes
may have been accomplished by rulers’ importing farmers or agricultural ex-
perts who brought new farming techniques with them. Gravity-ﬂow irriga-
tion, for example, may have been introduced to the Fayum in Egypt during

398
Economy
the Middle Kingdom by settlers from the Middle East (Butzer 1976: 36–37,
47, 51).
There is no evidence that speciﬁc types of environment alone determined
population densities or the intensity of agricultural production in early civiliza-
tions. Although the Classic Maya and the Yoruba both lived in tropical forest
and savanna, the Maya had high overall population density and intensive agri-
culture and the Yoruba had low population density and swidden agriculture.
Also, the Yoruba developed cities and kingdoms while their Ibo neighbours,
with much higher population density, did not (Bascom 1955: 452).
There was also no clear tendency for naturally circumscribed early civiliza-
tions to have higher population densities as Carneiro (1970b) once suggested.
Agricultural land was circumscribed by barren terrain in Mesopotamia, Egypt,
individual valleys in highland Peru, and the Valley of Mexico, but there were no
obvious ecological barriers circumscribing the Maya, Yoruba, or early north-
ern Chinese civilizations. The lowland Maya, who could have expanded into
adjacent areas of Central America, had a higher population density than did
the naturally circumscribed ancient Egyptians.
Beyond this, circumscription is a political phenomenon as well as an ecolog-
ical one. Egyptian rulers built walls and massive fortresses along their frontiers
and sometimes dispersed or deported neighbouring peoples in order to create
uninhabited wastelands, the better to control the trade in exotic goods and cage
their subjects (Hoffman 1979). The Shang and Zhou states, lacking natural
frontiers, gradually conquered neighbouring chiefdoms and settled them with
loyal populations who ensured that they were controlled and eventually assim-
ilated. Inka kings resettled subject populations on a large scale and controlled
trade and human movement across their well-marked borders. In general, it
appears that the need to control internal populations and foreign trade led
the rulers of territorial states to establish boundaries whether or not these
states were ecologically circumscribed. In city-states there appears to have
been little effective government control over movements across state bound-
aries in peacetime, and the possibility of refugees’ being offered a friendly
reception by nearby city-states made it harder for rulers to suppress dissent.
While in each early civilization, ecological conditions provided a context for
political manipulation, the speciﬁc ways in which borders were deﬁned and
populations controlled cannot be understood without taking account of polit-
ical factors. Because both the ecological and the political factors were highly
variable, there is no simple cross-cultural correlation between circumscription
and territorial or city-states. The relation between culture and environment is
better comprehended by a possibilist approach than by an ecologically deter-
ministic one.

Economic Constants and Variables
399
There may, however, have been a correlation between the political decen-
tralization of Yoruba and Mesopotamian city-state systems and the fact that
arable land (apart from that planted in oil or date palms) was not an endur-
ing asset in those societies (Stone 1997). In such situations control of land
was perhaps less important than control of labour, and this may have made it
harder for rulers to coerce landowners. Powerful Mesopotamian rulers sought
to settle nomadic groups on newly irrigated land and to compel them to pay
taxes, perform corv´ee labour, and provide military service, but farmers could
avoid royal exactions by moving away. Yoruba extended families were able
to relocate, often over long distances, because population density was low.
Had it increased signiﬁcantly, they would have had to develop more intensive
forms of agriculture, and this would have made speciﬁc plots of land more
valuable and reduced their owners’ mobility.
The problems of Mesopotamian agriculture probably encouraged the de-
velopment of large-scale land management in order to cope more easily with
the effects of salinization. This favoured the growth of major landowning in-
stitutions, although it does not explain why privately owned land also replaced
collective ownership by patrilineages. The higher population densities among
the Classic Maya and in the Valley of Mexico may have facilitated greater cen-
tralized control in these civilizations, but, as already noted, it is not clear why
the Maya did not expand territorially more than they did. In each case both
political and ecological factors seem to have been involved.
appropriation
Collective ownership of land by farming families predominated in the Valley of
Mexico, highland Peru, and among the Yoruba, but governments were able to
appropriate substantial surpluses from these groups. In all early civilizations,
alongside collectively owned land, there was land owned by institutions – the
king, the state, or religious cults. In Mesopotamia and Egypt institutional land
was of great economic and political importance, and it was rapidly becoming
more common in the Valley of Mexico and the Inka kingdom. In Mesopotamia
collectively owned land was transformed into institutional and privately owned
land to a greater extent than in any other early civilization. The division of
institutional land between temples and palaces reﬂected and reinforced the
heterarchical nature of power. In Egypt, Inka Peru, and the Valley of Mexico
all such land was managed by state ofﬁcials, including land that was devoted
to supporting cults. That arrangement reﬂected the greater centralization of
political power in those early civilizations. For the upper classes the great
advantage of institutional or privately owned land was that it facilitated the

400
Economy
appropriation of a much larger share of the crops than could be extracted from
equivalent amounts of collectively owned land.
No unilinear evolutionary sequence in which collectively owned land was
gradually replaced by institutional and then by private holdings can be iden-
tiﬁed. It is impossible to demonstrate that all land in early civilizations was
originally owned collectively. Moreover, the ability of wealthy and powerful
Yoruba to use the labour of privately owned slaves and debtors to derive
large agricultural surpluses from land collectively owned by their lineages
demonstrates that changes in the nature of land ownership were not the
only or even necessarily the most effective way for individuals to appropri-
ate larger shares of agricultural production. The long-term survival of col-
lective land alongside institutional land and, in the few examples where it
actually developed, private land indicates the lasting utility of the ﬁrst two
types.
There was no obvious correlation between types of landholding and territo-
rial or city-states. Among city-state civilizations, Mesopotamia had the largest
amount of private and institutional land and the Yoruba the least. In the Valley
of Mexico most land was collectively owned. Among territorial states, collec-
tive ownership predominated in Inka Peru and perhaps in China but appears
to have been superseded to a signiﬁcant degree by institutional and private
ownership in Egypt.
There also appears to have been no correlation between types of land own-
ership and population density. Collective ownership was a prominent feature
of the most (Valley of Mexico) and least (Yoruba) densely populated societies
in our sample. The survival of collective ownership may be associated with the
presence of lineages or endogamous collectivities in some societies, but it is
not clear what caused such forms of social organization to persist or diminish.
Forms of social organization may to some extent have been random inheri-
tances from the past that persisted as long as they were not incompatible with
changing social needs. While endogamous groups seem to have ﬂourished
in both rural areas and urban centres in the Valley of Mexico and the Inka
kingdom, patrilineal extended families appear to have diminished in size and
importance in the urban centres of Mesopotamia.
Taxes were not the only, or the most effective, way to extract agricultural
surpluses from farmers. Rents and sharecropping substantially increased the
amount of food surpluses that individual landowners or the state could collect
from landless farmers. The use of slaves, serfs, debtors, and hired labourers
to work the land resulted in entire crops’ being handed over to landowners,
who could treat as proﬁt everything but what was needed to feed the workers
and pay estate managers. Yet, because it was hard to control and motivate such

Economic Constants and Variables
401
workers, these more exploitative forms of cultivation also remained the most
restricted types in early civilizations.
Some states imposed taxes on the transport or sale of foodstuffs. Yoruba
kings and high ofﬁcials derived more revenue from taxing the movement of
food into cities and its sale at urban markets than they did from taxing land
or agricultural production, which amounted to no more than levies voluntarily
paid on the production of food.
Another source of revenue for the state was taxes levied on craft production
and on the movement and sale of such goods. The greater role played by market
exchange in city-states encouraged more taxing of the movement and sale of
goods, while in territorial states the main emphasis was on taxing agricultural
production.
In territorial states most tax revenues remained within provincial jurisdic-
tions. Some goods were transmitted to the capitals of territorial states for use
by the king and the royal court. In most city-states, the revenues that the state
derived as taxes belonged to kings and reinforced their authority. In heter-
archical Yoruba polities, revenues were divided among the king and major
ofﬁce-holders. Yoruba ofﬁcials also collected substantial fees for hearing legal
cases as well as the ﬁnes that were imposed as forms of punishment. In other
early civilizations reparations to injured parties tended to be more common
than ﬁnes.
manufacturing
The growth of early civilizations expanded the market for manufactured goods,
which in turn facilitated craft specialization and the production of higher-
quality merchandise. There was also a growing demand for luxury goods to
denote upper-class status. Luxury goods were often made from rare and ex-
pensive raw materials that could be obtained locally only with great effort or
had to be imported from abroad. These goods were manufactured by highly
skilled workers who often laboured in teams to produce small numbers of
exquisitely crafted objects. So much care and effort had to be invested in fab-
ricating these goods that less lavishly supported artisans could not produce
them.
Thus hierarchies of craft workers evolved in early civilizations. The least
specialized were men and women who produced goods within a household for
thathousehold’sownuse.Nextwerepart-timecraftworkerswhomanufactured
aparticularsortorrangeofgoodswhentheywerenotengagedinfarming.They
or other members of their families exchanged these goods at local markets.
Still more specialized were full-time craft workers who employed a particular

402
Economy
technology to produce goods for everyone in a community. A single bronze-
worker, for example, might manufacture everything from sickles to jewellery,
depending on what his clients wished to purchase. At the top of the hierarchy
were elite craft workers who produced luxury goods exclusively for the upper
classes and the state.
Interpretations of the economies of early civilizations were long distorted
by Karl Polanyi’s claim that in these societies trade and production were com-
pletely ‘embedded’ in political organization. According to Polanyi and his fol-
lowers, governments played the key role in securing exotic raw materials,
organizing production, and seeing that each individual received what he or
she required. Prices were controlled by the government, and land and many
other necessities were not regarded as commodities. Polanyi contrasted such
an administered economy with those of modern industrial societies, where al-
most anything can be bought and sold (Polanyi, Arensberg, and Pearson 1957).
Polanyi’s views and still earlier ones inﬂuenced by European corporatist think-
ing exerted an especially strong inﬂuence on the interpretation of ancient
Mesopotamian civilization. Palace and temple estates were viewed as control-
ling all aspects of trade and production, and every individual was imagined to
have been employed by these institutions (Falkenstein 1974 [1954]).
Polanyi was correct to the extent that in all early civilizations most land was
owned collectively or institutionally rather than privately and therefore could
not be freely bought and sold. Nevertheless, as the result of a more realistic
appreciation of the problems involved in processing information, it has be-
come impossible to imagine any early civilization as possessing the resources
needed to administer an entire economy or any ruler as wishing to do so.
The highly complex government administrative records of the Ur III period
in Mesopotamia or of state-directed boat-building in Middle Kingdom Egypt
were focused on particular aspects of the economy that were of special in-
terest to governments. Most of the everyday economic activities that kept
people alive appear to have gone on independently of the state. There is
growing appreciation of the considerable variety of ways by which goods were
produced and distributed in early civilizations. Many of the most important
differences appear to correspond with the distinction between city-states and
territorial states.
In Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico as well as among the Yoruba (the
three well-documented city-state systems in our sample) long-distance ex-
change was managed by professional merchants who traded goods with their
counterparts in nearby city-states and with far-off regions. Traders obtained
exotic raw materials from abroad and transported raw materials and manu-
factured goods from one city-state and one region to another. They had close

Economic Constants and Variables
403
relations with kings, major institutions, prosperous landowners, and craft work-
ers in their own city-states but operated largely independently of these individ-
uals and institutions. It has been argued that Akkadian and Ur III rulers tried to
develop state-controlled trade alongside or in addition to that of independent
traders, but it is uncertain how far this process was carried.
Craft workers produced goods both in urban centres and in the surrounding
countryside, purchasing exotic raw materials from long-distance traders and
selling what they manufactured at urban markets. In the Valley of Mexico the
purchase but not the sale of certain types of goods was limited by sumptuary
laws. Renowned Yoruba artists were invited to carry out commissions for kings
and sometimes worked at the royal palace. In Benin elite bronze-casters were
forbidden to produce certain ritual objects for anyone but the king and were
lavishly rewarded for their work. In the Valley of Mexico, expert stone sculptors
and mural painters may have worked exclusively for rulers. Yet it does not
appear that in these societies full-time craft workers were mainly employees
or servants of kings. In Mesopotamia some specialists may have worked full-
time for temples or palaces, but many of these were probably ordinary craft
workers who manufactured goods that institutions required in large quantities.
Some more highly skilled artisans may have manufactured goods, such as
military chariots, for which there was no demand except from the king. Yet
metallurgists, potters, and stone carvers lived and worked in various city wards
and sold at least some of their products to ordinary people, including temple
and palace employees. This suggests that these institutions did not allocate
to their employees the manufactured goods that these employees needed, as
Polanyi imagined. Urban craft workers probably sold their goods to individual
purchasers as well as to temples and palaces.
This sort of economy accords with the crucial role played by markets in
facilitating exchange in city-states. The presence of many farmers in or near
urban centres created a demand for goods, and the craft specialization that this
encouraged made higher-quality manufactured goods available to all. The vast
majority of full-time craft workers produced goods for the entire population
rather than only for the government and the upper classes. Wealthy hege-
monic rulers alone had the resources to employ considerable numbers of elite
specialists to produce goods of superlative quality. The distinction between
ordinary full-time craft workers and elite specialists tended to be a ﬂuid one.
In territorial states farmers manufactured goods from local raw materials in
their spare time and exchanged these goods within villages or at local markets.
Royal and government workshops employed groups of full-time specialists
to manufacture tools, weapons, and other items used by workers performing
special tasks for the state and elite specialists to produce numerous luxury

404
Economy
goods. Many worked under close surveillance by government ofﬁcials. The
craft workers who manufactured luxury and display goods for the use of the
upper classes were lavishly supported by the government. Control of exotic
raw materials, elite craft workers, and the luxury goods they manufactured
constituted a major source of power for kings and ofﬁcials.
This system created a two-tier economy in territorial states, with the upper
classes receiving luxury goods as gifts from the king and farmers fabricating
what they needed in their spare time. Part-time craft workers lacked both
access to exotic raw materials and the time, training, and incentives to produce
high-quality products. Elite craft workers were more lavishly subsidized and
better provided with exotic raw materials than were the vast majority of full-
time craft workers in city-states and therefore could produce extremely high-
quality luxury goods. The only important economic link between the realm of
production and consumption of farmers and that of the upper classes was the
appropriation of food surpluses by the state and by landlords.
It has been suggested that Classic Maya kings or upper classes may have
controlled interstate trade and markets may not have played a signiﬁcant role in
the Maya economy. Yet exotic goods, such as obsidian, were widely distributed
within Maya city-states. This suggests that the Maya upper class may have had
more control of external trade than was the case in other city-state systems
without the emergence of a two-tier economy.
Rulers of hegemonic city-states extracted tribute and reparations from
weaker neighbours and used their political control to reroute long-distance
trade and alter marketing patterns to the advantage of their own polities.
These city-states grew large and prosperous by comparison with militarily less
powerful neighbouring states. Skilled artisans were attracted to them by the
low cost of materials and increasing local demand for their products. Elite craft
workers developed in them. Military leaders, who controlled the distribution
of tribute, found their authority greatly enhanced. In most city-states the main
political beneﬁciary of hegemony was the king, although among the Yoruba
the non-royal title-bearers who commanded the army controlled much of the
tribute. Thus, while tribute did not inevitably increase the authority of the
monarch, it did enhance the power of those who controlled the state. Tribute
played the same role in increasing the power of rulers in hegemonic states as
royal control of exotic raw materials and elite craft workers in territorial states.
production and consumption
Systems of agricultural production, land ownership, and the techniques by
which surplus production and lower-class labour were appropriated by the

Economic Constants and Variables
405
upper classes varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another. At
least some of these differences contrast with the more limited variation ex-
hibited in sociopolitical organization. The environmental settings of early civi-
lizations and their technologies were especially variable. Forms of production
and distribution of goods differed radically between city-states and territorial
states, although there may have been more variation within each of these two
types than has so far been delineated. Nevertheless, the variation between city-
and territorial states indicates that the development of early civilizations was
shaped to a signiﬁcant degree by sociopolitical factors. Subsistence economies
were largely a heritage from earlier stages of development in various regions,
but as population densities increased, regionally and locally, food production
intensiﬁed. The development of craft production was inﬂuenced to a large
degree by the various political frameworks in which it occurred.
A question rarely asked in studies of early civilizations is why the acquisition
of greater political power was always accompanied by the appropriation of a
disproportionate share of surplus wealth by the upper classes. It can be argued
from a functionalist viewpoint that effective decision-making in early civiliza-
tions required that a small number of leaders possess sufﬁcient political power
to ensure that the orders that were necessary to regulate large-scale societies
were carried out. To do this, leaders needed to control a disproportionate share
of resources to be able to pay for police and military backing and reward loyal
supporters with generous gifts and hospitality.
This answer, however, does not account for the lavish lifestyle of the upper
classes. In complex societies, conspicuous consumption is indeed universally
understood and admired, if not always morally approved. It is recognized as
a deliberate violation of the principles of least effort and the conservation
of energy which shaped human relations with the natural environment in
all low-energy societies and were therefore implicitly familiar to everyone
living in early civilizations (Trigger 1990a; Zipf 1949). These principles could
be deliberately ignored only by individuals who controlled a disproportionate
shareofnaturalandhumanresources.Theconspicuouswasteofsuchresources
served not only to manifest power but also to reinforce it. In complex societies
political power is accompanied by a humble lifestyle (usually a conspicuously
humble one) only in very exceptional circumstances often religious in nature.
In small-scale societies, where people know one another, gossip, ridicule,
and fear of being accused of witchcraft compel hard-working and capable in-
dividuals to behave in a manner that is simultaneously generous and humble,
even though their personalities might incline them to act differently. Only in
response to such socially sensitive conduct are they accorded de facto leader-
ship roles (Lee 1990; Trigger 1990b). Once those who make decisions in larger

406
Economy
societies are able to exert political power and control communication networks,
they can disable the traditional mechanisms that maintain social and economic
equality. The neutralizing of such mechanisms invariably leads powerful indi-
viduals to assign to their own use much of the wealth produced by the lower
classes instead of continuing to share the products of their own labour with
others. Ostentation and conspicuous consumption replace personal restraint,
generosity, and humility. The rich use their political power and administrative
control to silence the protests of those who object to these changes. The fear of
witchcraft ceases to be a device for encouraging social and economic equality
and becomes a technique of intimidation exercised by the wealthy and pow-
erful against politically weaker individuals. These developments raise many
questions about human nature and the role it may have played in shaping early
civilizations.

Cognitive and Symbolic
Aspects

19 Conceptions of the Supernatural
T
he Egyptians had no word for ‘religion’. Religion was inseparable from
daily life. They did, however, have a rich vocabulary referring to priests,
deities, and worship. All aspects of state activity, everyday life, and material
culture in ancient Egypt were coloured by religious beliefs and symbolism.
Drama was religious in nature, tombs and temples were viewed as microcosms
of a supernaturally animated universe and decorated accordingly, and mun-
dane activities such as the netting of birds and the hunting of hippopotamuses
symbolized the curbing of supernatural forces that threatened the cosmic or-
der (Lustig 1997b). Analogous religious symbolism permeated the other early
civilizations.
Marshall Sahlins (1976: 211–12) has argued that each stage in the develop-
ment of society has a dominant source of symbolic production that supplies
the major idioms that permit social relations to be understood and publicly dis-
cussed. He maintains that in early civilizations religion was this source. Once
societies grew too large for kinship and other personal relations to provide the
basic metaphors that guided thinking about social relations, religion supplied
the concepts that were needed to consider and shape the moral order. Only
much later, in increasingly commercial and industrial societies, did political
and economic concepts supplant religious ones in this key role.
Clifford Geertz (1973: 90) has described religion as a symbolic system that
establishes powerful, pervasive motivations by formulating a general order of
existence and a model for perceiving the world. This useful characterization
reﬂects his more general view that human behaviour is governed by ‘systems
of signiﬁcant symbols’ (1965: 112). He does not explain, however, why forms
of religious thought are a feature of all cultures. Conceding universality to
religion comes oddly from an anthropologist who maintains that variability is
the essence of human behaviour and that universals are classiﬁcatory ‘fakes’
(1965: 101).
409

410
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
In recent decades, the term ‘ideology’ has often been treated as synonymous
withconceptssuchasreligion,worldview,beliefsystem,andcosmology.Robert
McC. Adams (1992: 208–9) has correctly observed that ideology is analytically
of no signiﬁcance if employed in this diffuse manner. It more usefully desig-
nates a set of beliefs or propositions that are consciously or unconsciously used
to promote social cohesion and unity by masking the inequality and exploita-
tion that are present in a particular society. Ideology seeks to represent the
self-interested behaviour of politically active groups within a society as being
altruistic. In this manner, it not only sustains but helps to increase the power
and privileges of ruling classes. Such a program is most successful when the
aggregate of beliefs and images being conveyed deﬁnes and appears to satisfy
the collective aspirations, objectives, and ideals of whole societies (Giddens
1979: 193–96).
In early civilizations much if not all ideology was religious in nature because
political thought tended to be religious. Stephen Houston and David Stuart
(1996: 289) observe that the rulers in early civilizations sought to link them-
selves to an immutable divine order so that the power and mystery of divinity
might sanction and reinforce their worldly authority. Religiously grounded
ideology was used to justify and promote the activities of the upper classes.
In the sphere of law, supposedly innate differences between various social
groups were used to justify inﬂicting less severe penalties on upper-class indi-
viduals than on lower-class ones who had committed the same crimes. Wars,
from which the upper classes were most likely to proﬁt, might be validated by
claiming that they were necessary to safeguard society as a whole or to preserve
the cosmic order. Most studies tend to concentrate on ideology as a political
practice and therefore focus on its functional and pragmatic aspects. This ap-
proach fails to explain how particular ideologies became ‘the driving force
behind expansionist states’ (Fash 1991: 75). To do that for early civilizations,
it is necessary to understand their religious beliefs.
religion in early civilizations
One of the greatest obstacles to understanding the religions of early civiliza-
tions has been a tendency to impose on them beliefs associated with later
transcendental religions. Christianity, Judaism, and Islam all assume the exis-
tence of a single, all-powerful, universal, and moral god who does not depend
in any way on his creation but upon whom the entire universe depends for its
being and preservation. It is often accepted that the religious beliefs of early
civilizations were similar to those of later transcendental religions except that
the idea of a single deity had not yet been developed. Instead, early civilizations

Conceptions of the Supernatural
411
postulated the existence of multiple gods who often acted at cross-purposes to
one other. On the basis of the work of Edward B. Tylor (1871), it used to be
assumed that still earlier there had been an animistic stage when the universe
was believed to be pervaded by a supernatural power that did not yet manifest
itself in the form of speciﬁc deities.
The religious concepts of early civilizations differed far more radically from
those of later transcendental religions than nineteenth-century anthropologists
assumed.Likebandandtribalsocieties,earlycivilizationsdonotappeartohave
distinguished between what we perceive as the natural, supernatural, and so-
cial realms. Beginning in the ﬁrst millennium b.c., the Greeks, the Hebrews,
the Zoroastrian Persians, and various Hindu and Chinese philosophers differ-
entiated the natural world, made up of plants, animals, and inanimate objects,
which possessed only limited or no consciousness; the social world of humans,
whose behaviour was guided by goals, reason, and moral considerations; and
the supernatural world of the gods, who for the ﬁrst time were seen as existing
apart from and independently of the natural and social realms. Supernatural
beings possessed intelligence and emotions, but they were less subject than
humans to the constraints of the material world, which they had created. In
Greece, a small number of materialistic philosophers effectively denied the ex-
istence or at least the relevance of the supernatural, leaving only the social and
natural realms as matters of human concern. This did not, however, prove to
be a popular view. The greatest and most lasting discovery of the later prein-
dustrial societies of Eurasia was that the behaviour observed in the natural
world was fundamentally different from that encountered in the social realm
and that, because of this, relations with plants, animals, and inanimate objects
had to be very different from those with human beings. The philosopher Karl
Jaspers (1953) labelled this dramatic shift in human outlook, which he believed
marked the beginning of modern society, the axial era (Eisenstadt 1986).
In early civilizations, it was assumed that the natural world, of which humans
were a part, was suffused with and animated by supernatural powers. There
was no distinction between the natural and the supernatural: everything was
alive, conscious, and interrelated (Townsend 1979: 28–31). Humans lived in a
realm composed only of other beings; there were no things (J. Allen 1988: 8).
Nature functioned because it was animated by powers that behaved much like
human beings but were usually much stronger and therefore could determine
human destiny. These powers are variously referred to in the anthropological
literature as ‘gods’, ‘goddesses’, ‘deities’, or ‘spirits’ (Swanson 1960: 6–31).
Deities possessed reason, will, a full array of human emotions (including
love, anger, jealousy, ambition, and compassion), and the ability to communi-
cate with each other and with human beings. They also possessed enhanced

412
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
powers that enabled them to do what ordinary humans could not. They lived
longer, were able to change shape, moved instantaneously from one place to
another, could be present in many places at the same time, and travelled back
and forth between the terrestrial realm and the extraterrestrial ones. Human
souls could also move about in dreams and shamans could visit the realms re-
served for the gods, but for humans these were special capacities rather than
normalattributes.Thegods,oratleastthemightiestofthem,alsopossessedthe
power to create and sustain the universe. Deities in early civilizations in many
ways resembled those found in polytheistic post-axial cultures, although the
latter were anthropomorphized more systematically and clearly distinguished
from natural phenomena.
People who lived in early civilizations believed that, because the natural
world, which they inhabited and were part of, was animated by spirits, it was
possible for them to interact with the natural/supernatural realm in much the
same way that they interacted with other human beings, especially very pow-
erful ones. They hoped, by communicating with the deities who pervaded the
natural world, to win the favour or at least avoid the anger of the powerful su-
pernatural forces that controlled the cosmos. This meant that what we identify
as the natural and the supernatural were regarded not as separate from but
as intimately linked to and interpenetrating the social realm. Human beings
could communicate with a supernaturally animated natural realm much as they
communicated with one other. It follows from this that the axial-age distinc-
tion between culture and nature, to which Claude L´evi-Strauss has attributed
universal relevance, meant no more to people living in early civilizations than
it did to hunter-gatherers (Ingold 1996: 117).
The refusal of people in early civilizations to distinguish the social, natural,
and supernatural realms has tended to be interpreted as the manifestation of a
‘primitive’ or ‘prelogical’ stage of intellectual development. Yet the distinction
between this outlook and later ones was clearly ontological rather than episte-
mological; it had to do not with perception and logic but with the manner in
which the universe was assumed to operate. Christopher Hallpike (1979) and
others have demonstrated that the people who lived in early societies were
as fully aware of causality as we are. They understood that water habitually
ﬂowed downhill, that speciﬁc types of stone could be shaped using particular
techniques, and that clay became harder and more waterproof when it was
ﬁred. The difference between early views and modern ones was that, when
it came to conceptualizing the nature of the universe, early peoples used the
understandings that were most familiar to them, those that concerned the
way human society worked. The universe was presumed to be animated by
powerful forces that possessed human-like personalities.

Conceptions of the Supernatural
413
This process was encouraged by what J. S. Kennedy (1992) has characterized
as humanity’s compulsive anthropomorphizing, a form of thought that is preva-
lent in all societies even if it has been somewhat curtailed in modern science
and engineering by trying to account for the behaviour of natural phenom-
ena other than in terms of the understandings and purposeful interventions of
actors. Stewart Guthrie (1993) argues that humans are innately predisposed
to view the natural world as social. Sahlins (1976: 53–54), echoing Marx and
Engels, maintains that explaining the world in terms of social understandings
was accompanied by a reciprocal assumption that the social order mirrored
that of the natural/supernatural realm.
As a result of the pervasiveness of human-centred explanations, it was as-
sumed in early civilizations that there were no instances of the operation of
cause and effect that could not be suspended by the gods if humans could only
persuade them to do so. Therefore the powerful human-like forces that ani-
mated nature could be appealed to when human beings needed supernatural
help to cope with insurmountable natural and social dangers. If supernatu-
ral powers ensured that water normally ran downhill, people might hope that
in times of crisis or special need these same powers might be persuaded to
make it ﬂow uphill. Conversely, ﬂint-knappers or potters might request that
appropriate supernatural forces ensure that the laws of nature, on which they
depended, not be abrogated in the course of their work (Childe 1956a; 1956b:
170). The belief that nature was controlled by supernatural forces that were
inherent in it was no more detrimental to the recognition and use of concepts
of cause and effect than was the medieval European belief in miracles. It pro-
vided people in early civilizations with reassurance that by addressing the gods
they could do something effective to cope with the many natural challenges
that their technology and medical knowledge were ill-equipped or entirely
unequipped to handle.
the nature of deities
Despite intensive study of the religions of early civilizations and a massive
data base, there is little agreement about how deities were conceptualized.
Prominent Mayanists such as Tatiana Proskouriakoff have expressed doubts
that the Maya recognized actual deities as opposed to vaguely personiﬁed and
mutable natural forces (Taube 1992: 7). Some Sinologists maintain that the
Chinese venerated primarily if not exclusively ancestral deities (Allan 1991:
19–20), and some experts on the Yoruba believe that most of their deities were
human beings who, because of their special qualities, were treated as divinities
after they had died (K. Barber 1981).

414
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Resolving such issues is difﬁcult even for the best-documented early civi-
lizations, but special problems are encountered with at least three of them.
The Yoruba have been exposed for several centuries to Christianity and Islam.
This contact may have modiﬁed indigenous religious concepts or at least the
way in which these concepts are explained to foreigners. Much of what is
known about early Chinese religious beliefs has reached the present ﬁltered
through Confucian humanism. During the Warring States period, this move-
ment appears to have reinterpreted cosmic deities and nature spirits as a
succession of human ancestral heroes beginning with Huangdi, the Yellow
Emperor. Such changes may have misleadingly enhanced the apparent impor-
tance of ancestor worship in early Chinese religion (Allan 1991: 19–20; Lewis
1990: 167–68, 195). Similarly, religious concepts of highland Mexican origin
may have altered lowland Maya religious beliefs in Postclassic times. There is,
for example, growing evidence that the idea of 5,126-year cycles of creation
and destruction of the universe may not yet have been present in Maya culture
during the Classic period (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 251; Schele and Mathews 1998:
106–7; Reents-Budet 1998: 78).
Concepts of deity seem to have varied signiﬁcantly from one early civiliza-
tion to another. This would accord with a widely accepted particularist view
of religious phenomena. Yet, while not denying that speciﬁc delineations and
classiﬁcations of deities, the myths concerning them, and the extent of their
anthropomorphization varied considerably from one early civilization to an-
other, certain features appear to be cross-culturally recurrent. In each early
civilization people viewed deities as a series of manifestations of the forces
of nature, which, whether or not they assumed human form, were aware of
human beings, as people in industrial societies believe the physical universe
is not. Deities possessed individual personalities which inclined them to treat
human beings well or badly. Yet human beings could never be certain of a par-
ticular deity’s continuing goodwill, even if that deity were a benevolent one and
they had served it assiduously. Dealing with deities was no less problematical
and potentially dangerous for humans than dealing with kings and upper-class
people was for the lower classes or dealing with the natural environment could
be for all human beings.
The deities did not, however, exhaust the varieties of supernatural power in
early civilizations. The Aztec and their neighbours believed that a numinous
divine power was diffused throughout the universe. This force animated natu-
ral phenomena, human beings, and humanly fabricated objects, as well as the
gods. The Aztec referred to this diffuse power, as well as to speciﬁc deities,
as teotl (Townsend 1979: 28). They are reported to have believed that every-
thing in nature had a soul – including plants, animals, and stones – and for

Conceptions of the Supernatural
415
this reason apologized to trees when they cut them down (L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 346). Yet, while teotl manifested itself in maize, which it caused to grow,
individual cobs of corn were not regarded as deities because they possessed
only a limited power to nourish humans (Broda 1987: 75). Likewise, an Aztec
prisoner of war contained divine power that could nourish the gods if he were
sacriﬁced to them, but this did not make him a god in the same sense that the
divine forces that controlled rain, sunlight, or success in warfare were gods.
The divine energy that pervaded the universe was of the same substance but
different in degree and in the way it behaved from the deities that determined
how the cosmos would function. Inga Clendinnen (1991: 248) has described
the Aztec gods as clusters of sacred forces engaged in complex interaction.
The Classic Maya used the same root to refer to sacred entities or deities
that possessed wills and personalities of their own (k’u) and to the cosmic
power (or soul-force) (k’ul) that they believed hallowed and activated the
entire universe. K’ul has been described as a vital, impersonal, natural force
that animated all things, including the gods (Houston and Stuart 1996: 291;
Schele and Mathews 1998: 413; Sharer 1996: 153). It was the power that
made plants grow, animals reproduce, and people live and it kept the cosmos
functioning. It also sustained objects that human beings had made, including
ceramic vessels and sacred buildings, and enabled those objects to perform
their social functions. The amount of k’ul that was concentrated in a temple
increased as a result of the building’s being repeatedly used and had to be
ritually released when the temple was abandoned if it were not to become
dangerous. K’ul appears to have been closely associated with blood, and was
also present in plant secretions (itz) such as the sap and gums (used for incense)
associated with the cosmic tree that held up the universe. They were believed
to transmit supernatural powers from one level of the cosmos to another and
used to practise witchcraft and divination (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993:
234, 448). Yet only in certain instances did these supernatural powers come
together to form deities.
The use of a single term to designate supernatural energy and deity is not
documented in the other civilizations in our sample. In highland Peru, how-
ever, kamaquen or kamaq (from kama, ‘existence’) referred to the enduring
supernatural essence or soul-power that energized and shaped matter, made
deities ﬂourish, and provided all that was necessary to sustain different forms
of life in the natural and social realms (Gose 1993). As a result of possessing
this power, deities, including animal spirits and the ancestors of human groups,
were able continuously to fashion, energize, and sustain their living descen-
dants. Being dry and unchanging, kamaquen produced life by combining their
own life-shaping power with the animating force of water, which was believed

416
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
to come from the Paciﬁc Ocean and was considered essential to produce life.
Diviners or shamans (kamasca) were believed to be infused temporarily with
the kamaquen of a particular deity (Salomon 1991: 16).
The Yoruba concept of ase signiﬁed life-force and authority and also the
energy that was associated with the act of procreation. This force existed ev-
erywhere, brought all things into existence, and opposed chaos and decay.
While ase was most notably present in deities (orisa), it could be accumulated
by individual human beings. By acquiring sufﬁcient ase, anyone or anything
could become a deity (H. Drewal 1989: 258). Some of the ase of a god could
be incorporated into a potion and transferred to a devotee of that deity by
being rubbed into his or her head (M. Drewal 1989: 203–7). The ase of a king,
who had the power of life and death over his subjects, was second only to that
of deities, who created life (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 89–90). Like the
power of life and death, ase was composed of contrasting qualities such as heat
and cold, violence and peace, danger and safety, red and white (Apter 1992:
84). Ase, as energy, manifested itself differently in different people or deities.
The ase of the war god Ogun was violent, that of the creator deity Orisala
(Obatalla) wise and peaceful (H. Drewal 1989: 240–41, 258).
Although there is no direct evidence for China from as early as the Shang or
Western Zhou periods, a similar concept, ﬁrst recorded in the Han Dynasty,
may have been qi, which is interpreted as referring to the formless but conﬁg-
uring primal energy present in everything that existed. Qi was associated with
wind, breath, life, vapours arising from cooked grain, the human spirit, strong
emotions, and sexual arousal. This concept may originally have referred to a
primordial life-force emanating from the waters under the earth and animating
everything in the cosmos, while shen denoted both individual celestial gods
and the spirit force, associated with the sky world, that created form and order
out of chaos (Lewis 1990: 140, 162, 213–18).
In Egypt the creation narrative associated with the solar cult at Heliopolis
identiﬁed the primary energy promoting the establishment and functioning of
the universe as male sexual drive and sunlight. In New Kingdom temple ritu-
als performed throughout Egypt, the sexual arousal of male deities by female
singers and dancers played a vital role in the daily rites of cosmic renewal
(Robins 1993: 153). In other Egyptian creation narratives, creative power
was identiﬁed with supernatural power or magic (h
• k3), creative utterance
(h
• w), and supernatural insight (sı3). These powers seem to have represented
a more abstract and analytical understanding of the forces that had created and
sustained the universe (J. Allen 2000: 156–57, 171–73). Associated with these
powers was cosmic order (m3t), which prevented both deities and the universe
from lapsing into primal chaos or cosmic disorder (ısft) (Englund 1989b: 19).

Conceptions of the Supernatural
417
Etymologically, h
• w was associated with h
• w, (food) (the vowels may have been
different) and m3t with m3w (food offerings). The cosmic order was thus
closely aligned with the creation and nourishment of life.
The Egyptians viewed divine power as animating and sustaining the uni-
verse. The hieroglyph for god (ntr) has been interpreted as a banner blown
in the wind, indicating the presence of an invisible force. The adjective ntry
may refer to this power. Yet, while all natural phenomena were believed to
be animated by divine power, natural phenomena were not regularly equated
lexically with deities. R was the ordinary word for the sun as well as the name
of the sun god, Re. Yet the earth god (Geb) and the sky goddess (Nut) were not
designated by the common terms for earth (t3) and sky (pt). The Nile River,
which was identiﬁed with the earth god or with Osiris, the god of fertility and
death, was never an object of worship in its own right and was referred to sim-
ply as ıtrw (the river), while the Nile ﬂood was associated with a minor deity,
H
• py. This suggests that the ancient Egyptians believed natural phenomena to
be animated and controlled by divine power or manifestations of divine power
rather than divinities in their own right.
In the past, Tylor’s followers interpreted such diffuse supernatural power
as the ‘mana-like’ vestige of an animistic stage of religious belief. This view
overlooked the lack of evidence of a belief in some general supernatural force
in small-scale human societies without an accompanying belief in behaviourally
and often physically anthropomorphized spirits (Trigger 1990c: 107–10). The
concept of an abstract supernatural force represented an attempt to describe
the power that animated the universe, including human beings. The idea of
deity sought to identify and establish relations with delimited manifestations of
that force that were vital for the survival and welfare of human beings. These
manifestations were associated with various aspects of nature, such as sunlight,
moisture, fertile soil, food, geological formations, and the powers associated
with various meteorological phenomena. Supernatural force manifested itself
in human beings in forms such as body heat, the ability to think and move,
male sexual drive, and female reproductive capacity. Thus, any one of these
forces or any combination of them could have been used to conceptualize
supernatural power in a generic sense.
This general analytical framework was shared by all societies that understood
the cosmos using the same concepts they employed to analyse social relations.
The main difference between more egalitarian societies and early civilizations
was the differing understanding of society that was brought to the analysis. In
egalitarian societies, people saw themselves relating to other human beings and
to spirits as individuals who for various personal reasons possessed differing
degrees and sorts of power.

418
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
In all early civilizations, deities were believed to participate in the con-
trol of natural processes and the shaping of social life. Some of these deities
were manifestations of what we perceive as natural forces; others represented
surviving and often supernaturally empowered aspects of deceased humans.
Ancestors were linked by their reproductive powers to the creative forces of
the natural world, and it is often difﬁcult to distinguish ancestral deities from
spirits or gods associated with the natural realm.
It is indicative of the extent to which human behavioural characteristics were
projected onto the cosmos that not only the spirits animating living beings but
also those controlling what we would regard as inanimate phenomena were
gendered. The vast majority of deities were either male or female; the rest
were bisexual or took both male and female forms (Clendinnen 1991: 168,
249). Deities became the foci of myths or sacred narratives that recounted their
deeds and in the course of doing so described their personalities and special
qualities, thus enhancing their resemblance to human beings (Taube 1992: 8).
In early civilizations, deities differed from one another in the extent of
their powers and the aspects of nature they controlled. Some exercised a
general cosmic function or controlled (or were) natural phenomena that were
of great importance to human beings, such as rainfall, sunlight, or reproductive
capacity; others were associated with the functioning of more geographically
delimited aspects of the natural world, such as particular rivers, lakes, or hills.
Minor deities occurred in large numbers and were regarded as subject to the
authority of more powerful ones.
Although deities regulated (or were) aspects of the cosmos, they also acted
as patrons of kingdoms, cities, families, craft associations, and individuals. They
were venerated by their clients, who expected them to look after their interests.
In general, major cosmic deities were the patrons of territorial or city-states
while less powerful forces of nature, or divinized ancestors, were the patrons of
smaller social groups. Ayllus, calpollis, and patrilineages worshipped ancestral
spirits, local gods, or cosmic deities according to their own rites and at their
own cult places. Humans also sought to placate hosts of minor spirits that
might inﬂict illness or bad luck on them, often by seeking help from the more
powerful deities who controlled such spirits. The relations between deities, the
natural world, and the spirits of human ancestors were complex and expressed
in culturally speciﬁc ways.
Thorkild Jacobsen (1970: 21; 1974) estimates that there were three thousand
tofourthousanddeitiesintheMesopotamianpantheon;ancientlistsrecordthe
names of more than two thousand of them, mostly in Sumerian forms (Bott´ero
1992: 216). About ﬁfty were major deities, seven of whom possessed the power
to determine annually the fate of all human communities and individuals.

Conceptions of the Supernatural
419
Lower in rank were the igigi and below them still lesser spirits and demons,
some of which caused illness. All these supernatural beings were descended
from An, the sky god. While the principal deities constituted a well-deﬁned
family extending over four or more generations, minor supernaturals were
classiﬁed in groups according to function and lacked individual genealogies.
High-ranking deities included Enlil, the storm god, Enki, the god of fresh
water and fertility, and Ninhursaga, the goddess of barren ground. Among the
younger generations of deities were Nannar, the moon god, Utu, the sun god,
Inanna, the goddess of storehouses and fertility, and Erishkegal, the goddess
of death and the underworld (Jacobsen 1976: 121–22). The principal deities
were associated with various aspects of nature and have been described as the
‘motors’ driving the natural world (Bott´ero 1992: 215). At the time of creation
they had also become the patron deities of speciﬁc city-states (Oates 1978:
474), and these assignments mirrored the economic geography of southern
Mesopotamia. In the far south, the chief urban deities were patrons of fresh
water and marsh life; along the lower Euphrates River they were associated
withorchardsandcattlebreeding;inthenorththeywerepatronsofsheepherd-
ing; and to the west they were connected with grain farming (Jacobsen 1976:
25; Maisels 1990: 310–12). In addition to controlling various natural forces
and being associated with particular urban centres, these deities presided over
speciﬁc functions of the social realm. Utu, the sun god, was the god of justice,
Enlil the god of kingship, and Enki responsible for craft production. Individual
humans looked to minor deities to promote their personal well-being. These
deities acted as intermediaries between individual humans and higher-ranking
deities.
Richard Townsend (1979: 31) observes that in the Valley of Mexico cults
addressed natural phenomena such as rain, ﬁre, sun, wind, and air through
the deities that animated them. H. B. Nicholson (1971b) has assigned most
of these deities to three thematic complexes: celestial creativity and divine
paternalism; rain, moisture, and agricultural fertility; and war, sacriﬁce, blood,
and death. Normally two deities were singled out for special reverence by each
city-state. The Aztec’s principal deities, whose main shrines were located atop
their largest temple platform, were Tlaloc, the chief god of water, rain, and
fertility, and Huitzilopochtli, a solar war god who was their patron deity.
Variation in the way in which major deities were conceptualized and named
in different city-states provided distinctive patron deities for the hundreds of
city-states that existed across central Mexico. Townsend (1979: 29) suggests
that variations in the names of gods were kennings, or descriptive titles, that
differentiated local aspects of a limited number of deities. It is also possible
that numerous originally separate gods were being systematically ordered by

420
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
identifying them as variants of a smaller number of deities. Scholars have
assigned at least eleven deities to the Tezcatlipoca complex – four of them
clearly different forms of Tezcatlipoca and the others either closely related
deities or alternative names for him (M. E. Smith 1996: 211–15). Historical
evidence suggests that the Aztec had upgraded their once humble patron deity,
Huitzilopochtli, by identifying him with the Tezcatlipoca of the south, who was
a deity of major cosmic importance. Gods also tended to be arranged in sets
of four, one for each direction, with perhaps a ﬁfth deity for the centre.
The major gods in the Valley of Mexico were the foci of elaborate myths
concerning their cosmic functions, relations with each other, and dealings with
human beings. These myths provided them with distinctive personalities and
identiﬁed them with human leaders who had played a major role in the found-
ing and early history of particular city-states. Quetzalcoatl, a major cosmic deity
associated with creation, fertility, and the planet Venus, was identiﬁed as the
ruler of the former city of Tollan, from whom all members of the nobility in the
Valley of Mexico claimed to be descended. This equating of gods and ancient
ethnic leaders has encouraged the view that all Mexican gods were deiﬁed
heroes and ancestors. As in Mesopotamia, in addition to their identiﬁcation
with the forces of nature and with particular cities, gods were assigned speciﬁc
social roles. Huitzilopochtli was a god of war, Quetzalcoatl the principal deity
of priests, and Tezcatlipoca a patron of kings.
Ranking below the principal deities were numerous nature spirits. These in-
cluded the calpolli deities (calpolteotl), to whom members of calpollis at-
tributed their corporate existence and well-being. These deities had led their
human followers to their historical places of settlement and continued to live
nearby in hills, caves, and other natural features. Minor supernatural beings
were believed to be present in inanimate objects made from stone, clay, and
other materials and capable of emerging from them to harm human beings
during periods of cosmic breakdown (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 70, 246, 252–53).
The term teotl seems to have been applied to the dead only in its broad sense
of any numinous power. There is no evidence of ancestor cults in the Valley
of Mexico, regardless of how high the status of the person, and the human
personality was believed not to endure long after death. Deities appear to
have been forces of nature that were drawn into human affairs and were often
identiﬁed with legendary political leaders.
The Yoruba revered an elaborate hierarchy of deities who were referred to
as orisa, ebora, or imole (Bascom 1969: 77). These deities were believed by
traditionalreligiousspecialiststonumberbetweenfourhundredandseventeen
hundred. Their names, interrelations, and gender varied from one place to
another (Apter 1992: 154–55). The most senior was the creator god, Olorun,

Conceptions of the Supernatural
421
who lived in the sky, while the rest either lived exclusively on earth or shifted
between earth and sky. A number of deities associated with various aspects of
nature, such as particular hills, rivers, trees, the earth, lightning, and diseases,
were worshipped in one form or another throughout the Yoruba region. Minor
bushspiritsthatmanifestedthemselvesintreesandpondstendedtobefriendly
andinclinedtohelphumans,buttheforestwasalsoarealmofghosts,monsters,
and demons who sought to harm people (Bascom 1969: 77; K. Barber 1981;
1991: 316). The most powerful deities had already existed prior to the creation
of the world, but their natures were deﬁned only later as a result of their
achievements in the terrestrial realm (Apter 1992: 151). Many deities were
created through the fragmentation or division of existing ones, and each new
deity was assigned its own taboos, songs, and personality (K. Barber 1981:
732–33).
Many powerful deities were equated with important historical personages
who had lived near the time of creation. The thunder god, Sango, was iden-
tiﬁed with the fourth king of Oyo, who committed suicide after inadvertently
destroying his palace with his powerful lightning charm. Such individuals had
been transformed into deities by sinking into the ground, rising into the sky, or
becoming a rock or a river. Despite their continued supernatural presence in
the terrestrial sphere, they were immortal beings of heaven (ara orun) instead
of simply mortal beings on earth (ara aye) (Apter 1992: 151). Thus, like the
Aztec, the Yoruba viewed their major deities as natural forces while simul-
taneously equating them with major historical ﬁgures. While Bascom (1969)
and others interpret these deities as ancestors (agbanle) who became gods,
Apter (1992: 150–52) regards many of them as nature deities on which the
personalities of speciﬁc human beings have been superimposed. The goddess
Ayelala, however, began as a slave who was sacriﬁced in the nineteenth cen-
tury in a ritual that marked the conclusion of a war between two Yoruba states
and quickly evolved into a regional deity whose main function was to punish
oath-breakers (Awolalu 1979: 41–44). It was therefore possible for humans
to become deities, as well as for deities to be woven into human history. For
humans to become or to be identiﬁed with a deity they had to depart from the
human world in some ritually signiﬁcant manner.
Yoruba kings or royal lineages claimed a special relation with one or more
major deities, making these gods the patron deities of their city-states. The
king of Oyo supported the cult of Sango, whom he claimed as his ancestor
and whose most important shrine was located in the royal quarter of the Oyo
capital. Other deities were associated with the heads of quarters and lineages.
Such patronage did not prevent these deities from having other, less important
cults in other quarters of the same city and at still lower levels in the social

422
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
hierarchy (Apter 1992: 21). Extended families often venerated one or more
major deities as their patrons or protectors. Sacriﬁces were also offered to
ancestral souls by their living patrilineal descendants in the expectation that
such souls would promote their family’s welfare among the gods. Despite
their interventionary powers, however, dead ancestors were not designated as
deities, and the worship of the gods greatly overshadowed that of ancestors
(Bascom 1969: 77).
Shang kings and nobles focused great attention on reporting to lineage and
clan ancestors and petitioning and sacriﬁcing to them at their tombs and at
special ancestral shrines and temples. In their pursuit of supernatural support
to ensure good weather, abundant harvests, productive hunts, successful jour-
neys, and health and well-being for themselves and their families, Shang rulers
approached their principal god, Shangdi, through the mediation of their ances-
tors (Eno 1990). While the most remote ancestors were regarded as the most
potent intermediaries and the ones whose sphere of operation affected society
as a whole, it was recently deceased ancestors who were directly appealed
to for intercession. Because of fear that they might be malevolent as well as
well-intentioned, they were carefully placated (Allan 1991: 50–52; Keightley
1978b: 218).
Shangdi has been variously identiﬁed as the apical ancestor of the Shang
royal clan, a dead king, the collective embodiment of all dead kings, and a
nature deity unrelated to Shang royalty. While the king communicated with
Shangdi through the deceased Shang rulers and more remote non-royal an-
cestors, Shangdi issued his commands not to living kings but to the forces of
nature (Chao 1972: 143–44). Fragmentary legends have been interpreted as
suggesting that Qi, the hero-ancestor of the Shang royal clan, was the offspring
of Shangdi, who, in the form of a black bird, had caused the wife of the mythical
emperor Diku to become pregnant by swallowing an egg. The black bird has
also been identiﬁed with the sun (ri) (Allan 1991: 39). This myth suggests that
Shangdi may have been a major nature deity who commanded other nature
deities and had the power to inﬂict disasters as well as blessings on the Shang
kings and their subjects. Each noble clan may have had its own hero-ancestor
descended from a nature deity (Keightley 1999b: 252–53).
The early Chinese worshipped many deities identiﬁed with the forces of na-
ture. Trees and groves were locales of popular cults, and earth altars (she) were
the foci of community and state agricultural rituals addressed to the deities
that ensured the fertility of the soil. They also venerated spirits associated
with rivers, lakes, forests, winds, rains, astronomical bodies, and mountains
and offered sacriﬁces to the cardinal directions (Creel 1937: 180–81; Lewis
1990: 215). Stellar deities, as well as ones associated with the winds and rain,

Conceptions of the Supernatural
423
were probably viewed as having their primary locus in the sky, while others,
perhaps originally presided over by the god Huangdi, were associated with
the Yellow Springs, or underworld (Allan 1991: 66; Granet 1958 [1930]: 153).
Deities such as the Dragon Woman and the Eastern and Western Mothers
were yet other objects of cults associated with natural forces. While it has
been suggested that only the royal and noble families venerated their ances-
tors, every extended family may have had an altar to its ancestors and to the
soil (Granet 1958 [1930]: 246).
Maya deities have been described as manifestations of natural phenomena
(Schele and Miller 1986: 42). Gary Gossen and Richard Leventhal (1993:
210–11) maintain, in contrast, that at all levels Maya religion was based on
ancestor worship and that state cults were addressed to royal ancestors as well
as to nature deities. These characterizations are not necessarily contradictory.
Regionalized manifestations of nature deities had tutelary relations to polities
ortoroyalandotherhigh-rankingfamilies,andinthiscontextnaturedeitiesand
royal ancestors became identiﬁed with each other (Houston and Stuart 1996:
292, 302; Taube 1992: 9). While major deities in different centres may have had
the same names and been recognized as part of a common overall structure of
belief, their ritual signiﬁcance, speciﬁc meanings, and myths appear to have
varied signiﬁcantly from one city-state to another. Because of this variation, it
has been questioned to what extent Maya deities constituted a clearly deﬁned
set (Taube 1992: 7).
It has been suggested that Maya gods were less personally characterized
than those of other early civilizations (Baudez 1994: 267; A. Miller 1986: 21),
tending to occur in multiple forms relating to each of the four directions
and exhibiting young, old, and dead manifestations. Yet their apparent lack of
characterization may simply be a consequence of the scarcity of known Classic-
period myths. Sons’ engendering or giving rebirth to their fathers may have
been the central mystery or metanarrative of Maya religion (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 281).
The most powerful Classic Maya deity appears to have been K’awil, an aged,
omnipresent deity associated with rulership, scribal arts, the four quarters, the
world tree, all levels of the universe, the principal bird deity, and maize. His
counterpart in the Postclassic period was the paramount deity Itzamna, whose
power was based on his command of witchcraft and other forms of esoteric
knowledge(Taube1992:31–42,78).Itisnotclear,however,thatK’awilenjoyed
a paramount position among his fellow deities during the Classic period. The
majority were identiﬁed with the sun, rain, weather, and crop fertility, as well
as with human activities such as rulership, subsistence, and trade. Maya deities
were articulated within the framework of a 260-day sacred calendar, while the

424
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
timing of their rituals was determined by the roles they played in annual natural
cycles (A. Miller 1986: 22).
Maya rulers traced their descent from major deities, and dead kings were
identiﬁed with one of the Hero Twins who had defeated the gods of death and
risen temporarily out of the underworld as the sun or Venus. Long-dead royal
ancestors were also identiﬁed with sun gods and moon goddesses and recently
dead kings with the young maize god and K’awil (Houston and Stuart 1996:
297). These were all deities whom rulers impersonated while alive. Kings also
erected elaborate funerary monuments where they were venerated after death
as manifestations of various celestial deities who sank into the underworld and
rose again.
Much attention also appears to have been paid to the mortuary cults of non-
royal ancestors. William Haviland (1968: 112) maintains that in Late Classic
Tikal only elite compounds had identiﬁable ancestral shrines, but this does
not mean that ancestral cults were limited to the nobility. Such cults may have
played an important role in religious life at all levels of Classic Maya society.
Among the Inka supernatural power was manifested in wakas, visible ob-
jects animated by deities who communicated with humans through dreams,
oracles, and supernatural signs and provided them with life, food, health, fer-
tility, and whatever else they required. The most powerful deities had as wakas
the sun, moon, ocean, stars, and meteorological phenomena such as lightning.
Most deities were, however, associated with less powerful and more localized
wakas – mountains, lakes, springs, caves, rock outcrops, trees, shrines, an-
cient ruins, and efﬁgies (MacCormack 1991: 338). Field wakas were usually
stones that served as boundary markers (saywa) or ﬁeld guardians (wanka)
(Rowe 1944: 296). Living humans who had waka status were referred to as
willka. In addition, numinous objects called conopa, including unusually large
orcuriouslyshapedcorn-cobs,werekeptandveneratedinhouses.Suchobjects
are variously referred to as minor domestic deities or talismans (MacCormack
1991: 406). Deities could be persuaded to move into new physical embod-
iments if their old ones could not be transported to a new location or had
been destroyed. From this it is clear that wakas were physical manifestations
of divine power rather than the essence of such power.
Many wakas were revered as rumapkamaq, creators and sustainers of lo-
cal human groups. Each such waka traced its origin to a deity whose body
had turned to stone but whose enduring supernatural power was a source of
fertility and protection on which the survival and well-being of an ayllu de-
pended. Through its power to shape matter, such a waka was able to create new
members for the ayllu. Wakas could speak through oracle priests and afﬂict
ayllu members with famine and disease if they became displeased with their

Conceptions of the Supernatural
425
behaviour (Gose 1993). After death the power that had shaped and sustained
a human being returned to the waka from which it had come, but the mum-
miﬁed body (mallqui) also became a waka. Mummiﬁed ancestors constituted
links between creator wakas and the living people they supported. The mum-
miﬁed bodies of dead kings were important wakas, kings having been created
by and embodying the power (kamaquen) of the sun. The body of Manqu
Qhapaq, the ﬁrst Inka king, was preserved only in the form of a stone. The
bodies of some children who had been ritually sacriﬁced by royal command also
became wakas, some of which were venerated as oracles in the communities
where they had been born (Rowe 1944: 295–98).
Egyptian deities (ntrw) were the forces that animated the various aspects
of the natural world: sun, earth, water, sky, moon, stars, winds, geological
formations, and wild and domesticated plants and animals. Each deity had its
own name and attributes, and the most important of them were the tutelary
deities of particular Egyptian towns and localities (J. Allen 2000: 43–45). Each
major Egyptian temple had not only its own presiding deity but also its own
creation myth and place of creation. While gods who bore the same name
sometimes presided over a number of widely dispersed localities, it is difﬁcult
to determine whether these deities represented syncretisms of once distinct
gods or had been transplanted from one place to another. If the latter, each
local manifestation acquired its distinctive attributes. The principal male deity
in each locality was viewed as the creator god, whose power had brought the
universe and human society into existence and sustained both. Through his
female counterpart, this god continually renewed himself by being reborn as
his own son. During their lifetimes, kings were the earthly manifestation of
the living version of each creator god; in death they became identiﬁed by
means of mummiﬁcation with the older and unchanging (dead or Osiris) form.
Offerings were made at the graves of ordinary people, and the term ntr was
applied to dead commoners as well as to living kings and nature spirits. Ntr
appears to have signiﬁed any entity that received cult offerings. The extent of
such an entity’s supernatural power seems to have corresponded to the volume
of offerings received (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 33–37). Egyptians must
have believed the supernatural powers of dead commoners to be very limited
by comparison with those of dead kings or major deities.
In all early civilizations deities or personiﬁed natural/supernatural powers
were thought to play a major role in the operation of the natural and social
realms. Tutelary deities were identiﬁed in various ways with human ancestors.
The Chinese, Inka, and perhaps the Maya looked to dead ancestors for signif-
icant protection against natural and social calamities. The Aztec and Yoruba
identiﬁed early historical ﬁgures as human manifestations of gods, while in

426
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ancient Egypt gods were believed to have ruled on earth prior to giving rise
to the ﬁrst mortal kings. The Mesopotamians, while occasionally identifying
early heroic rulers as the children of gods and mortal women, generally saw
little in common between the gods and human ancestors.
Divine power was identiﬁed most essentially with the forces of nature. Even
ancestral spirits, to whom great powers were attributed, were, because of their
fertility, regarded as forces of nature. Gods associated with natural phenomena
sometimes bore the common or generic names of those phenomena. Other
gods were given names that alluded to one or more of their characteristic
natural aspects. The Aztec sun god was called Huitzilopochtli, ‘hummingbird
of the left side’, a kenning reference to his being a solar deity who had cosmic
associations with the Tezcatlipoca of the south (the left-hand side of the sun’s
daily course across the sky) and hence with the directional colour blue, which
was associated with hummingbirds. Some Sumerian deities were referred to
as the lord (en) or lady (nin) of the element they animated, such as Enlil (Lord
Wind), Enki (Lord [moistened] Earth), and Ninhursaga (Lady of the Stony
Ground).
The whole of nature was believed to be animated by a primordial divine
power that manifested itself to varying degrees in different entities. Major
natural forces and in some civilizations deceased ancestors possessed much
more of this power than did living humans. Human destiny was seen as deter-
mined to a large extent by divine powers that manifested themselves in nature
or were nature and thus played a major role in shaping the social order.
manifestations of deities
Deities were believed to have personalities that resembled those of powerful
human beings, but they were not invariably anthropomorphized (Fig. 19.1).
Sometimes they combined human and animal attributes. Deities could also
manifest themselves as natural phenomena such as animals, plants, rocks, and
stars, in efﬁgies and ritual objects, and in living human bodies, which deities
might occupy while humans were in a trance state.
There is considerable uncertainty about the extent to which anthropomor-
phic portrayals of deities were intended to be iconic or were believed to rep-
resent their actual forms. Egyptologists debate whether Egyptian deities were
thought to exist primarily in human form or as immaterial forces that ani-
mated the universe (J. Allen 2000: 43–45; Bonnet 1999 [1939]; Silverman
1991: 15–16). Most Egyptian deities were depicted either entirely in human
form or with anthropomorphic bodies and animal heads. Sometimes the same
deity was portrayed in both fashions. Egyptian texts indicate that deities were

19.1. Deities as depicted in early civilizations: Egypt – (a) Min, (b) Seth, (c) Horus, (d) Isis;
Valley of Mexico – (e) Tonatiuh, the sun god, (f) Huitzilopochtli; Maya – (g) Young Moon
Goddess, (h) Itzamna, (i) Ix Chel, Old Moon Goddess and Goddess of Medicine, (j) Death
God, all from the Post-Classic Dresden Codex; Mesopotamia – (k) Gudea, King of Lagash, being
presented to his city god Ningirsu (seated) by two other deities, on a cylinder seal from Telloh
(ca. 2144–2124 b.c.). Sources: (a) – (d) from Gardiner 1961: 215; (e), (f) from Eduard Seler,
Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur Amerikanischen Sprach – und Alterthumskunde (Berlin, 1902–
1904); (g) – (j) from G. Zimmermann, Die Hieroglyphen der Maya-Handschriften (Hamburg,
1956), pls. 6, 7; (k) from Woolley, The Sumerians, 89.
427

428
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
thought to have imperishable bodies made of gold with lapis lazuli hair (Meeks
andFavard-Meeks1996:57),butsometimestheypassedsurreptitiouslyamong
humans in forms that were indistinguishable from those of mortals (Lichtheim
1973: 220). Major deities entered the body of the king when he procreated
the heir to the throne. It was believed that beholding a deity in his or her
full glory could cause a human being to catch ﬁre. Gods therefore most of-
ten appeared either enveloped in or in the form of natural phenomena such
as earthquakes, storms, or ﬁres (Morenz 1973: 32). These apparitions were
accompanied by dazzling radiance or a sweet aroma and created powerful
sensations of reverence or terror in the humans who witnessed them. During
such encounters, the presence of an invisible deity was sensed, and the deity
could be heard speaking in one’s heart (Hornung 1982: 132–35). The primary
form of an Egyptian deity may have been a numinous power that could take
many forms (h˘ prw), although these transformations did not include changes
of gender.
An Egyptian deity existed simultaneously as a b3 (free life-force) or 3h˘
(illuminated spirit) in the sky, as the special power in a cult statue (hnty) or in
cult objects in his or her temple or in living humans, animals, or trees on earth,
and as a mummiﬁed body (dt) in the underworld (Hornung 1982: 132–35;
Morenz 1973: 151). Different gods could temporarily combine with one an-
other to increase their power without compromising their individual person-
alities or independence. Such deities were referred to in both the singular
and the plural. These combinations often endowed local gods with the cosmic
functions of the sun god, Re (Morenz 1973: 140–46). Parts of deities, such as
eyes, could act independently of the god to whom they belonged or become
another deity. While gods behaved in a human fashion, their personalities were
only occasionally clearly distinguished from one another.
Egyptian gods were drawn down from the sky into cult statues to activate
them for daily rituals that nourished the gods and ensured that they per-
formed the acts necessary to renew creation (Morenz 1973: 88). When occu-
pied by a deity statues could make oracular pronouncements if questions were
put to them by appearing to tilt in one direction or another. In addition, priests
might sense the god present in the statue speaking to them in their hearts.
Gods communicated with ordinary Egyptians by means of dreams, visions,
and spirit possession (Baines 1991a). They also entered into trees, individual
wild or domestic animals, and even whole herds or species, and the behaviour
of these animals provided oracular responses to questions put to them. The
Apis bull of Memphis, who was associated with the Egyptian creator god, Ptah,
indicated by his actions the answers to questions that priests addressed to the
god incarnate in him (Morenz 1973: 103). Yet, the Egyptians also believed that

Conceptions of the Supernatural
429
the gods had made animals for human beneﬁt. They did not hesitate to work,
castrate, kill, and eat animals or to offer them as sacriﬁces to the gods. Pro-
hibitions against killing or eating animals that were sacred to speciﬁc deities
were observed only locally. Hence divine power was manifested in nature and
made it work, but nature itself was not regarded as divine. Rocks and animals
were no more deities than cult statues were; instead, they were places where
divine power might manifest itself.
Major Mesopotamian deities were conceptualized in human form, although
this did not extend to lesser spirits, demons, or even a son of the solar god,
Utu, who was depicted as a bull (Oppenheim 1964: 184). Gods were also rep-
resented anthropomorphically in the cult images that were the foci of temple
rituals. These statues, made of precious materials attached to a wooden base,
were manufactured in special workshops and endowed with life by means of
‘opening of the mouth’ rituals. So important were such statues that the names
used to designate particular years sometimes commemorated their creation.
These images stood or sat in the inner chambers of temples, although in some
cases, when doors were open, they could be glimpsed from temple court-
yards (Oppenheim 1964: 185–86; Postgate 1992: 118). Mesopotamian deities
had distinct personalities, and some male ones were described as engaging
in sexual relations with human women. Most encounters between deities and
humans were, however, accompanied by a divine luminosity that ﬁlled humans
with paralysing fear (Jacobsen 1976: 12; Oppenheim 1964: 176).
Thorkild Jacobsen (1976) suggests that before the Early Dynastic period
Sumerian gods were conceptualized less in human form than as natural phe-
nomena. The female deity Inanna may have begun as a date palm and only
gradually evolved into an anthropomorphic fertility deity. As natural mani-
festations were replaced by anthropomorphic ones, the older forms became
the symbolic attributes of deities, and the gods retained their natural associ-
ations. Nannar continued to be identiﬁed with the moon, Inanna with date
palms and the planet Venus, Utu with the sun, and Enlil with storms. In ad-
dition to animating cult statues, the gods entered into portable holy symbols
on which oaths were sworn (Postgate 1992: 280). These symbols were also
carried into battle and paraded around the countryside to encourage the pay-
ment of tithes. Deities appeared and spoke to people in dreams. They also
conveyed messages through natural events such as earthquakes, the shapes
of the livers of sacriﬁced animals, and the changing positions of the plan-
ets, all these manifestations being objects of divination (Oppenheim 1964:
210–27).
Yoruba deities were conceptualized as existing in human form but were
only infrequently so portrayed (Frobenius 1913, 1: 196). Often more abstract

430
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
cult symbols hosted the presence of a god. The door to almost every Yoruba
household and the gates of most Yoruba towns had a shrine to the god Esu,
represented by a block of laterite or a crude clay statue. Esu was important
because he conveyed sacriﬁces to the other gods (Bascom 1969: 79). Living
animals, among them snakes and crocodiles imported from the coast and kept
in walled ponds, were also venerated as incarnations of deities (Ojo 1966a:
168). Yoruba gods communicated with humans by temporary spirit possession
during rituals, controlling the movement of their bodies and speaking through
their mouths. These human ‘horses’ or ‘mounts’ of deities were said to be
permanently altered by such episodes (Bascom 1969: 78). Costumed members
of the Egungun society provided vehicles that permitted the souls of the dead
to return temporarily to the human world by possessing their bodies.
In the Valley of Mexico deities were portrayed in human form in codices, and
distinctivehumanpersonalitieswereascribedtothemostprominentofthemin
myths and legends. Numerous local forms of deities had to be distinguished by
minute differences in their costumes, which dominated the portrayal of most
deities. Because deities represented sacred forces interacting with each other,
it was possible by adding a few ornaments to incorporate one god into another
without either deity’s losing its identity (Clendinnen 1991: 248). Earth deities
frequently incorporated reptilian and crocodilian body parts. The power of
deities entered into cult statues in temples, which appear to have been three-
dimensional renditions of the images represented in codices. These statues
played an important role in temple rituals. Sacred bundles containing portable
statues and other objects associated with deities were an important focus for
concentrating divine power (van Zantwijk 1985: 38).
As a result of hallucinogens and dance-induced ecstasy, people became pos-
sessed by deities, who spoke and acted through them. Such individuals tem-
porarily ceased to be themselves and became ‘mirrors’ of deities (Clendinnen
1991: 259). Deities were also drawn into the human world for solicitation and
invocation by means of ixiptlas, images made from amaranth dough, which
worshippers consumed, elaborately dressed images erected on pole frames,
and costumes worn by kings, priests, or less prestigious god impersonators
during religious ceremonies. Captives used as god impersonators were slain as
human sacriﬁces at the end of the ritual as a means of empowering the deity
they represented. While the purpose of ixiptlas was normally to draw deities
closer for more effective communication with human beings, the effect of a
king’s wearing the costumes of many high-ranking deities was to endow him
permanentlywiththeirpower(Clendinnen1991:249–53;Townsend1979:28).
Gods, like sorcerers and other powerful humans, could transform themselves
into animal shapes (nahualli), and therefore some animals were really deities

Conceptions of the Supernatural
431
travelling about the human realm (Clendinnen 1991: 55; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 364–71).
The Maya generally depicted deities in human form. Some deities had a
few animal features, such as square eyes or animal markings. Other supernat-
urals were portrayed as a combination of human and animal features or were
composed of parts of animals that lived in different environments. Still other
deities were shown as animals behaving like people, such as the rabbit scribes
who assisted the Lords of the Underworld (Schele and Miller 1986: 42–43).
Deities also manifested themselves in natural phenomena such as the sun,
stars, or rain. Some gods were portrayed in only one form, others in young,
old, and dead variants, in different anthropomorphic and zoomorphic versions,
and in different colour and directional forms. Deities were also represented
in the form of their animal co-essences or spirit familiars (way).
Kings and other humans were intermittently possessed by various deities
and appropriated their powers by wearing the costumes of these deities. This
behaviour involved the same principles as the Aztec use of ixiptlas (Houston
and Stuart 1996: 306; Taube 1992: 8–9). By means of appropriate costuming
and spirit possession, one person could become consubstantial with many
deities (Schele and Miller 1986: 66). Through painful forms of self-bleeding
and hallucinogens administered both orally and rectally, members of the royal
family entered into trance states that drew their divine ancestors back into the
human realm. Finally, cult images, at least some of them carved from wood,
kept in Maya temples served as receptacles of divine power. These images
appear to have been activated by re-enacting the circumstances that had led
to the birth of the deities they represented (Houston and Stuart 1996: 302–6).
Among the early Chinese, the character for Tian (sky), the Zhou deity who
replaced Shangdi as supreme god, appears to represent an anthropomorphic
ﬁgure, and Shangdi may have been conceived in human form as well (Eno
1990: 3). Ancestral souls were probably visualized in human form. The souls
of the dead were drawn into the bodies of ritual impersonators (shi), usually
their young grandchildren, so that they could participate in sacriﬁcial meals and
bless their living descendants (Allan 1991: 157; Creel 1937: 336). In contrast,
lineage ancestors and the spirits worshipped at the altars of the soil were from
an early period represented by inscribed tablets rather than by images (Granet
1958: 239–40; Laufer 1913). Various nature spirits may have been represented
by the birds, tigers, snakes, turtles, and taotie monsters cast on Shang ritual
vessels (Allan 1991: 130–72). Yet there appears to have been no more obvious
representation of gods in Shang elite art than there was of kings.
Andean conceptualizations of deity tended to be mainly aniconic and ab-
stract. While major deities were often represented anthropomorphically, most

432
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
deities were associated with natural objects (waka). Inti, the sun god, was
worshipped both in human form and as a solar disc. Wiraqucha, the creator
god, was represented by an anthropomorphic gold statue in his main temple
in Cuzco; in other cult centres he and other deities took the form of poles
covered with human clothing (Cobo 1990: 23–26). Deities appeared to hu-
mans, often in times of crisis, in the form of imageless radiance, and therefore
it was not always obvious which deity was being encountered. Deities could
also change their form: Inka legends reported that stone wakas had turned
into superhuman warriors when Cuzco was attacked by its enemies and be-
come stones again after the Inka had won the battle (MacCormack 1991:
287–89, 328–29). Every deity that was venerated, including dead kings, had
one or more oracle priests through whom the deity could regularly address
human beings (Gose 1996a). Gods also spoke to humans through dreams and
apparitions.
While most deities could, on special occasions, manifest themselves almost
anywhere and to anyone, especially in dreams and visions, in early civiliza-
tions they regularly did so only to priests and ofﬁcials at appropriate temples,
shrines, and cult places. Some deities were restricted to one cult centre. The
vast majority of Andean deities were each associated with a single dawning
place (pakarina) where they had ﬁrst appeared at the time of creation. Yet
the Inka rulers constructed temples for the worship of Inti, their ancestral sun
god, in provincial centres throughout their kingdom. These royal solar temples
symbolized the unity of the Inka state and the acceptance of Inka authority
in far-off regions. Major Egyptian deities such as Ptah, who was worshipped
as the creator god at Memphis, had modest ‘guest temples’ in major temple
complexes elsewhere in Egypt. In city-state systems the same major deities
or local variants of them were worshipped in many places. Tezcatlipoca and
Quetzalcoatl were venerated in various forms throughout highland Mexico,
often as the tutelary deities of different city-states. The Maya built large mor-
tuary temples in each of which a particular dead king was identiﬁed with a
local variant of a major cosmic deity.
The most important deities – the animators of major cosmic forces and the
patrons of states, large cities, and rulers – received offerings at major cult
centres. These temples were the earthly abodes of deities rather than places
of public worship. Deities of lesser importance had smaller cult centres that
were maintained and controlled by villages, corporate landowning groups, ex-
tended families, nuclear families, and voluntary ritual societies. Local leaders
or part-time priests ofﬁciated at smaller temples or at open-air shrines such
as those associated with Andean ayllus. In the Valley of Mexico each calpolli
maintained a temple for its tutelary deity, while every household had a shrine

Conceptions of the Supernatural
433
containing clay statues of maize goddesses and sometimes the cloth-wrapped
thigh bones of sacriﬁced prisoners who had been captured by family mem-
bers (Brumﬁel 1996). Ordinary Egyptian household shrines were a focus for
the veneration of dead ancestors as well as deities of fertility and childbirth,
such as Taweret and Bes, who did not have major temples anywhere in Egypt.
These cults sought to ensure the fertility and general well-being of the family
(Demar´ee 1983; Robins 1993: 75–76). Rituals for dead relatives were also per-
formed at their tombs or graves, located in cemeteries outside settlements. The
Chinese honoured ancestors in household shrines that varied in importance
and elaboration according to the antiquity of the patrilineal descent group
and hence the social status of the head of the household (Granet 1958: 246).
Mesopotamians honoured household and personal deities in their homes and
performed rituals for their dead ancestors, who were sometimes buried in
vaults under houses (Postgate 1992: 99–101).
In all early civilizations the universe appears to have been conceptualized as
a manifestation of supernatural power, which supplied it with life and activity.
The most potent manifestations of that energy were deities of varying degrees
of importance who pervaded different aspects of the natural world and made
them function. While there was considerable variation in the extent to which
the representations of deities were anthropomorphized, the idea of groups of
deities with human-like mental qualities animating the universe and in this
and other ways controlling human existence appears to have been shared by
all the early civilizations.
one or many?
Some anthropologists have maintained that in early civilizations all deities
were recognized as particular manifestations of a single god; others have ar-
gued that religions in early civilizations were polytheistic. This debate has
been labelled the problem of ‘the one and the many’ (Hornung 1982). The
claim that all gods are manifestations of a single deity was part of a belief
in ‘primitive monotheism’ advocated long ago by Christian anthropologists
of the Vienna school. In its most strident form, primitive monotheism main-
tained that all early peoples possessed the (divinely revealed?) knowledge of
a single god. Various forms of evidence have been cited in support of this
notion.
The ﬁrst type of evidence is belief in a single creator deity. The Egyptians
maintained that all things came into existence as the result of the activity of
an original creator god who gave rise to the other gods and to all else that
exists and, as the sun, re-created the universe each morning. The Aztec and

434
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
their neighbours maintained that all the gods were in some fashion emanations
of Ometeotl (The Lord and Lady of Two-ness), an undifferentiated form of
cosmic power that continued to exist in the highest celestial sphere. It was
Ometeotl who sustained life and sent each new child into the world (Le´on-
Portilla 1963: 84–106). While the initial ‘transformations’ of both the Egyptian
creator god and Ometeotl created multiple deities out of a single or dual one,
they do not appear to have altered or diminished the original divinity. In the
Heliopolitan creation myth, the Egyptian creator god, Atum, produced the
next generation of deities by mixing together his semen and spittle. Ometeotl
did so through a process of non-reductive duplication whereby cosmic power
manifested itself in individual forms in different spheres, creating time and
space. In both Egyptian and Valley of Mexico mythology, later generations
of deities were produced by sexual reproduction, a process that by its very
nature created new beings without altering existing ones. Both creator deities
continued to play an active role in the universe they had brought into existence.
The Yoruba believed that their supreme god, called Olorun (owner of
heaven) or Olodumare (one of superlative greatness?), created the other major
deities and all human souls, which could not exist without his continued sup-
port. While Olorun received sacriﬁces only through the gods he had created,
he heard people’s prayers, intervened directly in terrestrial affairs, and person-
ally determined the fate of each human being prior to that person’s rebirth.
Unlike the other gods, Olorun could not behave badly, and ultimately all the
other gods were accountable to him for their actions (Awolalu 1979: 1–20, 50;
K. Barber 1981: 729). Deities could, however, divide or be separated to form
new gods and be created by sexual reproduction, while humans could become
gods. Thus not all of them were direct manifestations of Olorun.
In the Andes Wiraqucha, whose name may have meant ‘ocean of fat’ or
‘boundless vitality’ and who was either a single creator and fertility god or a
complex of such deities, was believed to have vanished into the Paciﬁc Ocean
after fashioning the world and the ancestors of all people, animals, and plants.
Yet he continued to appear to Inka rulers at times of crisis and, as Pachakamaq
(creator/animator of the world), was a very inﬂuential lowland waka and oracle.
While various lowland myths stated that Pachakamaq had created the sun, the
Inka claimed that Inti, their solar deity, was Pachakamaq’s father. Wiraqucha
was the direct recipient of prayers but not usually of sacriﬁces, which, except
on special occasions, reached him only through the other gods. He also lacked
land and ﬂocks of his own. He appears to have been viewed as the main
deity of the lower half of the cosmos, while the sun was the principal deity
of the upper half (Cobo 1990: 23; MacCormack 1991: 59–61, 343, 350–51;
Sullivan 1985).

Conceptions of the Supernatural
435
While the role that the powerful Chinese celestial deity Shangdi played in
the creation of other gods is unknown (Eno 1990), he continued to control the
universe. Mesopotamian religious lore mentions a primordial female deity,
‘The Mother who Gave Birth to Earth and Heaven’, who may have been
the goddess Tiamat (Frankfort 1948: 283–84). Mesopotamian deities were
produced by successive generations of sexual reproduction beginning with
a mating between sea water (Tiamat) and fresh water (Apsu). The original
Mesopotamian creator gods were slain by their descendants, who represented
a more differentiated and active universe, leaving An as the oldest living god;
the younger gods used the corpses of their primordial ancestors to create the
current cosmos.
Although people in most early civilizations believed that all deities were in
some manner created or engendered by a single primordial deity or pair of
deities, there is no evidence that later gods were regarded merely as man-
ifestations of speciﬁc attributes of that deity. Whenever enough is known
about individual deities it is clear that, instead of representing selected at-
tributes of a single being, each deity had a complex nature that was complete
in itself. Each represented one or more of the conﬂicting forces that were
observed to be present in the natural and social realms. Primordial creator
deities did not always rule over younger gods, who were sometimes at odds
or even in open conﬂict with them. While the details of the creation of the
gods differed from one early civilization to another, they were usually seen
as having been produced in a way that did not diminish the substance of the
original deity.
A stronger argument that all the gods in each early civilization might be
manifestations of a single supernatural force has been found in the ways in
which many gods could absorb one another and turn into others. Both Egyp-
tian and Aztec solar deities defeated the stars each dawn and incorporated
their essences into their own being only to release them in the evening (Goebs
1998). The Egyptian sun god, Re, is described as devouring the other gods
every morning and vomiting up their bodies in the form of ﬁsh and their b3-
spirits in the form of birds every evening (Troy 1989: 131). While Egyptian
gods combined with or ‘inhabited’ each other without impairing their individ-
ual identities (Bonnet 1999 [1939]), Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba deities assumed
distinctive local or otherwise spatio-temporally restricted forms without los-
ing their generic identities. While these actions, which went beyond single
deities’ merely altering their appearance or entering the bodies of animals
or oracle priests, may indicate that all deities were believed to be manifesta-
tions of a single divine power, they do not constitute evidence that all deities
were manifestations of a single supernatural being. In early civilizations the

436
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
anthropomorphization of natural/supernatural forces does not appear to have
reached the point where people began to think of deities as multiple expres-
sions of a single god.
the moral order of the gods
There is no evidence that in any of the early civilizations, except perhaps
that of the Yoruba, people believed that a uniﬁed moral order pervaded the
universe. Among the Yoruba that order was associated with the overlordship
of the morally transcendent though not omniscient Olorun. Although it is
possible that this aspect of their religious beliefs reﬂected their long exposure
to Christianity and Islam, even within Olorun’s overarching moral order deities
competed with each other and championed opposing tendencies and causes.
The Aztec conceived of the universe as having a highly complex but unstable
structure within which major gods competed ruthlessly for power and control.
Their behaviour, determined by the roles they played in the functioning of the
cosmos, resembled that of the forces of nature more closely than it did human
interactions based on moral or ethical considerations. The Egyptian concept of
m3‘t, conventionally translated ‘truth’, ‘right’, or ‘justice’, referred to the fragile
natural order that kept the universe functioning and prevented it from lapsing
into disorder. It also designated the traditional order prevailing in the social
realm, which paralleled the order that the creator god had ﬁrst established
to control the cosmos. In both realms m3t was based on a balance between
opposites in which order prevailed over but could not eliminate disorder. This
delicate balance was seen as providing the conditions necessary to support life
(J. Allen 2000: 115–17). In the other early civilizations, relations among the
gods also largely reﬂected those obtaining in the natural world.
Only the Mesopotamians, at least by the time the creation epic Enuma
Elish was composed during the Old Babylonian period, saw relations amongst
the gods as governed by considerations that fundamentally resembled those
prevailing in human societies. The slaying of the primordial deity Tiamat and
her confederates by younger gods symbolized the triumph of social values
over older, natural ones. The deities descended from An were represented
as reluctantly having accepted one of their number to be their king in order
to ward off the threat of physical destruction posed by the primordial gods.
The original motto of the new regime was ‘safety and obedience’, meaning
‘security in return for obedience’. Following the destruction of the older gods,
this motto was replaced by ‘beneﬁts and obedience’, meaning ‘prosperity in
return for obedience’. After defeating the older deities, the new supreme god,
Marduk, refashioned the universe in a manner that rendered it beneﬁcial to his

Conceptions of the Supernatural
437
fellow deities while at the same time subjecting all that was in it to his personal
domination. Yet, while the Enuma Elish implies that the deities agreed to adopt
a centralized political regime for pragmatic, self-interested reasons, it does not
suggest that doing this made all of them of one mind (Jacobsen 1976: 173–80).
Whether the Mesopotamian gods were governed by a natural or a pragmatic
political order, their relations were not characterized by an overarching moral
order or even by a moral consensus.
In the early civilizations gods often fought with each other. In the Valley of
Mexico, the four sons or emanations of Ometeotl struggled with each other
to control the universe, with one of these gods and then another achieving
supremacy and brieﬂy presiding over a new cosmic order. Mexican gods also
wounded and killed each other (Caso 1958). Huitzilopochtli decapitated his
sister Coyolxauhqui when she tried to murder their mother, who had become
pregnant out of wedlock (Matos Moctezuma 1988: 39–42). The Egyptian god
Seth murdered his older brother Osiris to become king of Egypt and battled
his nephew Horus to keep that position. Rebellious subjects, deities as well
as humans, had driven the still earlier generations of Egyptian gods from the
earth when these gods had grown old and feeble (Meeks and Favard-Meeks
1996: 23–33). In Mesopotamia the older gods had attempted to destroy the
younger and more active generations of deities to silence the noise these gods
were making. Erishkegal, the Mesopotamian female deity of the underworld,
killed her sister Inanna, when Inanna attempted to usurp her realm (Jacobsen
1976: 55–57).
Deities also raped, seduced, and committed adultery with one another. The
Egyptian god Osiris fathered the god Anubis by his brother Seth’s wife, and
Seth in a display of sexual dominance sodomized his young nephew Horus.
The Mexican god Tezcatlipoca stole Xochiquetzal, the ﬁrst wife of Tlaloc, the
rain god (Caso 1958: 42). Both the Mesopotamian storm god Enlil and the
fertility god Enki seduced and raped various goddesses (Jacobsen 1976: 104,
112–13).
In addition, gods deceived, robbed, and betrayed each other. According to
one version of the Yoruba creation myth, when the god Orisala became too
drunk to carry out Olorun’s command to create the earth, the god Oduduwa
stole the equipment Olorun had given Orisala to perform this task and carried
out the work himself. This led to a ﬁght between Oduduwa and Orisala in which
various other deities took sides. Finally Olorun accorded Oduduwa the right
to rule the earth but bestowed on Orisala the privilege of fashioning bodies for
human babies (Bascom 1969: 10). The very existence of the Mesopotamian
deities was threatened when a rebel deity stole their charm of supremacy
(Oppenheim 1964: 269). The Egyptian goddess Isis created a poisonous snake

438
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and had it bite the sun god in order to force Re to tell her his secret name so that
she could use it to cure him. Re’s disclosing of his name constituted sharing his
power with Isis (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 98–99). The Mesopotamian
goddess Inanna, in a ﬁt of anger after she discovered that her husband, the
pastoral fertility god Dumuzi, had been carousing while she was trapped in the
underworld, condemned him to be her replacement there. A major ecological
disaster on earth was averted only when Dumuzi’s sister, the vineyard deity
Geshtinanna, agreed to alternate with her brother in the underworld for six
months of every year (Jacobsen 1976: 26–71). During a visit to Eridu, Inanna
stole various divine powers that were essential for the operation of the social
order and carried them off to her own city, Uruk (114–15). The Maya Hero
Twins used trickery and deceit to outwit and slay the gods of death and escape
from the underworld. When the Mesopotamian god Enlil decided to destroy
humanity for making too much noise, Enki, who disapproved of this policy,
secretly warned a human family what was about to happen and advised them
to build a large boat so that they might save themselves (120).
Deities were easily offended and capable of great severity in their dealings
with human beings. The Inka god Wiraqucha called down ﬁre upon people
living near Cuzco who had hurled stones at him while he was travelling through
the Andes (Rowe 1944: 316; Sullivan 1985), and the Egyptian sun god Re
ordered the ferocious lion goddess Sakhmet (identiﬁed with his ﬁery eye) to
devour humanity when their behaviour displeased him (Meeks and Favard-
Meeks 1996: 26). While, in these examples, the gods relented before everyone
involved was destroyed, their actions, like those of the forces of nature, killed
and injured innocent and guilty people alike. Moreover, while gods might
punish individuals, ethnic groups, or all humanity for immoral or disrespectful
behaviour, they attacked them for more trivial reasons. Mesopotamian kings
dreaded that some inadvertent mistake they made in performing rituals might
result in tutelary deities’ abandoning their city-states to their enemies. They
were also apprehensive that deities would quarrel with each other, bringing
undeserved misfortunes to their peoples (Postgate 1992: 263–69). Jacobsen
(1976: 120) describes Mesopotamian gods as treating humans in a selﬁsh,
ruthless, and unsubtle manner.
While the deities of the early civilizations possessed human-like personal-
ities, they often dealt with human beings in ways that seemed to be more
inherent in the natural world they animated than part of the social realm. In
many myths their behaviour was transparently that of natural forces: ﬂoods,
storms, droughts, and volcanic eruptions afﬂicted humanity without warning.
An attack launched by Enlil against a Mesopotamian city was described as
the approach of a devastating thunderstorm (Pritchard 1955: 455–63). The

Conceptions of the Supernatural
439
complex hierarchies of deities presiding over different sectors of the universe
also resembled the unequal but multiple and conﬂicting forces of nature to
a greater extent than they did the political organization of even heterarchical
city-states. Apart from the Mesopotamian gods, who at least in later times
explicitly recognized the authority of a single leader, various groups of deities
formed competing and often shifting factions. Even Mesopotamian deities
continued to struggle for power within the general political framework they
had established.
Paramount deities tended not to be the patron deities of states. Wiraqucha
was not the patron god of the Inka, nor was Olorun the chief deity of any Yoruba
city-state or Ometeotl the principal deity of any Mexican one. Powerful, active
deities tended to be associated with kingdoms and rulers, while less power-
ful ones were associated with smaller communities, less prestigious descent
groups, and individuals. The Inka kings recognized local deities as the gods of
conquered peoples but attempted to integrate regional and local deities into a
state pantheon by establishing asymmetrical kinship relations between these
deities and leading Inka ones (Silverblatt 1988b). In a totally different fashion,
in Egypt the deity of every provincial centre continued to be recognized as the
creator of the universe, while the king claimed to be the earthly incarnation,
son, and priest of each of these gods (Frankfort 1948: 41–42). The Shang rulers
claimed a unique relation to the god Shangdi, and the worship of Shangdi may
have been restricted to ancestral temples in royal palaces.
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, the chief executive of the gods was not
An, the father of the gods, but his son Enlil, the patron deity of the neutral
city-state of Nippur, who was later replaced by the Old Babylonian dynasty’s
patron deity, Marduk. Mesopotamian city-states were each presided over or
owned by one or, in the case of Uruk, two high-ranking deities. In the Valley
of Mexico each city-state especially honoured two gods, one of whom was its
patron or protector. The Maya linked their cities to local versions of major
deities from whom their royal families claimed descent. The chief ritual focus
of a Yoruba city-state was the king, whose clan claimed descent from Oduduwa
and other major deities.
Thus in some early civilizations either there was no paramount deity or
that deity was not associated with any one state or dynastic lineage. City-states
usually claimed a close association with one or more high-ranking deities, while
the rulers of territorial states either forged special relations with the deities of
the numerous localities they ruled or established the worship of a particular
dynastic god as the focus of a state cult. The cult of that god could either be
imposed on subject peoples or retained as a prerogative of the royal family. The
resemblances between the organization of the gods and the loose hierarchical

440
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
relations of natural forces appear to have been closer than those between the
organization of the gods and that of the human political realm.
the power of the gods
Whereas in monotheistic religions, deities are believed to be eternal and all-
powerful, the deities of early civilizations were born or created, died or were
killed, and sometimes grew old or lost power to other deities. Caution is, of
course, needed not to interpret these statements too literally. The Egyptians
referred to creating cult statues as giving birth (msı) to the gods. Although
the primary referent of msı was to a woman giving birth, the Egyptians also
used this verb to refer to creator gods’ bringing the sun or anything else into
existence by non-sexual means. The Maya also used the verb ‘to give birth’
(the upended frog glyph) to refer to acts that caused existing deities to man-
ifest themselves in the human realm (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 152; Schele and
Miller 1986: 183). The Egyptian gods who had ruled on earth at the begin-
ning of time slowly grew old and feeble and eventually withdrew into the
sky realm where they could rejuvenate themselves. The highland Mexicans
and the Maya believed that the sun grew old and died each day and was re-
juvenated each night in the underworld. After the Egyptian god Osiris (the
elder Horus) was murdered, he remained conﬁned to the underworld but was
reborn on earth as his son Horus or as the sun god Re (Meeks and Favard-
Meeks 1996: 32–33). Classic Maya deities were born on speciﬁc days, some of
the most important close to but not precisely at the start of the most recent
long-count cycle in 3114 b.c. These gods may have died and been reborn re-
peatedly at various points in the much longer cycles of Maya time (Schele and
Miller 1986: 48).
The notion of cycles of death and renewal of the gods, which paralleled or
were extrapolations of various natural cycles, afﬁrmed rather than denied the
collective power of the gods. Nevertheless, at least the peoples in the Valley of
Mexico, the Maya, the Egyptians, and the Inka appear to have believed that at
some time in the future the existing gods would perish and the cosmos would
lapse into disorder, either to begin a new cycle of existence or to cease to exist
forever. The Aztecs and their neighbours believed that if the sun god were
not regularly nourished with human blood the universe would quickly dissolve
into chaos.
Major Egyptian deities, instead of being all-powerful and self-reliant, were
protected and served by retinues of supernatural guards and retainers. Be-
cause they shared power, no deity was omnipotent. Re suffered from severe
pain and illness as a result of being bitten by a serpent. Even semi-transcendent

Conceptions of the Supernatural
441
deities such as Olorun or Ometeotl had to carry out their works through
subordinate deities. The Inka observed that their solar god, the most pow-
erful deity in the upper world, could not prevent himself from being covered
by clouds, which, because of their connection with rain, were presumably as-
sociated with Wiraqucha, the principal deity of the lower realm (Cobo 1979:
134–35).
Gods could also be indecisive and cowardly. The Egyptian tribunal of deities
that was charged with deciding whether Horus or Seth should rule Egypt was,
like many a village court, unwilling to render a decision for fear of offending
one of the contestants and his supporters (Lichtheim 1976: 214–23). At the
most recent re-creation of the universe, a major Aztec god hesitated to sacri-
ﬁce himself for the purpose, provoking a minor god to cast himself into the
divine hearth in his place (Le´on-Portilla 1963: 44–45; Townsend 1979: 53).
Gods were also capable of short-sighted and injudicious behaviour that they
later regretted. After the ﬂood, the Mesopotamian gods who had ordered the
destruction of humanity grew hungry and began to regret that there were no
humans left to provide food for them (Pritchard 1955: 95).
Deities were also not omniscient. They cheated and deceived one another,
and sometimes even humans outwitted them. The Mesopotamians believed
that temporarily appointing a substitute to replace a king who had angered the
gods would divert their anger to a socially insigniﬁcant victim (Bott´ero 1992:
139–53). It was also widely believed that protective amulets and incantations
could prevent deities from learning about displeasing things people had done
or render them incapable of harming individuals. The Egyptians believed that,
armed with the right spells, the dead could conceal from the gods knowledge
of major wrongdoings they had committed during their lifetimes (Pinch 1994:
61–160).
Thus, while deities were believed to live longer and be more powerful than
human beings and to affect their lives in crucial ways, people perceived far
fewer differences between themselves and the gods than the adherents of
modern monotheistic religions. Deities were not thought to be omniscient or
omnipotent and were rarely believed to be changeless or eternal. As super-
natural powers animating the natural world, they were caught up in cycles of
growth and decay that often seemed unlikely to continue forever. While they
possessed great powers, humans could use spells to deceive them, inﬂuence
their behaviour, and appropriate their powers to a limited extent and for vary-
ing periods of time. The gods thus reﬂected human characteristics, which had
been projected onto a natural order that humans found difﬁcult to control
and very threatening. The main precondition for this transposition of ideas
from the social to the natural realm was recognizing the vast powers inherent

442
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
in nature, the speciﬁc impacts these powers had on human beings, and the
relative autonomy from one another of various sorts of natural forces.
religion and social life
The deities of early civilizations were viewed as supernatural beings who ani-
mated (or were) the natural world and therefore exerted great power over hu-
mans. Gods had mental faculties and gendered personalities that resembled
those of human beings, but they could transform themselves, move rapidly
about the earth, and pass between it and the realms above and below in ways
that human beings could emulate only in dreams and trances.
In early civilizations as in earlier small-scale societies, the natural, super-
natural, and social realms were not categorically distinguished. Nature was
believed to be impregnated with supernatural powers that possessed human-
like intelligence and motivations. This was not an analytical failure but reﬂected
a particular ontological position. People living in early civilizations acted on
the world technologically as far as they were able, but their technology, most
crucially their agricultural and transport technology, was rudimentary, and they
remained heavily dependent on the vagaries of the natural environment. When
their technology was insufﬁcient, they sought to control natural phenomena in
the same way they tried to inﬂuence the behaviour of powerful human beings.
In doing this, they applied to the natural realm what appears to have been
humanity’s oldest and most highly developed skill: understanding of social be-
haviour (Mithen 1996). It was, however, a skill that could appear effective
only to people who believed that nature was controlled by forces that behaved
more or less as humans did. Where technology did not sufﬁce to control na-
ture, people sought to make nature conform to their purposes as they would
have done other people: by persuasion, magic, and spells. What they did not
perceive was that the non-human world, both animate and inanimate, oper-
ated on fundamentally different principles. Major insights into this distinction
were not achieved until the ﬁrst millennium b.c. The religious beliefs of early
civilizations were therefore products of a different set of analytical categories
from those that scientists in modern societies use. They were not the results
of a defective or ‘primitive’ intelligence or of an inability to understand causal
relations.
The principal difference between the religious beliefs of early civilizations
and those of still earlier, more egalitarian societies was that the various forces
controlling nature had come to be viewed as more unequal in power and
more hierarchized as human society itself had acquired these characteristics.
Yet it was not believed that nature totally resembled states. In Mesopotamian

Conceptions of the Supernatural
443
society, at least by the Old Babylonian period, supernatural forces had sworn
obedience to a single divine leader. In other early civilizations either there was
no single supreme deity or such a deity was not concerned with dominating
the others. This reﬂected a perception of the cosmos as composed of forces
that, while unequal, were not arranged in a single, all-embracing hierarchy.
The views of the cosmos that prevailed in early civilizations call into question
the suggestion that early civilizations were the ﬁrst societies in human history
to insulate themselves from the natural world (Renfrew 1972: 13). Because
the divine was seen as manifesting itself in the natural world, people sought
not to be separated from nature but rather to establish good relations with the
supernatural powers inherent in nature that could help to ensure their well-
being. Under these circumstances, a desire to be insulated from the natural
world was inconceivable. People living in early civilizations not only felt less
cut off from nature by a massive intervening technology than we do but actively
sought to insert themselves, as individuals and societies, into the natural order
which they believed was simultaneously a supernatural one.
As society expanded and kinship declined in importance as a factor unifying
social life, religion replaced kinship as a source of concepts for analysing and
discussing the social order. Myths concerning a supernaturally animated cos-
mos permitted a detailed analysis of ideas and strategies that could be used to
promote, sustain, and change the sociocultural order as well as to criticize spe-
ciﬁc policies. Such religious understandings supported the political claims of
the upper classes by identifying them with the organic powers of reproduction
and the hierarchies that were believed to be inherent in a cosmic order that
was simultaneously natural and divine (Bauer 1996: 327). Having interpreted
nature in terms of familiar social categories, the leaders of early civilizations
used the understanding they derived from this operation to justify the unequal
social order they had created.

20 Cosmology and Cosmogony
I
n early civilizations ideas about the structure and origin of the universe
were articulated in the form of myths or sacred narratives. Such an ap-
proach was inevitable given that the universe was believed to be animated and
controlled by supernatural forces. Because of this, it is impossible to divorce
the investigation of ancient cosmologies from the study of religious beliefs.
John Baines (1991b) has suggested that the ancient Egyptians did not record
myths systematically because myths and dogmas were not as central to Egyp-
tian religion as cults and rituals. Inadequate recording and preservation of
myths are serious problems in the study of all early civilizations. Yet myths that
are reasonably well recorded also tend to be highly variable. Within early civ-
ilizations, beliefs relating to the structure and creation of the universe varied
from one period and from one state, city, cult centre, and family to another.
Adherence to alternative versions reﬂected not only local traditions but also
rivalries, factionalism, and resistance to centralization. Rationalized corpuses
of mythology were developed for literary purposes only after myths had ceased
to have major religious and political signiﬁcance. Much of the seeming unity
of modern versions of Greek and Roman myths is the product of harmoniza-
tion that occurred during the Renaissance (Grant 1973). To compare concepts
relating to cosmology and cosmogony in different early civilizations, it is nec-
essary to focus not on the surface detail but on the basic structures of myths.
While the shape and size of the earth were ﬁrst correctly approximated by
the Greek astronomer, Eratosthenes of Cyrene, in the third century b.c., as-
tronomical knowledge has expanded rapidly since the invention of the Galilean
telescope in the seventeenth century a.d., creating a vast divergence between
ancient and modern understandings. People in early civilizations believed both
the earth and the cosmos to be very small by modern standards. Each early
civilization was thought to be located at the centre of both the terrestrial plane
and the universe and regarded as cosmologically privileged in its relations with
444

Cosmology and Cosmogony
445
the forces that had created the universe. The cosmography of early civilizations
was not only anthropocentric but also ethnocentric (M. Wright 1995).
In city-state systems, every capital city claimed a privileged position in the
cosmos. In the Valley of Mexico, however, by 1519 few people would have
openly disputed the hegemonic city of Tenochtitlan’s claim that it was the
centre of the world (D. Carrasco 1987). In early Mesopotamia a privileged
position was accorded to Nippur, a centrally located cult centre that avoided
direct involvement in the wars that pitted other Mesopotamian city-states
against one other (Postgate 1992: 33–34). The Yoruba believed Ife to be the
place where the world was created, the world’s ﬁrst city, and their religious
and cultural centre. The Maya seem to have recognized four major cities (can
caanal, ‘the four on high’) as playing special roles in relation to the four quarters
of their civilization. The four cities varied from one period and perhaps one
city-state to another (Marcus 1993: 149–52).
Much of the research on the views that people in early civilizations had of
the universe since the 1950s has been strongly inﬂuenced by the publications
of Mircea Eliade (1954), a specialist on Siberian shamanism. Eliade maintains
that all early humans sought to understand the workings of the supernatural in
relation to an imagined primal event that inaugurated reality and determined
humanity’s situation in the cosmos. Early religious rituals attempted to realize
the presence of the divine spirit (numen) by returning to a moment when
time did not yet exist and experiencing the original act of creation. The most
important and enduring representation of the sacred was an axis mundi in
the form of a centrally located mountain or tree that connected the terrestrial
world with supernatural realms located both above and below it. Around this
central axis the world was laid out in four directions. Eliade argued that this
cosmic plan inﬂuenced the location and layout of cities, temples, palaces, and
houses, each of which was intended to be a microcosm of the universe. His
concepts have been applied to the interpretation of Hindu temple plans and
Chinese and Roman urban conﬁgurations (Wheatley 1971: 418). While vertical
and quadripartite arrangements seem to recur frequently in conceptions of
the earth and the universe in early civilizations, the widespread inﬂuence of
Eliade’s theories may have encouraged the interpretation of fragmentary data
in ways that exaggerate the extent of cross-cultural uniformity of ideas relating
to cosmology. His ideas may have become self-fulﬁlling.
While the notion of a central vertical axis was strongly marked in the Valley
of Mexico and in Maya and Mesopotamian culture and seems to have been
present in early China and among the Yoruba, it was not evident among the
Inka or in ancient Egypt. Yet the symbolic importance that the Inka assigned to
verticality, Egyptian preoccupation with the circumpolar region of the sky, and

446
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the ethnocentric belief that every early civilization was located at the centre
of the universe can all too easily – and perhaps deceptively – be construed
as referring to such a cosmic axis. Although it is often proposed that Chinese
and Mesoamerican cosmological concepts were derived from a common set
of shamanic beliefs of Siberian origin that were carried to the New World by
the earliest Palaeo-Indian settlers, the resemblances between Chinese beliefs
and those prevailing among the Indians of the southeastern United States
seem to be more detailed than are those between Shang China and highland
Mesoamerica. Both the Chinese and the Indians of the eastern United States
believed that the underworld was a realm of raw life-forces while the sky world
wasoneofmorecontrolled,intellectualpowers.Contrariwise,thepeopleliving
in the Valley of Mexico viewed the underworld as a place of sterility, death, and
disappearance (Allan 1991; B. Smith 1996: 311–16). The theory of Siberian
origins also fails to account for the notable differences between Mexican and
Peruvian cosmologies, which were presumably based on ideas brought to the
New World at the same time. Much more systematic testing of the applicability
of Eliade’s ideas to hunter-gatherer and other prestate societies around the
world is needed before they can be employed to infer the cosmological beliefs
of early civilizations. In order to make my data base as independent as possible
of Eliade’s inﬂuence, I have sought to use information collected before as well
as since the 1950s. This will help to test the general applicability of Eliade’s
ideas.
More speciﬁc conceptual problems beset the application of Eliade’s views.
Directionality usually refers to a quadripartite division of the earth’s surface.
Sometimes, however, it indicates the cardinal directions, as, for example, when
the sloping entrance to an Old Kingdom Egyptian pyramid points due north
and the pyramid’s mortuary temple faces due east. In other instances, it refers
to a quartering of the horizon, with the centre of each quarter facing one of
the cardinal directions. Among some modern Maya, the words glossed as ‘east’
and ‘west’ actually refer to those segments of the horizon where the sun rises
and sets in the course of a year, while those glossed ‘north’ and ‘south’ refer
to the remaining portions of the horizon, where the sun never rises or sets
(Watanabe 1983). It is probably more difﬁcult to control for emic variation
in the sphere of religious and cosmological beliefs than in any other sector of
early civilizations.
The earth, the realm of living human beings, was generally conceptualized
in early civilizations as a ﬂat surface (rather than a globe or curving surface),
square or circular in outline and only a few thousand kilometres across. It was
assumed to be surrounded by the ocean, which at its outer extremity became
one with the higher and lower supernatural realms. Above the earth was the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
447
realm of the sky, where deities generally associated with life and cosmic order
dwelt. The sky realm was often supposed to be supported above the earth by
gods, trees, or mountains located at the four corners of the world. Beneath the
ground was another realm inhabited by supernatural powers. Sometimes that
realm was associated with moisture and life, but more often it was associated
with death, albeit a death from which new life might arise. The main points
of communication between the upper, middle, and lower worlds were located
at their common centre and four corners. Contact occurred at or through
hills, sacred trees, caves, tombs, and temples. Within this generic conceptual
framework, individual early civilizations elaborated distinctive versions of the
cosmos.
The Aztec and their neighbours believed the earth (cemanahuatl) to be a
disc or square surrounded by four petals or quadrants (nauhcampa) set in the
midst of sea water that was charged with supernatural power (teoatl, ilhuica-
atl) (D. Carrasco 1999: 104; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 58–60). The saline waters of
Lake Texcoco were believed to be sea water rising up from under the ground
(Dur´an 1971: 168), and their presence made Tenochtitlan, on an island in the
middle of that lake, a microcosm of the whole earth. This connection with the
sea was emphasized by the sea sand, seashells, and other marine fauna buried
in caches in Tenochtitlan’s main temple platform (Broda 1987: 99–100).
The terrestrial plane was divided into quadrants. The east was associated
with the daily birth and the west with the daily demise of the sun, while the
north was associated with the sun’s right hand and the south with his left hand
as he travelled west across the sky. The north, which was the source of cold,
dry winds, tended, like the west, to be associated with death, while the more
clement south and east were associated with life. The east was identiﬁed with
maleness and the west with femaleness. Each of the four quadrants had its own
emblematic colour, tree, bird, type of wind, deity, and supernatural powers.
The colour symbolism that was associated with the quadrants and the centre
was not, however, constant. In one commonly used system, east was associated
with red, north with black, west with white, south with blue, and the centre
with green (Caso 1958: 10; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 57). However, east was also
associated with yellow, north with red or white, west with blue-green or black,
south with white, and the centre with black or red (Aguilera 1989: 132; Berdan
1982: 123; D. Carrasco 1987: 140).
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that there were thirteen sky
levels above the earth, each inhabited by different deities. The lower levels
were the realms of the moon, stars, sun, and comets. Above them were skies of
variouscolours,whilethetoptwolevelsconstitutedtherealmofthecreatorgod
Ometeotl (Caso 1958: 64–65). Directly beneath the mountains, fertility deities

448
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
lived in caves ﬁlled with rain-producing clouds, streams, trees, and vegetation.
The most important of these paradises, located at the southern edge of the
world, was Tlalocan, the home of the rain god Tlaloc. At the northern edge of
the world, openings led to the nine levels of Mictlan, the underworld. Mictlan
was a cold, dry, dangerous place where the souls of the dead descended from
one level to another until those that survived the journey experienced personal
extinction in the lowest. The underworld was ruled by Mictlantecuhtli and
Mictlancihuatl (the Lord and Lady of the Underworld), who were counterparts
ofifnotthesameasOmeteotl(Le´on-Portilla1963:109).Eachnightthedeador
jaguar sun passed through the underworld, illuminating it before being reborn
as the eagle or daytime sun (Caso 1958: 12–13). The Mexicans believed that at
the four corners of the world cosmic energy, which provided rain, sunlight, and
plant life, ﬂowed up through caves from the fertile parts of the underworld
and down from the skies and then travelled across the surface of the earth
before returning to its source at the centre. For the Aztec, the centre was
the main temple at Tenochtitlan, the most important and spiritually powerful
building in their world (Broda 1987: 122; D. Carrasco 1990: 67; Caso 1958:
56–64; Matos Moctezuma 1988: 123–35).
Many Maya beliefs about the structure of the universe were derived from
the same Mesoamerican sources as those in the Valley of Mexico. The Maya
pictured a terrestrial world that consisted of a centre surrounded by four quad-
rants and a primordial sea. East and west were associated with the birth and
death of the sun, north with the sky realm, and south with the underworld.
There were thirteen sky realms above the terrestrial plane and nine under-
worlds beneath it. The underworld was a dark, watery (or underwater) locality
with its own black water ‘sky’. These realms were vertically separated by a
cosmic tree located at the centre of the universe with its roots in the under-
world and its crown in the sky. The Classic Maya often depicted the sky as a
double-headed serpent, their words for ‘snake’ (kan) and ‘sky’ (ka’an) being
near-homophones. The earth was pictured as a cayman or turtle resting in wa-
ter or as a two-headed monster (kawak). Both the sky and the earth monster
had one living head and one dead one.
The Maya assigned the colour red to the east, white to the north, black to
the west, yellow to the south, and blue-green to the centre. Each quadrant
had distinctive trees and gods that kept the earth and sky separated. The
north, the principal direction from which rains came, was associated with life.
Supernatural powers were able to pass from one level of the universe to another
through mountains, caves, sinkholes, lakes, and oceans, as well as up and down
the world tree and through the bodies of vision serpents that the upper classes
conjured up by bleeding themselves and using hallucinogens. Temples were

Cosmology and Cosmogony
449
identiﬁed with the trees, hills, and caves which facilitated communication
between the terrestrial and other realms. The Maya may have regarded the
night sky as the underworld, which rotated so that it became visible to the
terrestrial world after sunset. The sun rose as a young man from the underworld
each day and grew old as he crossed the sky (Freidel and Schele 1988b; Reents-
Budet 1998: 78–79; Schele and Miller 1986: 42–47; Sharer 1996: 153–57). The
Maya associated the underworld with death and decay, which were a source
of fertility and regeneration. The elderly Lords of Death ruled a malodorous
realm of rot and disease but one from which major deities and the souls of
resourceful rulers were able to escape, at least temporarily, by transforming
themselves into the sun, moon, and planets (Schele and Miller 1986: 42, 54).
The Shang and Western Zhou may have conceptualized the terrestrial plane
as a square with a square spirit world adjacent to each side. Each spirit world
was the home of a different wind and rain, and all of these were surrounded by
the ocean (Allan 1991: 75, 173). The Shang viewed the terrestrial plane as con-
stituting a central area (zhong shang) surrounded by four lands (si tu) named
for the cardinal directions. David Keightley (2000) suggests that the east-west
axis,associatedwiththesun,mayhavebeenregardedastheparamountoneand
east as the principal point of the compass. North was the direction of cold and
the dead and south the direction of warmth and the living. The Shang viewed
themselves as occupying the centre of the earth and surrounded on all four
sides by barbarians. In Zhou times these peoples were identiﬁed generically
as the Rong to the west, the Di to the north, the Yi to the east, and the Man to
the south. The Rong and the Di were nomadic peoples (Creel 1970: 197–212).
Above the square of the earth was a circular sky world, perhaps composed of
nine levels, and below the earth were the Yellow Springs, a moist underworld,
perhaps also with nine levels (Allan 1991: 30). This triple-level universe was
also conceptualized as a turtle, its upper shell the sky world and its plastron
the terrestrial world, swimming in a cosmic sea (104). At the centre of this
universe grew the gianmu, or ﬁxed mulberry tree, which had nine branches
in the sky world and nine roots in the underworld. Shang royal capitals were
described as the pole (ji), or centre, of the four quarters (76).
The early Chinese appear to have distinguished between celestial spirits, in-
cluding Shangdi and the royal ancestors, who collectively may have embodied
the spirit force (shen) that shaped and ordered the universe, and underworld
deities who embodied the primal energies (qi, feng), associated with winds and
sexual arousal, that animated the cosmos (Lewis 1990: 213–15). It has been
suggested that the later culture hero Huangdi (the Yellow Emperor) was orig-
inally the ruler of the underworld and hence the underworld counterpart of
Shangdi. While the celestial realm was associated with birds, the underworld

450
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
was associated with dragons (Allan 1991: 65–66, 170). Ten suns were distin-
guished, each equated with one of the ten sequential days of the Shang ritual
calendar. A close association was established between these suns and deceased
Shang rulers, each posthumously named after one of the ten days. Every day
nine suns, perhaps in the form of birds, stayed in the underworld while the
remaining one travelled across the sky. The sun rose from the ocean and as-
cended into the sky by means of the cosmic mulberry tree before once again
plunging into the sea and the underworld (Allan 1991: 50, 172–83; Granet
1958 [1930]: 203; Keightley 2000).
The Mesopotamians imagined the visible universe to consist of two parts,
the curved vault of the sky (an) and the ﬂat disc of the earth (ki), which long
ago had been forced apart by the air (lil) (Huot 1989: 73). In some early myths
these two units had grown through the accumulation of primeval silts; in others
they were the body of Tiamat, a primeval cosmic deity that had been torn in
two. The surface of the earth had been shaped by the gods, who had dug
river channels and raised mountains prior to creating human beings. Southern
Mesopotamia was thought to be located at the centre of the terrestrial plane
and hence to be the place that had the most effective contact with the gods. It
appears to have been assigned to the southern quadrant (ubda) of the world,
the other quadrants containing Shubur and Hamazi to the east, Martu, the
Amorite country, to the west, and Uri to the north (Kramer 1963: 284–85).
Above the earth were the air and the sky world, where the major cosmic
deities lived. The earth rested on sweet water (apsu), which in turn overlay
and was surrounded by the heavier salt water of the ocean (tamtu).
Beneath the earth was a cavernous underworld (eretsu): a dry, dark place
containing the city of the dead, which was surrounded by seven walls. Here
lived the gods of the underworld, the spirits of disease, and the souls of the
dead. The sun travelled through the underworld from west to east each night,
brieﬂy bringing light to various parts of it. The moon visited the underworld
once a month at new moon to judge the dead. Various deities associated with
crops, animal care, and fertility also lived part of each year on earth but had
to spend the rest of it in the underworld. Beneath the underworld, a counter-
sky was sometimes envisioned (Bott´ero 1992: 273–74; Jacobsen 1976: 168–79).
According to some Babylonian cosmologies, there were three sky realms above
the earth inhabited by different groups of deities. These combined with the
earth, the sweet water, and the realm of the dead to form a six-layered universe
(Lambert 1975: 58–60). Beyond the ordered universe was a limitless celestial
ocean.
The Inka distinguished an upper or sky world (hanan pacha) ruled by the
sun and associated with sovereignty, the surface of the terrestrial world (cay

Cosmology and Cosmogony
451
pacha), which was the abode of living human beings, and a lower realm (hurin
or ucu pacha) composed of the sea and what lay beneath the earth. This lower
realm was associated with night and the creator god Wiraqucha. The Inka also
thought of the Andean highlands as constituting an upper (hanan) moiety,
associated with the sky world, and of the coastal plain as constituting a lower
(hurin) moiety, associated with the sea and fertility (Classen 1993: 31–33;
MacCormack 1991: 310).
Cuzco was venerated as the centre of the terrestrial world and the major
focus of spiritual power in the Inka kingdom. In the region surrounding it
more than three hundred wakas were located along forty-one or forty-two ce-
ques (siqi), or lines of spiritual force, that radiated from the Qorikancha, the
main temple of the sun. Different social groups were responsible for maintain-
ing each of these wakas (Bauer 1998; Cobo 1990: 51–84; I. Farrington 1992;
Zuidema 1964). The Cuzco area in turn was surrounded by four divisions
(suyu) that extended to the frontiers of the Inka kingdom, which was called
tawantinsuyu (land of the four parts). These quarters not only constituted
the largest administrative districts of the Inka state but also were associated
with different ecological zones: the northwest (chinchasuyu) with the northern
highlands, the southwest (cuntisuyu) with the Paciﬁc coast, the southeast (col-
lasuyu) with the Lake Titicaca area and the Atacama Desert, and the northeast
(antisuyu) with the Amazonian tropical forest (Kendall 1973: 54). The Inka’s
two ritual directions were east and west; there were no Quechua words for
north or south (Rowe 1944: 300).
The Inka believed the cosmos to be a combination of two sets of reciprocal
forces in a creative equilibrium. The ﬁrst set was characterized by structure,
maleness, light, clarity, dryness, rock or earth, fertility, and right-handedness
and the second by ﬂuidity, femaleness, darkness, obscurity, moisture, water,
fecundity, and left-handedness. Yet water, which was generally conceptualized
as female, was also viewed as semen and hence male, while soil, which was
impregnated by water, was often regarded as female. The moon, which was
always female, was associated with the male sky realm (Classen 1993). Repro-
duction was a process brought about by water’s combining with dry, stable,
and enduring earth or rock. High altitudes, including mountain peaks and
the sky, were associated with maleness and low-lying regions, including fertile
mountain valleys, with femaleness. Life was thought to be sustained by water
rising through underground channels from the Paciﬁc Ocean to the highlands,
from where it ﬂowed over the earth in the form of rivers back to its source,
or, alternatively, transported to the highlands by a celestial llama or the Milky
Way and released there as rain. The movement of water into the highlands
maintained the equilibrium of the cosmic order by preventing the ocean from

452
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
rising ever higher and ﬂooding the whole earth. The sun was believed to rise
out of Lake Titicaca and sink into the Paciﬁc Ocean, from where it too made its
way back into the highlands through underground channels. The Inka viewed
death as the separation of the dry and wet aspects of living creatures. While
the moist life-force returned to lakes and rivers and ﬁnally to the ocean, the
dry forces shaping life survived as wakas and mallquis, the dried remains of
living things, which were connected with the world inside the earth (Classen
1993: 11–25; Gose 1993: 494–502; Salomon 1991: 15–16; Sherbondy 1992).
The Egyptians viewed the universe as a region of light, life, and ordered
activity that had been created and was sustained within Nun (nw, nnw), a lim-
itless ocean of dark, inert, undifferentiated, and lifeless water that was alien
and unknown even to the gods. The earth (t3) was pictured as a ﬂat surface
or the upturned, reclining body of the earth god Geb and the sky (pt) as
a ﬂat plate made of bronze or meteoric iron held up by four deities or the
downward-facing body of the sky goddess, Nut, who was variously pictured
as a woman arched over the earth or a cow standing above it. Geb and Nut
were separated by their son Shu, who represented air or sunlight. Beneath the
earth was the underworld (dw3t), which consisted of caverns that extended
from the western horizon back to the eastern one. Alternatively, the under-
world was identiﬁed with the dark sky that extended below the horizon. Below
the underworld stretched the feminine portion or counterpart of Nun (nnwt)
( J. Allen 1988: 3–7).
The Egyptians conceived of the universe as being organized along two main
axes: an east-west solar axis and a north-south Nile one. The sun god was
believed to grow old as he travelled across the sky each day. In the evening
he was swallowed by Nut and rejuvenated as he passed through her body
to be reborn the next morning in the east. Alternatively, the sun sank into
the underworld and travelled east through it, defeating the forces of disorder
and being rejuvenated as he did so, before rising victorious from the eastern
horizon the next morning. The Nile River’s life-giving waters were believed to
well up from the primeval waters in the vicinity of the cataracts and ﬂow north
until they reentered the primeval ocean when they reached the Mediterranean
Sea. Through endless repetitions of cycles, the sun and the Nile River renewed
themselves and provided the necessities of life for the Egyptians.
The east and south were regions that symbolized life and rebirth, while
the west and north symbolized both death and the possibility of survival after
death. This survival was associated with the Field of Reeds (sh˘
t ı3rw), a fertile
realm of the god Osiris located near the setting place of the sun, and the Field
of Offerings (sh˘
t h
• tp), which was associated with the northern circumpolar
stars. The Egyptians interpreted the ecliptic (h˘
3-channel, ‘winding channel’)

Cosmology and Cosmogony
453
as a river in the sky along which the sun, moon, and planets travelled in their
boats. At least in later times, this river was also believed to provide water in the
form of rain to foreign lands. Other Egyptologists have associated the Field
of Reeds and the Field of Offerings with the portions of the sky located south
and north of the ecliptic (Goebs 1998: 10–11).
While the cosmos continued to sustain and renew itself, it constantly had
to resist the forces of primeval inertia and disorder (ısft) which assailed the
gods and threatened the terrestrial realm in the form of deserts, sandstorms,
low Niles, rainstorms, night-time, weak rulers, and death. Every night the
serpent that personiﬁed disorder sought to destroy the weakened sun, every
year drought attempted to overwhelm the fertility of the Nile Valley, and over
time kings grew older and less competent to rule. The efforts of the solar
creator god to renew himself and ensure his eternal youth maintained the
delicate balance between the order of the universe and the disorder of the
primeval ocean that the creator god had established at the time of creation (sp
tpy) (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 197–98).
The Yoruba compared the realm of the gods, or the upper spirit world (orun),
and the earth to the two halves of a calabash, with the sky set over an earth
that was concave downwards. The earth in turn was surrounded by the ocean
(Ojo 1966a: 196). The sky was associated with Ifa, the god of certainty and
balance, who alone knew the will of the creator god Olorun, and the earth with
Esu, the god of uncertainty and disorder (R. Armstrong 1981: 75–76). Yoruba
deities climbed up and down between the upper spirit world and the earth
along iron chains that hung from the sky or, like the winds, passed between the
two realms at the gates of the earth, which were located at the four cardinal
directions. The sun, moon, and Venus, the only star that the Yoruba identiﬁed
individually, all travelled some distance below the dome of the sky. The sun was
believed to recross the sky from west to east at midnight (Ojo 1966a: 196–200).
The people of Benin drew a similar distinction between the spirit world (eriui)
and the visible world (agbo). The path between these worlds ran through or
across the ocean, which surrounded the visible world and was the source of its
fertility (Bradbury 1957: 52–54).
Like the Aztec, the Yoruba divided the surface of the earth into four seg-
ments, which were identiﬁed in relation to the motion of the sun: sunrise,
sunset, and the areas to the right and left of the sun as it passed across the sky
each day. The east-west axis was regarded as the primary one, the north-south
axis as secondary. Noon and midnight, when the sun traversed the zenith, were
both regarded as times of special importance and concern. The Yoruba did not
venerate the sun, and, while women prayed to the moon for children, they
offered no sacriﬁces to it (Ojo 1966a: 174, 198). Each city ideally had gates

454
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that faced the four quarters. In the centre of a town or by each of its gates was a
mound dedicated to the four-headed god Olori Merin. Babies were sacriﬁced
to these mounds every three months (Lucas 1948: 166; Ojo 1966a: 200). Yoruba
divination correlated speciﬁc deities and coloured substances with particular
directions. The east was associated with the trickster deity Esu and with sulfur,
the north with Ogun, the god of iron, and with redwood, the west with Sango,
the god of lightning, and with charcoal, and the south with the creator god
Orisala and with chalk. In Ilesa, a special annual cycle of sacriﬁces was made
to Esu in June, Ogun in September, Sango in December, and Orisala in March
(Frobenius 1913, 1: 254–59). The Yoruba area was thought to be composed of
four parts, each divided into four kingdoms. These were the sixteen kingdoms
that had been assigned to the immediate male descendants of Oduduwa, the
god who created the world (Ojo 1966a: 200).
The cosmological models propounded by the early civilizations have striking
similarities. Those between the Egyptian and the Mesopotamian model may
reﬂect shared beliefs with a single origin somewhere in the Middle East. Those
among the various Mesoamerican models have obvious historical connections,
although the timing of the development and spread of many religious beliefs
remains uncertain. The similarities between Mesoamerican and Chinese cos-
mologies have tentatively been attributed to shared connections with Siberian
shamanism. These particular explanations do not, however, account for the
worldwide distribution of many traits. The shared features at least partly re-
ﬂect the way in which people living in early civilizations would have interpreted
the natural world that was familiar to them in the light of their belief that such
a world was sustained and animated by supernatural powers. As Alan Sokal
and Jean Bricmont (1998: 183 n. 255) observe, ‘All beliefs, even mythical ones,
are constrained, at least in part, by the phenomena to which they refer’. The
best-informed individuals in early civilizations knew about lands many hun-
dreds of kilometres from their own but had no detailed information about
regions that were more than a few thousand kilometres away. They tended to
think of the terrestrial world as being a relatively ﬂat plane only a few thousand
kilometres across. All early civilizations were located close to seas or oceans;
therefore it was inferred that salt water encircled the whole earth. Above the
terrestrial plane was the sky, which was ﬁlled with moving, hence living, ce-
lestial bodies. Most cosmographies posited some form of counterpart of the
sky located under the earth. Especially in civilizations that interred the dead,
this underworld was equated with death and decay and populated with the
deities, spirits, and souls of the dead. Because the surface of the earth pro-
vided food for humans, it was often concluded that the underworld was a place
of regeneration, where death gave rise to new life. The Yoruba’s dual division

Cosmology and Cosmogony
455
of the cosmos into a purely supernatural sky realm and a terrestrial realm
appears to be an exception to this tri-level scheme, but they acknowledged a
third cosmically signiﬁcant level: the sea. Their view of the universe appears to
have been more analogous to the Chinese image of the sky and earth as equiv-
alent to the carapace and plastron of a turtle ﬂoating on a cosmic sea. The
Maya and Aztec viewed the earth as a saurian monster ﬂoating on a primordial
ocean.
The peopling of the cosmos with deities who animated (or were) the natu-
ral world and supplied it with order, light, moisture, fertility, and well-being
accords with notions about the fundamental nature of the supernatural shared
by the people living in these civilizations. The adverse manner in which nat-
ural forces often affected humans also encouraged the belief that the deities
who controlled nature were not primarily concerned with human welfare and
might under certain circumstances seek to harm human beings.
The belief that spirits and supernatural forces moved from one level of
the cosmos to another encouraged symbolic elaboration. The widespread idea
that the sun returned from west to east either below the earth or above the
sky accorded with a widely shared belief that both earth and sky were opaque
bodiesthatwouldrendersuchmovementsinvisible.Itisalsonotsurprisingthat
an east-west axis, which corresponds to the visible movement of the sun, was
generally privileged over a north-south axis. By contrast, the Andean emphasis
on the symbolic meaning of verticality in the terrestrial world and the Maya
portrayal of the underworld as a place of rank decay, as opposed to the Aztec,
Mesopotamian, and Egyptian views of it as a dry, etiolated realm, reﬂected
major differences in the speciﬁc ecological settings in which such views were
formulated.
It is more difﬁcult to explain the widespread notion of a vertical central axis
and quadripartition among the early civilizations. These concepts appear to
have been present in many small-scale societies and ultimately may have been
grounded in the coordinates that any upright primate would have required to
monitor the natural environment. The human body itself would have suggested
a vertical axis, while, given the limited range of clear vision, scanning in four
directions (front, back, and to each side) would have been necessary to secure
the visual coverage required to detect game, as well as animal predators and
other dangers. Out of these perceptual foundations may have evolved the
tendencies found in early and later preindustrial civilizations to draw complex
analogies between the human body and the cosmos (Classen 1993; L´opez
Austin 1988).
Without minimizing signiﬁcant variations in cosmography from one early
civilization to another, many similarities can be attributed to parallel analyses

456
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of the natural world by people who viewed the universe from generally similar
perspectives, including similar views of the supernatural. Such an explanation
also helps to account for the greater similarity of views about the terrestrial
plane, which were controlled to a greater degree by direct observation, than of
ideasconcerningtheskyworldortheunderworld.Thisconclusionaccordswith
the materialist belief that observations of the natural world play a signiﬁcant
role in the development of some religious concepts ( J. Furst 1995: 174).
cosmogony
All early civilizations sought to understand when and how the universe had
come into being and how long it might last. Since it was believed to be ani-
mated by supernatural powers, these questions were studied mythologically.
Because people in early civilizations saw themselves as following collective pat-
terns of behaviour that the gods had established when they created the world,
cosmogonic speculations were intimately concerned with society as well as the
natural world.
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that the whole of creation
had evolved from Ometeotl, the bisexual deity living beyond the skies who
represented the source of everything that ever was or ever would be in the
universe. Ometeotl combined maleness and femaleness, day and night, and
all the other complementary and contradictory qualities that made up the
universe. At the time of creation, when darkness still prevailed, Ometeotl
channelled energy (sometimes speciﬁed as ﬁre) to produce four male deities
who constructed the temporal and spatial framework of the universe. These
were the Red Tezcatlipoca (the agricultural fertility god Xipe Totec) of the east,
the Black Tezcatlipoca (Tezcatlipoca, the god of kingship, who could see all)
of the north, the White Tezcatlipoca (Quetzalcoatl) of the west, and the Blue
Tezcatlipoca of the south, with whom the Aztec identiﬁed their patron deity
Huitzilopochtli. Huehueteotl, the Old God, or Xiuhtecuhtli, the Old Fire God,
identiﬁed with Ometeotl, presided over the central axis of the universe. The
four Tezcatlipocas created the calendar, the upper sky worlds, the earth, the
ocean, the realms of the dead, the other deities, and the heavenly bodies
(Heyden 1989: 38–39; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 33–34). In some myths they split
in two a female cayman or earth monster ﬂoating on the primeval sea in order
to create from her body the earth and the sky (Clendinnen 1991: 177).
The sky world and the underworld remained stable, but the terrestrial level
was periodically subject to violent transformations (Clendinnen 1991: 222).
There had been four successive ages, each lasting from six to thirteen ﬁfty-
two-year calendar cycles, during which a different Tezcatlipoca constituted the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
457
dominant cosmic force. Each successive age was associated with a different
element: earth, wind, ﬁre, and water. Each age was better organized than
the one before, but at the end of each the sun of that era failed, a violent
cataclysm disrupted the world order, and the human creatures of that period
either perished or were turned into animals (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 4). At the
beginning of the present era, in a.d. 883, the gods assembled at the ruins
of Teotihuacan to raise the sky, which had fallen to earth at the end of the
previous era, and renew the earth for a fourth time. Here the god Nanahuatzin
immolated himself to become the ﬁfth and apparently ﬁnal sun, and one by
one the other gods hurled themselves into the cosmic ﬁre, where they were
consumed, to ensure that the new sun had sufﬁcient life-force to move across
the sky. As a consequence of this action the cosmos and the gods were renewed
(Le´on-Portilla 1963: 33–48).
The Aztec and neighbouring peoples believed that the new era, identiﬁed
as that of their patron god, Huitzilopochtli, would come to an end at the
termination of one of their ﬁfty-two-year calendar rounds. The world would
be destroyed by earthquakes, and supernatural monsters would kill all human
beings. It is unclear whether this era was thought likely to be of as short
duration as previous ones or whether, because of the superior harmonization
of space and time that had been achieved when it was created, it could be
expected to last longer. The Aztec believed that by nourishing the sun with
human blood the duration of this cosmic order could be extended (Caso 1958:
93–94; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 54–61).
Unlike the Aztec, whose longest year count covered only one ﬁfty-two-
year cycle, the Maya had a calendar that used multiples of twenty-year cycles
to stretch the counting of days backward and forward over immensely long
periods. The Maya equated various cyclical conﬁgurations of their calendar
with particular controlling deities and believed that the coincidence of the
same supernatural forces at different points in time caused human history to
repeat itself. In the sixteenth century they believed that their era had begun in
3114 b.c. and would come to an end in a.d. 2012 and that the world had been
destroyed, and the sky again raised and the terrestrial realm re-created, at least
three times since the beginning of the universe (Schele and Miller 1986: 16).
Both the Classic and the historical Maya thought that the gods brought
the universe into being at a cosmic hearth that they identiﬁed with the three
brightest stars of the constellation Orion. Yet there is growing evidence that
the idea of relatively rapid cycles of cosmic creation and destruction may have
been introduced to the Maya from central Mexico after the Classic period.
While several major Classic-period deities were born or reborn shortly before
or after 3114 b.c., there is no indication that that particular year marked the

458
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
beginning of a new creation for the Classic Maya (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 251).
Classic Maya inscriptions referring to anniversaries of royal successions that
would occur as late as a.d. 4772 have been interpreted as evidence that the
Classic Maya likewise did not believe the present world order would come
to an end in a.d. 2012 (Reents-Budet 1998: 78; Schele and Mathews 1998:
106–7, 341).
Such ﬁndings call into question signiﬁcant beliefs that have been attributed
totheClassicMayaconcerningthecreationandhistoryoftheworld.Ithasbeen
suggested that they viewed creation as a never-ending pattern of birth, death,
and rebirth involving the sowing of cosmic seeds that became celestial bodies,
plants, trees, humans, and the dead living in the underworld (D. Carrasco
1990: 100–101). Yet they appear to have believed that the fates of deities and
of human individuals and collectivities were predictable from arrays of cosmic
forces and planetary motions that could be linked to particular calendrical
cycles. They also may have believed that individual gods and other beings had
predetermined beginnings and endings that recurred as a result of similar
alignments of cosmic forces. Adopting this interpretation creates far greater
differences between Aztec and Classic Maya beliefs about cosmological history
than were formerly envisaged.
The surviving fragments of Sumerian myths suggest that in the beginning,
the wind and storm god, Enlil, separated the sky and the earth, while the god
Enki, noted for his cleverness, organized the world much like a large estate. He
arranged the land, mountains, marshes, and seas, each with their own deities,
put gods in charge of agricultural production, and appointed Utu, the sun god,
to look after boundaries. Prior to the creation of human beings, the igigi, a
lower order of deities, had to labour to produce food for all the gods. In the
course of this labour they dug out the beds of the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers
(Bott´ero 1992: 222; Jacobsen 1976: 85).
In the later, more detailed, Babylonian creation narrative, Enuma Elish, the
universe began with a watery waste in which the female salt water, Tiamat,
and the male fresh water, Apsu, were commingled. These two engendered
silt, which in turn gave rise to time, the horizon, and heaven (an) and earth
(ki), the latter probably in the form of two conjoined discs. The god An mated
with various goddesses who gave birth to the historical pantheon of deities that
controlled the sky, air, earth, sea, and underworld. By impregnating Ki, An gave
rise to vegetation. In alternative versions An, the sky, was described as both
male (Anum) and female (Antum) and as constituting a married couple who
became the ancestors of the gods ( Jacobsen 1976: 95, 167–69). The creation
of the various generations of gods was followed by a series of conﬂicts between
Apsu and Tiamat, on the one hand, and the younger gods, on the other, in the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
459
course of which the older gods were killed in battle and Enki’s son, Marduk,
was recognized ﬁrst as the champion of the younger gods and then as their
king. Marduk cut Tiamat’s body in two and used it to (re-?)create the sky and
earth. Next he reorganized the cosmos, created human beings, and assigned
administrative tasks to each of the gods. In each of these narratives, creation
and cosmic change were accomplished by divine utterances, the same means
by which kings and ofﬁcials commanded things to be done in the human sphere
( Jacobsen 1976: 170–88; Kramer 1963: 115).
The cosmic order created by the god An and his descendants was transmitted
to the people of Mesopotamia as a model for their society in the form of
over one hundred supernatural enabling powers (mes) that directed both the
operation of the universe and orderly social life among human beings, taking
the form of rules, institutions, actions, and symbols (Kramer 1963: 166; Maisels
1990: 281; 1999: 173). The Mesopotamians asserted that royal rule lasted for
241,200 years from the time when it descended from the sky world until the
ﬂood, after which the human life-span was shortened to its current length. The
ﬁrst dynasty after the ﬂood, that of the city of Kish, lasted for 24,510 years.
After that dynasty, recorded history began (Huot 1989: 231).
It is unclear to what extent the Mesopotamians considered the earth and
the universe perishable. Their endurance and the lives of the gods themselves
appear to have depended upon the gods’ carefully guarding the sources of their
power (Oppenheim 1964: 269). The Mesopotamians believed that the gods
decreed the fates of individual humans and city-states at an assembly held
annually in the temple of Enlil in Nippur, over which the god An presided
( Jacobsen 1976: 188). If a tutelary deity abandoned his or her city or his or
her support was overruled by the other gods, that city would be destroyed
by its enemies. Such a catastrophe could be averted, if at all, only by a pious
ruler who was able to divine the wishes of the gods and knew how to placate
them. The constant threats that Mesopotamians faced as a result of natural
catastrophes, intercity warfare, and foreign invasions were reﬂected in their
pessimistic view of the way in which the gods managed the universe.
The Yoruba believed that in the beginning the earth was a primeval sea or
marsh and Olorun and the other deities lived in the sky world. According to
accounts that were associated with different city-states, the creation of the
terrestrial world was carried out, on Olorun’s orders, either by Orisala or by
Oduduwa, who descended from the sky world for that purpose. Oduduwa
reached the ground at the place where his sacred grove was later located
at Ife. He brought with him a supernatural chicken that had been supplied
by Olorun, and this chicken created the earth by scratching up soil from the
bottomoftheswamp.OduduwabecametheﬁrstrulerofIfe,andhisimmediate

460
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
descendants established the ﬁrst sixteen Yoruba monarchies (Bascom 1969: 10;
Awolalu 1979: 12–13).
There is no indication that the Yoruba believed either the gods or the nat-
ural order to be threatened with destruction. While Olorun determined the
destinies of individual humans and deities could harm as well as assist people,
communities, and the natural world, deities did not periodically determine
the fate of city-states, as Mesopotamians believed their gods did. Because they
were ruled by descendants of Oduduwa, Yoruba states were expressions of the
cosmic order. Through divination and worship, the Yoruba sought to minimize
supernatural disruptions in both the natural and the political realm.
The best-documented cosmogonies of a territorial state are the ancient
Egyptian ones. The Egyptians referred to the creation of the universe as ‘the
time of Re’ (rk r) or ‘the time of the gods’ (rk ntrw) (J. Allen 2000: 126). The
universe had begun as the result of movement or life stirring within the cosmic
sea of non-existence. While each major cult centre had its own creation myth,
all of them agreed that a primeval deity or deities had produced the gods and
in the course of doing so had ordered the universe and all that inhabited it.
In Heliopolis this creator was identiﬁed as the sun god Atum (ﬁnisher), who
shaped the universe after he appeared upon a mound (st wrt, ‘great seat/place’)
that had emerged in the primeval sea and slain or repelled the serpent of non-
order. A bisexual though physically male-appearing deity, Atum masturbated
and then combined his own semen and spittle to create the god Shu (sunlight)
and the goddess Tefnut (moisture), who was also identiﬁed as the goddess
Ma et (cosmic order). They in turn engendered the earth god, Geb, and the sky
goddess, Nut, whose four children were Osiris (or Horus the Elder) and Seth
and their sister-wives Isis and Nephthys. Osiris represented the fertility of the
Nile Valley, Seth the sterility of the desert. The ﬁrst generations of male gods
(Atum, Shu, Geb) successively ruled on earth for a long time, but eventually,
as each of them grew older and less able to manage things, disorders broke out
which the younger gods had to quell. At that point each older god ascended
to the sky world, where he was able to renew his youthful vigour by passing,
like the sun, through cosmic cycles of death and rebirth. Osiris’s murder by his
brother Seth was the ﬁrst death among the major gods, although not necessarily
the ﬁrst death in the terrestrial sphere. Following a brief revival on earth,
Osiris was consigned to the eternal changelessness of the realms of the dead.
At the same time he was reborn as his posthumously conceived son, Horus the
Younger. Thus the two forms of survival, through endless renewal (nh
• h
• ) and
total changelessness (dt), associated with mummiﬁcation and dryness, were
established. With the eventual accession to the throne of Egypt of Osiris’s
son Horus, modern conditions were achieved. One king after another aged,

Cosmology and Cosmogony
461
died, and became identiﬁed with the god Osiris while leaving behind a son
or incarnation to rule over the whole terrestrial world (J. Allen 2000: 143–45;
Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 13–32).
In an alternative Memphite version of creation, that city’s creator god, Ptah,
who was equated with the primeval mound, brought the other gods, includ-
ing the sun, into existence and created the universe and social order by for-
mulating concepts in his heart and making them realities by means of his
divine utterances (h
• w) ( J. Allen 2000: 171–73; Lichtheim 1973: 54–55). At
Hermopolis the sun was caused to emerge from the primeval waters by four
pairs of male and female deities who represented various attributes of non-
existence: inertness, formlessness, darkness, and hiddenness ( J. Allen 2000:
126–27).
The Egyptians believed that the universe was constantly threatened by the
forces of cosmic disorder, but they were conﬁdent that, so long as the proper
ritualswereperformed,itwaslikelytoendureformillionsofyears.Therenewal
of the universe was essential to protect not only life on earth but also the gods
from the ravages of time. Ultimately, they believed, the universe would come
to an end and merge into the creator god, who in turn would be absorbed into
the primeval waters (Hornung 1982: 163).
In the ethnically and socially diverse Andean highlands, many different cre-
ation myths appear to have coexisted. Branches of the Inka royal family main-
tained that either one or many Wiraquchas or the lowland deity Pachakamaq
had created the universe (MacCormack 1991: 350–51). Wiraqucha, who seems
to have been eternal, was associated with the sea, which was viewed as the ul-
timate source of a major ingredient of life. When Wiraqucha ﬁrst created the
earth and sky, all remained dark. At that time he created stone giants whom he
decided not to bring to life. Then he created smaller humans, later to turn some
of them back into stones and drown the rest in a great ﬂood. Finally, at Lake
Titicaca, he created the sun, moon, and stars. The sun, which was associated
with the sky, ﬁre, light, and mountains, was the opposite of Wiraqucha, who
represented earth, water, darkness, the coast, and the sea. Both were viewed
as essential to support crops and animal life. In some traditions, Wiraqucha
was the father and mother of the sun and moon, who produced the morn-
ing and evening stars and they in turn Lord Earth (Camac Pacha) or Mother
Earth (Pacha Mama) and Lady Ocean (Mama Cocha) (Classen 1993: 19–25).
Wiraqucha also reshaped the landscape and provided it with everything that
humans would need to survive. When creation was ﬁnished, Wiraqucha and
two assistants made their way from Lake Titicaca north to Ecuador, where
they disappeared into the Paciﬁc Ocean (Demarest 1981; Gose 1993: 490–91;
Kendall 1973: 182–89; Rowe 1944: 315–16; 1960; Sullivan 1985).

462
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Spanish recorded that the Inka believed that the cosmic order periodi-
cally disintegrated or was overturned. According to one variant of these myths,
ﬁve successive worlds had been created, each one lasting between eight hun-
dred and twenty-eight hundred years. Every creation had its own sun, and suc-
cessive creations were separated by major episodes that were called pachakuti
(world reversals or earthquakes). According to another version, each sun lasted
one thousand years and signiﬁcant changes occurred every ﬁve hundred years,
the rulers at such times being called Pachakutiq. The Inka Pachakutiq was
said to be the ninth ruler of that name, and his reign was asserted to have
marked the beginning of the ﬁfth world (Kendall 1973: 201; Zuidema 1964:
219–34). The upheavals separating different epochs might be cosmologically
traumatic. Sometimes the terrestrial world was ﬂooded when water ceased to
be drawn from the ocean into the highlands; sometimes the surface of the
earth was turned over and the realms of the living and the dead were reversed.
The rapid expansion of the Inka state was another kind of upheaval. It has
been suggested, however, that all these myths may have resulted from Span-
ish scholars’ inadvertently superimposing European or Mexican concepts on
poorly understood Andean myths (Zuidema 1992: 39; Duviols 1989). Thomas
Zuidema (1964: 219–20) argues that in Peru the various worlds or cosmic
periods existed both simultaneously and consecutively. We must therefore in-
terpret this material with extreme caution. There is no evidence concerning
what the Inka believed would be the ultimate fate of creation.
In early civilizations there was much more variation in speculation about the
age of the universe, how it was created, and how it might end than there was
about the structure of the universe. This is scarcely surprising, since much less
empirical evidence was available to constrain thinking about these historical
issues. It is often assumed that in most ancient cosmogonies an initial period in
which there were no gods or only one was followed by an age in which multiple
deities emerged and created the basic structure of the universe and then by the
present era, in which human beings live on earth (Meeks and Favard-Meeks
1996; M. Wright 1995). This scheme does not do justice to the complexity of
the cosmogonies associated with early civilizations.
While each early civilization evolved its own general narrative about the
creation of the universe, there was considerable variation in these accounts
within both city-state systems and territorial states. In city-state systems much
of this variation was from one city-state to another, each state having its own
learned elite and its own traditions. In territorial states regional variation re-
ﬂected the limited control that central governments exerted over intellectual
life in large kingdoms. In all early civilizations, variations were associated with
political factions within the upper class.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
463
The Aztec, Yoruba, and Inka appear to have regarded deities such as Ome-
teotl,Olorun,andWiraquchaasuncreated.TheEgyptiansandMesopotamians
believed that the universe had evolved out of some sort of watery, motionless,
limitless, and eternal uniformity. The Mesopotamians calculated that this had
happened about three hundred thousand years ago, while the Egyptians also
believed that the universe had been created many thousands of years in the
past. Yet all but a short period of Egyptian cosmological history represented a
time when gods had ruled on earth, and most of Mesopotamian history was a
mythical time when humans lived far longer than they have done since. The
Aztec seem to have believed that the universe had existed in any form for only
a few thousand years and that the present creation was only a little over seven
hundred years old. In most Yoruba states ﬁfty reigns or fewer separated kings
recorded in the nineteenth century from the god Oduduwa, who had created
the earth and become the ﬁrst king (Lloyd 1960: 223). The suggestion that the
Inka believed the universe to be about forty-ﬁve hundred years old is highly
suspect.
There was a general tendency in early civilizations to view creation as a
time of superior power and authority, when the gods had established a model
cosmic and social order that later human rulers strove to copy as best they could
(Maisels 1990: 280). Creation time was often believed to continue alongside
historical time. In Egypt and the Valley of Mexico, the daily rising of the sun
repeated the act of creation; among the Maya, rulers’ souls’ escaping from the
underworld in stellar forms replicated the Hero Twins’ rescuing themselves
from the forces of death.
It is unclear how long most early civilizations expected the present cos-
mic order would endure. The Egyptians believed that, provided their kings
performed the proper rituals, their universe would last for a very long time
but not forever, while the Aztec feared that the Fifth Sun and perhaps the
entire universe might collapse at the completion of any ﬁfty-two-year calendar
cycle. The Inka may have believed that the world experienced a destructive
upheaval every millennium or less and the Classic Maya that the universe
would be destroyed and re-created approximately every ﬁve thousand years,
but neither of these beliefs can be attributed to them with certainty. The
Mesopotamians doubted that individual cities would endure for long periods,
given the ﬁckleness of the gods, but surviving myths reveal nothing about the
end of the universe; nor do those of the Yoruba. Whatever they believed about
cosmic cycles, the Maya appear to have had similar doubts about the long-term
survival of cities and other political institutions as a consequence of their belief
in cyclicity and the cosmically predetermined fortunes of all things. All early
civilizations viewed the cosmos as an ordered system in which everything had

464
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a clearly deﬁned function and was interrelated to everything else. Yet no one
explicitly believed this orderly arrangement to be eternal.
Some early civilizations associated the creation of the cosmic order with
gods that existed prior to and independently of time and space. This was the
case with Ometeotl, Olorun, and probably Wiraqucha. The Egyptians viewed
creator gods such as Atum or Ptah as a potential for order that existed in the
primeval ocean but did not come into being until order had differentiated
itself from disorder. The Mesopotamians likewise identiﬁed the earliest gods
as engendering powers within a cosmic ocean, but the gods to which they gave
birth had to slay them before they could order the universe in its present form.
Maya cycles suggest a sense of some kind of overarching, impersonal fate, and
this sense was also present in the cosmogonies of the Valley of Mexico.
While the deities in early civilizations were always gendered, the gender of
creatordeitiesvaried.Someofthem,suchasOlorun,wereclearlymale.Others,
such as Atum and Wiraqucha, appeared to be male but were described as bisex-
ual, indicating that they embodied, at least potentially, the whole of creation.
The Aztec conceptualized their deity Ometeotl as a balanced combination of
male and female forces. The Mesopotamians believed that a primordial pair
of male and female deities engendered the other gods but ascribed a more
prominent role to the female. They also may have conceived of an ultimate
mother of the gods, while An, the sky god, was sometimes said to take both
male and female forms. The younger and more active deities that replaced
Tiamat and Apsu were invariably governed by male deities.
Creation myths thus combined a limited set of general ideas about what
might have existed before the current cosmos or world order (a creator god?
disorder? eternal cycles?) with a belief in the gendered nature of the gods
(the creator gods being male, female, both, or bisexual). The aggregate result
among the early civilizations was a limited but randomly distributed set of
speculations about the origins and history of the cosmos. Similarities between
Mesopotamian and Egyptian creation myths that were not shared by any other
early civilizations, such as their belief in an ordered universe proceeding out
of a watery uniformity, and the Aztec, Maya, and possibly Inka emphasis on
periodic transﬁgurations of the cosmos may result from speciﬁc historical links
among these societies. There is no obvious connection between the type of
creation myth and whether it is associated with city-states or territorial ones.
This suggests that the primary aim of cosmogonies was to account for the
origins and history of natural phenomena rather than to link the speciﬁcs of
these phenomena to political issues. This is a conclusion that runs counter to
the current emphasis on trying to establish the social role of creation myths in
early civilizations (van Zantwijk 1985; Zuidema 1990).

Cosmology and Cosmogony
465
We must, however, consider a possible objection to this conclusion. Thorkild
Jacobsen long ago suggested that the instability of the Mesopotamian environ-
ment was reﬂected in its inhabitants’ fear of changes in divine favour, while the
greater ecological stability of Egypt encouraged the conviction that disorder
could be resisted for a long time (Frankfort et al. 1949: 137–40). More recent
research conﬁrms that serious problems were indeed encountered in culti-
vating southern Mesopotamia, but the punishments that the gods regularly
meted out to human groups were devastating military defeats, foreign inva-
sions, and epidemics, the major ecological disaster – the great ﬂood – being
a unique event. At the same time, both long-term and short-term variations
in the height of the Nile ﬂood presented greater ecological challenges than
Jacobsen and his colleagues recognized (Butzer 1976). Egyptian cosmology
appears to have incorporated a recognition of these ecological problems into
its interpretation of the universe as an unstable equilibrium between the forces
of order, which among other things ensured agricultural prosperity, and the
forces of disorder, which threatened the viability of the universe. This sug-
gests that the cosmic insecurity of the Mespotamians may have reﬂected to a
much greater degree the political instability of their city-state system, while
the Egyptians’ optimism reﬂected the stable political order that their territorial
state was able to maintain over long periods (Trigger 1979).
If this is so, it might be hypothesized that city-state systems would have
attributed greater instability to the cosmic order than territorial states. The
city-state systems in the Valley of Mexico had an even greater sense of cosmic
insecurity and pessimism than the Mesopotamian ones. As in Mesopotamia,
hegemonic relations among city-states were fragile and subject to dramatic
reversals. Yet the Valley of Mexico suffered from volcanic eruptions and disas-
trous crop failures caused by periodic droughts and the region’s susceptibility
to frosts. While the vast extension of chinampa agriculture and the imposition
of extensive tribute in foodstuffs on areas surrounding the Valley of Mexico had
considerably alleviated the ecological threat by the late ﬁfteenth century, these
solutions were both ecologically and politically fragile. Thus it is impossible to
estimate to what extent cosmological pessimism in the Valley of Mexico and
Mesopotamia reﬂected ecological or political problems or a combination of
the two.
Not enough is known about Classic Maya beliefs to measure either their
sense of ecological instability or the extent to which they interpreted polit-
ical reversals as deliberate divine interventions as distinguished from cycli-
cal, astrologically predictable realignments of cosmological forces. There is
general agreement that, as population density increased in the Late Clas-
sic period, Maya agriculture was adversely affected by deforestation and soil

466
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
erosion on hillsides (Fash 1991: 170–81). Yoruba city-states experienced swift
reversals in their political fortunes, but they do not appear to have linked
these reversals to cosmic instability. As in Egypt and Mesopotamia, kingship
was viewed as the continuation of patterns established when the world was
created.
The correlation is no clearer with territorial states. The Egyptians believed
that the cosmic order could be maintained over vast periods. This belief also
implied that the political order that the gods had established for Egypt and the
world at the time of creation would endure despite minor perturbations. But
neither the cosmic nor the political order could be taken for granted; both had
to be maintained by kings performing the correct rituals. The situation is more
uncertain for China and Peru. The Shang appear to have regarded their regime
as a symbolic reversal of the previous mythical (or at least mythologized) Xia
Dynasty. While they associated themselves with ﬁre, birds, sun, life, and light,
they associated their predecessors with the reverse qualities: water, dragons,
moon, death, and darkness (Allan 1991: 17–18). This suggests that changes in
ruling families or the conquest of one territorial state by another may already
have been associated with notions of cosmic reversal. We do not, however, have
enough information to determine how stable the Shang believed either their
environment or the supernatural order was. The much later Chinese concept
of the Mandate of Heaven (tianming), which was adumbrated at the beginning
of the Zhou Dynasty, reconciled periodic political upheavals with a belief in
cosmic and ultimately political stability by blaming political change on the
misconduct of rulers. Such misconduct, by angering Heaven, led to ecological
disasters, uprisings, and eventually the overthrow of bad governments.
In highland Peru it may have been believed that the cosmos underwent
major changes, if not destruction and re-creation, every ﬁve hundred or
one thousand years. This suggests a sense of cosmic instability approximating
that found in the Valley of Mexico. Such a sense of instability would not have
been inappropriate in a region subject to severe earthquakes, El Ni˜no episodes,
and climatic marginality at high altitudes. Yet it is uncertain whether cosmic
cyclicity was an indigenous Andean concept or invented by early Spanish schol-
ars. Even if this view were indigenous, given the brief dominance of the Inka
state over much of the Andean region it would be impossible to be certain
whether this view was associated with earlier territorial states, such as the
Chimu kingdom on the north coast of Peru or Tiwanaku and Wari in the
southern highlands, or with the rivalrous chiefdoms that had prevailed until
the time of Inka rule in the central highlands.
Thus there is not enough evidence to associate belief in cosmic instabil-
ity with city-state systems and belief in cosmic stability with territorial states.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
467
Despite varying degrees of optimism and pessimism, all early civilizations en-
tertained doubts about the powers of their deities to control the universe
and about the unequivocal willingness of these deities to help human beings.
Like the inhabitants of all complex societies, those who lived in early civiliza-
tions appear to have been aware of the devastating impacts of both ecological
and political calamities and projected these fears into the supernatural realm.
Views of cosmic instability may have reﬂected both political and ecological
concerns. In at least some cases, however, they may also have represented
the views of earlier and quite different societies persisting under altered cir-
cumstances. It is therefore not surprising that, on the whole, these views ap-
pear to reﬂect concerns more about ecological instabilities than about political
organization.
cosmograms
The realm of the gods was the main reference point for maintaining political
orderinearlycivilizations.Egyptiankingswerebelievedtocontinuearulership
that had been established by the creator gods before they retreated to the
sky world. Mesopotamian myths asserted that kingship and its paraphernalia
descended to earth from the kingdom that the younger gods had established
in the sky realm. The Yoruba supreme god Olorun, who lived in the sky world,
was king of all the gods, and the world-creating god Oduduwa was the common
ancestor and prototype of Yoruba kings. The Inka regarded their ruler as the
earthly incarnation of Inti, the chief deity of the sky world, and the Shang
kings may have claimed to be descendants of the supreme sky deity Shangdi.
Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba kings sought to incorporate into their own persons
the powers of one or more major deities.
Wilfred Lambert (1975: 49) has pointed out that in ancient Mesopotamia
no clear distinction was drawn between the world of nature and the prod-
ucts of human beings. At the time of creation the gods brought cities into
existence, just as they produced rivers and mountains. Mesopotamian temples
were viewed as mountains (kur) which connected the sky and terrestrial realms
(Mander 1999). They bore names such as ‘House of the Universe’ (´eˇs´arra) and
‘House That Is the Bond of the Sky and the Earth’ (´eduranki) (George 1993:
80, 145). In Egypt the god Ptah created cities in the course of fashioning the
natural world (Lichtheim 1973: 55). Such understandings encouraged efforts
to strengthen the symbolic alignments between social and political organi-
zation, on the one hand, and supernatural powers, on the other, by creating
earthly structures and community plans that duplicated those existing in the
realm of the gods.

468
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Efforts to relate the terrestrial realm more closely to that of the gods often
took the form of aligning public buildings and tombs with solar, lunar, or stellar
rising and setting points. The main axes of at least some Egyptian temples were
oriented to the rising or setting positions of the sun, moon, or particular stars
on certain days of the year (R. Wilkinson 2000: 36–37). The sides of Egyptian
pyramids faced the cardinal directions. Features of Maya building complexes
were aligned with a series of rising points of the sun or particular planets (Harri-
son 1999: 53–55). From earliest Shang times, the entrances to major buildings
faced away from the malign supernatural inﬂuences coming from the north,
including the cold north winds of winter. Later Chinese scholars believed that
Zhou altars to the soil god were regularly faced with earth of an appropriate
directional colour: the east with blue-green, the north with black, the west
with white, the south with red, and their summit with yellow. This, however,
may have been a late Zhou innovation (Creel 1970: 370; Wheatley 1971: 434).
Beyond this, buildings were created to be cosmograms – miniature repli-
cas of the universe. The Aztec interpreted their Great Temple, which they
believed stood at the centre of the cosmos, as such a microcosm. Its three
tapered tiers, each with four sides, and top platform represented the thirteen
levels of the sky world, its supporting platform the earth, and its founda-
tions the underworld. Its northern half, dedicated to the rain god Tlaloc, was
Tonacatepetl, ‘the Hill of Sustenance’, and its southern half was Coatepec Hill,
where Huitzilopochtli had defeated his sister and brothers shortly after he was
born. These two sacred hills joined together symbolized the portals of Mictlan,
the realm of the dead (Broda, Carrasco, and Matos Moctezuma 1987; Matos
Moctezuma 1988: 123–45).
Maya temples represented sacred mountains or the cosmic tree that facili-
tated human communication with the sky world and the underworld. Classic
Maya urban building complexes often had a ritual area to the north, consisting
of pyramid temples erected over the burials of former rulers, and a palace
complex to the south, with a ball court between. The funerary temples, which
reached the highest elevation, symbolized the sky world, the palace complex
represented the human realm and the underworld, and the ball court was be-
lieved to be a major point of communication with the underworld (Ashmore
1989: 273–74). Shang royal graves, which had four ramps descending to a cen-
tral wooden chamber, also appear to have been cosmograms (Allan 1991: 88).
In Egypt most major urban temples were constructed along east-west axes.
From early Shang times or even before, royal palaces contained important rit-
ual structures. Yoruba palaces were of great ritual importance but, while they
were divided into outer, semi-public and inner, private sections, they did not
exhibit any standard, ritually signiﬁcant layout.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
469
It is frequently maintained that entire cities were planned as cosmograms.
Dav´ıd Carrasco (1989: 9) asserts that all Mesoamerican cities exhibited such
plans. Tenochtitlan was laid out, much as nearby Teotihuacan had been over
a millennium earlier, with a major ritual and governing complex at the cen-
tre that was approached by avenues coming from the four cardinal direc-
tions. Tenochtitlan’s layout, which is said to have been dictated by the god
Huitzilopochtli (Dur´an 1964: 32), made it a duplicate of Aztalan, the mythical
city where the Aztec claimed to have originated, and of Tollan, the city that
had been ruled by the god Quetzalcoatl and from which the Aztec nobility
and artistic skills were thought to have been derived (Gillespie 1989: 178–79).
It is uncertain, however, to what extent other communities, large and small,
in the Valley of Mexico physically approximated such an ideal. Texcoco, the
second-largest city, does not appear to have implemented such a plan.
The Inka capital, Cuzco, was laid out with four roads extending from Cusi-
pata, its main square, to the four quarters of the kingdom. The adjacent Cusi-
pata and Wakapata squares were covered with a layer of sand brought from the
Paciﬁc coast to honour the god Wiraqucha. This sand symbolized the life-giving
waters of the ocean which the gods continuously transported to the highlands.
Like most highland communities, Cuzco was physically divided into upper and
lower moieties. Curiously, the principal temple of the sun god, who was the
chief deity of the upper moiety, was located in Lower Cuzco, while the shrine
of Wiraqucha, the chief deity associated with the lower moiety, was located
in Upper Cuzco. The city as a whole was said to represent a puma, with the
fortress and ritual complex of Saqsawaman being its head. The ceque system
turned the surrounding Cuzco Valley into a vast ritual area (Classen 1993:
100–106; Hyslop 1990: 29–65; Sherbondy 1992: 61–62; Zuidema 1964).
David O’Connor (1989) has postulated that, at least in the New Kingdom,
royal Egyptian cities were laid out along a north-south axis, associated with
the king, and an east-west axis, associated with the sun god. Where the two
axes met in the centre of the city were located the main temple and, just
north of its western entrance, the ofﬁcial palace where the king appeared as
the earthly representative of the creator god. Royal residential palaces were
located on the outskirts of such cities. From these the king approached the
centre of the city as the sun god approached it from the eastern horizon each
morning. Such a plan duplicated the solar and Nile axes that structured the
terrestrial and sky realms. Barry Kemp and Salvatore Garﬁ(1993: 78–79)
argue, however, that too much symbolism is being read into these urban plans.
Recent efforts to assign complex religious meanings to the distribution of cult
centres throughout Egypt and Nubia (O’Connor 1998) are even more weakly
supported. Efforts to impute celestial patterns to the relative locations of Old

470
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Kingdom pyramids (Bauval and Gilbert 1994) have been received with great
scepticism.
There is no evidence for a symbolic layout of early Chinese urban centres,
but this may be the result of inadequate data. Mesopotamian and Yoruba cities
appear to have been functionally arranged, although G. J. A. Ojo (1966a: 200)
argues that, for cosmological reasons, Yoruba cities had central cult places and
city gates arranged in fours or multiples of four. Maya city plans are highly
diverse and may not have had any generic cosmic signiﬁcance, although indi-
vidual buildings and building complexes clearly did.
The desire to create cosmograms does not appear to have been as obvious or
widespread in early civilizations as Eliade and his followers have maintained.
Tenochtitlan was a city with a central temple that represented the vertical axis
uniting heaven, earth, and the underworld and a clear layout of streets and
districts representing the four quarters. In other cases, individual temples,
palaces, or complexes of such buildings served as cosmic symbols connecting
the vertical realms and oriented to the four quarters. Certain general ideas
about the nature of the cosmos that Eliade noted may be very old and widely
shared, but it has not been established how widespread were the more speciﬁc
beliefs that he postulated as universals. His general ideas seem to have been
applied too dogmatically and in some cases without sufﬁcient local warrant to
the physical layout of structures. This does not mean that the broader range
of culturally speciﬁc meanings that were assigned to topographic features did
not play an important role in determining the location and shaping the layout
of urban centres or that, as the Inka ‘new Cuzcos’ illustrate, such meanings
were not read into existing topographic or built features (Brady and Ashmore
1999; Richards 1999; van de Guchte 1999).
the civilization in the universe
All early civilizations visualized the earth and the cosmos as being much smaller
than they are now perceived to be and the cosmos as consisting of two or more
vertically arranged and intercommunicating levels. Above, and usually below,
the terrestrial plane were realms that were occupied exclusively by deities
and by the dead. The terrestrial plane, which was the abode of living humans
but was also constituted and animated by supernatural power, was ﬂat and
round or square in outline and extended to an encircling ocean. Every early
civilization believed itself to be located in the centre of the terrestrial plane
and to enjoy a privileged location in relation to the gods and the rest of the
universe. There was a tendency to view the terrestrial plane as divided into
four quarters related to the cardinal directions or the course of the sun across

Cosmology and Cosmogony
471
the sky. The main connections between the terrestrial and supernatural realms
were found at the extremities and the centre of the world.
It appears likely that many of these similarities resulted from attempts by
people living in early civilizations to explain observable natural phenomena in
light of their understanding of the supernatural forces that animated (or were)
the universe. Widespread vertical and quadripartite divisions of the cosmos
may have been derived from still older belief systems inﬂuenced by widely
shared individual orientations to the environment.
Theories of cosmogony displayed considerably more variation. There was
much less agreement about what had preceded the creation of the universe,
how stable the terrestrial and cosmic orders were, and what the ultimate fate
of the universe might be. This greater variety reﬂected the lesser degree of
constraint by direct observation and hence the greater scope for culturally
guided speculation. People in all early civilizations appear to have doubted
the ability or willingness of supernatural powers to maintain the cosmos or
to treat human beings in a consistently friendly manner. They were aware of
the potentially devastating effects of political and ecological breakdown and of
ecological disasters and generally attributed these failures to interventions by
supernatural beings. Yet beliefs about the stability of the natural environment
and the human realm varied considerably, and there is no correspondence
between political stability and belief in cosmic stability. The most probable ex-
planation is that, because people living in early civilizations did not distinguish
the natural, supernatural, and social realms, all cosmogonies were attempting
to understand what we regard as the physical and social realms simultaneously.

21 Cult
I
n early civilizations’ relation with the supernatural, cult or ritual predom-
inated over other forms of devotion (C. Bell 1992). The central feature of
these cults was sacriﬁce, which has been described, along with prayer, as one
of the two ‘fundamental acts of worship’ (Faherty 1974: 128), and prayer and
sacriﬁce were closely linked. The Roman writer Sallust, although living at a
time when deities were viewed both more transcendentally and more scepti-
cally than in early civilizations, still described prayer accompanied by sacriﬁce
as animated words – prayer supplying meaning to sacriﬁce and sacriﬁce giving
power to prayer (Lewis 1990: 3).
Sacriﬁce has been deﬁned as ‘a religious rite in which an object is offered
to a divinity in order to establish, maintain, or restore a right relationship of
man to the sacred order’ (Faherty 1974: 128). The offering transferred the
life-force or power of the object from humans to the supernatural, which for
early civilizations meant the forces that activated the natural world.
Anthropologists have long discussed the origins and meaning of sacriﬁce.
Edward B. Tylor described it as gifts that fearful humans gave to their deities to
win their favour or placate their hostility. William Robertson Smith argued that
it constituted a form of communion of a society with its deities that involved
eating the gods’ totem, or earthly manifestation. James Frazer saw it as a
technique for rejuvenating deities and ensuring the continuity of the cosmos,
Marcel Mauss as a means to ensure that power continued to ﬂow both ways
between human beings and the gods. Gerardus van der Leeuw interpreted
sacriﬁce as a way to open a source of supernatural beneﬁts for humankind.
Valerio Valeri (1985) argued that most offerings simultaneously symbolized
and were seen as a part of the deity, the donor, and the ofﬁciant and thus
created, rather than merely reﬂected or reinforced, a relationship among them.
These explanations capture aspects of sacriﬁce in various societies, but each is
speciﬁc and partial in its coverage.
472

Cult
473
Numerous intentions were ascribed to sacriﬁce by those who practised it.
Their goals included to propitiate the gods or avert their anger, to purify
wrongdoers or taboo breakers, to establish communication with a deity, to
express gratitude for a divine favour already received, to strengthen a request
for a favour being requested, to seek protection for worshippers against their
human enemies or from evil powers, to cure epidemics, to avoid war or famine,
and to replenish the earth (Ajisafe 1924: 92; Faherty 1974: 132–33; Awolalu
1979: 137, 144). The Yoruba and Aztec believed that one of the tasks per-
formed by human sacriﬁces was to transmit messages, including requests for
help, to deities or dead ancestors (Caso 1958: 72; Connah 1987: 145; Soustelle
1961: 99).
The most important function of sacriﬁce in early civilizations and the one
that integrated most of the more speciﬁc meanings ascribed to it was to re-
turn energy or life to its divine source, thereby rejuvenating the power of that
source to animate nature and assist humans. A Roman priest said to the deity
to whom he was offering a sacriﬁce, ‘Be thou increased (macte) by this offer-
ing’. Sacriﬁce was the impetus that ensured the continuing reciprocal ﬂow of
divine life-force between its source and its various manifestations in the terres-
trial realm (Faherty 1974: 128). In transcendental religions such as Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam, where the omnipotence of a single god renders that
god’s existence totally independent of his creation, sacriﬁce becomes merely
a token of individual or collective human gratitude for the deity’s favours. In
early civilizations, individual deities were not viewed as being sufﬁciently pow-
erful to render them independent of human support. On the contrary, deities
and humans were regarded as depending on each other. Because most anthro-
pologists believe that religious concepts are shaped wholly by cultural factors
and thus expect them to exhibit considerable cross-cultural variation, the pos-
sibility that all early civilizations shared a belief in the dependence of deities
and human beings on one another is unexpected and requires veriﬁcation and
explanation.
gods as providers
In all early civilizations it was believed that deities had created the universe and
kept it functioning. As the powers which animated and controlled nature, they
supplied (or were) the energy or life that permitted the universe, including
human beings, to exist and sustain itself. They were regarded as the source of
the light, warmth, activity, nourishment, and fertility that humans required to
live and reproduce themselves. Since humans depended on the natural world
for their survival, they also depended on the gods. Agriculture was not simply

474
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the principal source of nourishment and livelihood but also the primary means
by which the gods sustained human life. The gods not only fed humans but in
some instances were viewed as the food humans ate.
But why did deities sustain human life and at what cost to themselves? The
Egyptian ‘Instruction Offered to King Merikare’, which dates from the First
Intermediate Period, suggests that the creator god fashioned the universe for
the sake of human beings, that he shone as the sun in the sky for them, and that
he provided them with food and leaders who could maintain order amongst
them (Lichtheim 1973: 106). This work, which superﬁcially appears to have
anticipated a transcendental, post-axial view of the universe, reﬂected the ‘solar
theology’ of the Old Kingdom, which celebrated the creative power of the sun
god. Yet, while the statement that human beings were the creator god’s ‘cattle’
may be construed as a metaphorical reference to a transcendental deity’s loving
care for humans, it may instead indicate the sun god’s dependence on humans
for his nourishment. Elsewhere it is made clear that the Egyptian creator god
brought the universe into existence primarily in order to have a realm in which
he and the other gods could exist. The sun’s daily trip across the sky not only
beneﬁted human beings but also allowed the creator god to remain vigorous
by passing through ceaseless cycles of death and regeneration (Meeks and
Favard-Meeks 1996: 79, 197–98).
In most early civilizations the gods kept the universe functioning pri-
marily to ensure their own survival and well-being. Humans existed in the
Mesopotamian universe to provide services – labour and sacriﬁce – for the gods
that signiﬁcantly improved the quality of their lives (Jacobsen 1976: 117–18).
In Mesoamerica, where the concept of religious sacriﬁce was elaborated to an
exceptional degree, it was believed that the gods periodically sacriﬁced their
own or each other’s lives to ensure the continuity of the universe and facilitate
the survival of humanity. As we have seen, the Aztec claimed that the Fifth
Sun had been enabled to move across the sky by the gods’ casting themselves
into a cosmic ﬁre and that, still earlier, by splitting the female Earth Monster
into two parts to form the earth and sky, the gods had made it possible for her
to bring forth all the life on earth (Clendinnen 1991: 177). The Aztec believed
that plants and animals ﬂourished mainly because the gods sacriﬁced their own
lives to support them (Berdan 1982: 186). Each autumn the sun god died and
descended into the underworld to marry the Earth Goddess, who gave birth
the following spring to the maize god – the sun reborn in a different aspect.
Human sacriﬁces were interpreted not simply as offerings to the sun but as
embodiments of divine power, representing the gods’ sacriﬁcing themselves to
renew the world (Broda 1987: 70, 75). The Maya likewise believed that their
deities sacriﬁced themselves so that the world might be renewed and human

Cult
475
beings live. Humans were made from maize, which was the ﬂesh of the gods
and contained divine soul power or life-force that was sacriﬁced for humans’
beneﬁt at harvest time. This power passed from maize into human bodies,
where it became particularly concentrated in human blood (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 195; Miller 1986: 19). Thus humans depended on the gods
for their survival.
The Pyramid Texts suggest that the Egyptian sun god nourished and em-
powered himself each morning by slaughtering and consuming the multitude
of stars, thereby appropriating their power. As he crossed the sky, creating and
sustaining terrestrial life with his energy, he grew older and weaker, and his re-
maining power was dispersed again each evening (Goebs 1998). In Egypt and
Mesopotamia myths also associated the death and rebirth of the gods with the
agricultural cycle. Inanna’s essential role in ensuring the agricultural fertility of
the earth required that, when she was executed by her sister, the god Enki had
to send spirits to the underworld to revive her and secure her release in return
for the conﬁnement of various other agricultural deities in the underworld for
several months of each year (Jacobsen 1976: 55–61). The Egyptians believed
that crops sprouted from the body of Geb or Osiris when it was moistened by
the Nile ﬂood, which represented the god’s own power of fertility. The murder
of Osiris by his brother Seth was represented as part of an ongoing struggle
between cosmic order and disorder, while the annual cycle of Nile ﬂoods and
crop growth constituted the cycle by which Osiris renewed himself (Frankfort
1948: 190–97). Whether the gods were represented as deliberately sacriﬁcing
themselves or not, their cycles of life, death, and rebirth sustained the universe
upon which, ultimately, all humans depended.
nourishing the gods
In all the early civilizations human beings offered nourishment to the gods in
the form of sacriﬁces. Sacriﬁces took the form of killing animals or human be-
ings, offering meat, vegetables, and alcoholic or non-alchoholic beverages, and
presenting inedible materials believed to contain special supernatural powers.
The Inka offered lumps of gold and silver or images made from these metals
to the gods, and the Egyptians offered unworked metals and semiprecious
stones, all these substances being considered especially rich in cosmic en-
ergy (Daumas 1979; MacCormack 1991: 150; Rowe 1944: 307). The Inka
offered thorny oyster (mullu) shells from the Paciﬁc Ocean, whole or pow-
dered, to springs and rivers in the highlands (Gose 1993). The Maya believed
that burning incense, made from tree resin, provided deities with an espe-
cially potent form of divine energy (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 204).

476
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Inka burned large amounts of fancy cloth as offerings, thus releasing for
the gods the energy that had gone into making it (Murra 1962). Worshippers
in Mesopotamia and elsewhere donated goods to temples as thanks offerings
to gods (Postgate 1992: 135), but it is not clear whether they were also viewed
as sacriﬁces that would have helped to sustain and empower the gods.
Sacriﬁces were made to the gods by individuals or groups. Some were made
at regular intervals (daily, weekly, or yearly), others on special occasions to
expiate sins, thank the gods, or celebrate life-cycle events. In general, the upper
classes made more lavish offerings and sometimes sacriﬁced to more important
deities than the lower classes. While Aztec commoners offered quails, tortillas,
green maize, and ﬂowers to the gods, nobles and rich merchants offered human
captives, cacao beans, exotic bird feathers, and jade (Clendinnen 1991: 243).
Sacriﬁces offered by the king on behalf of the whole nation were the most
costly and elaborate of all. While, especially in Mesoamerica, human sacriﬁce
was represented as an honour for the victim, upper-class adults rarely if ever
freely volunteered themselves. Human victims were mostly prisoners of war,
criminals, strangers, and children.
Erik Hornung (1982: 203) has suggested that the Egyptian gods were tran-
scendental – that they did not need either cult or offerings for their own well-
being and therefore offerings were merely tokens of gratitude. New Kingdom
texts suggest, however, that, when the gods ceased to receive offerings in the
reign of King Akhenaton, they abandoned Egypt, which resulted in military
defeats and other disasters (Baines 1995a: 28–29). Other Egyptologists assert
that the Egyptians believed that their deities needed human support in or-
der to survive and that the main purpose of temple offerings was to preserve
the universe (Daumas 1979: 705; Quirke 1992: 70–103). In particular, the
gods required sustenance in the form of food (Silverman 1991: 28–29). Sac-
riﬁcial offerings returned to Egyptian deities the energy they had expended
on the creation and maintenance of the universe. The more offerings a deity
received, the more powerful that deity became. Consequently, the most vital
concern of the Egyptian gods was the apportioning of their offerings (Meeks
and Favard-Meeks 1996: 37, 102, 123). Food offerings were also essential to
maintain the life-force of dead humans, who were regarded as gods. Offerings
to deceased rulers were a major focus of Old Kingdom religious ritual.
Offerings were essential features of daily Egyptian temple and mortuary
cults. Animals were killed in temple abattoirs, and it appears to have been the
presentation of their ﬂesh to the gods rather than the act of slaughtering them
that constituted the offering. The Egyptians believed that gods entered or were
drawn into their cult images three times each day to consume the supernatural
energyfromtheirfoodofferings.Inthemorningtheseimageswerealsowashed

Cult
477
and dressed by their priests. These rituals, performed in the most secluded
part of the temple, were essential for maintaining the cosmic order (Robins
1993: 157). Food was regarded as possessing magical power as well as creative
energy which made it the essence of life or being (Goebs 1998: 280–81). The
term for ‘cosmic order’ was etymologically closely related to m3w, which
meant ‘offerings’, just as h
• w, which referred to the divine power of creative
utterance, was identical with or similar to a word that meant ‘life-sustaining
nourishment’ (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 103). Evidence suggests that
human sacriﬁce was performed in cultic settings in Early Dynastic times, but
in later periods the only manifestation of it may have been the infrequent
slaying of enemy leaders as apparent offerings to the gods (Gardiner 1961:
199–200; R. Wilkinson 2000: 265–67). Statues of bound enemies or written
lists of such people appear to have served as substitutes for living individuals
in the execration rituals that were performed during the Middle Kingdom to
drain the king’s enemies of power (Posener 1940).
Mesopotamians believed that all human beings were the servants of the
gods. It was their duty to grow food, weave clothes, build earthly residences,
cook, and clean for their deities. Gods needed food in order to function ef-
fectively, and this was provided by their temple staff in the form of two meals
each day (Oppenheim 1964: 188–91; Postgate 1992: 119–20). Without these
offerings, the gods would have grown malnourished and ceased to function
effectively. The legend of the ﬂood recounted that, after water covered the
earth, offerings ceased and the gods grew hungry and began to repent their
destruction of humanity. When the water receded and the one surviving fam-
ily, led by Utnapishtim, emerged from its boat and offered a burnt sacriﬁce,
the deities crowded ‘like ﬂies’ around the rising smoke, which transmitted to
them for the ﬁrst time in many days the spiritual power of food produced by
humans. Because of this, the gods forgave Enki for having surreptitiously res-
cued a few humans who could continue to serve them (Jacobsen 1976: 120).
A later, perhaps facetious Mesopotamian text suggested that, if sacriﬁces were
withheld from a neglectful personal deity, that deity could be forced to beg for
food as a hungry dog does from its master (Bott´ero 1992: 255–58).
The food and drink that were offered to Mesopotamian gods resembled what
was consumed by humans. As in Egypt, animals were slaughtered on temple
premises, but there is no indication that the killing of the animal, as opposed
to the offering of meat, was regarded as sacriﬁce. Some animal sacriﬁces were
burned. There is no evidence of human sacriﬁce, except perhaps the killing of
lower-class individuals temporarily substituting for a monarch who feared that
the gods might be seeking to destroy him. In serving the gods, priests acted
as their household servants, the king as their chief steward, and commoners

478
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
as their estate workers (Bott´ero 1992: 223–25). The Mesopotamians appear to
have believed that the gods collectively could survive without human assistance
and had done so prior to the creation of humanity. That, however, would have
required them to grow and prepare their own food, which meant that their
standard of living and position in the cosmos would have been considerably
lower than it was after the creation of humanity. The spirits of dead humans
received sacriﬁces, usually together with the deities that were worshipped by
individual households (Bott´ero 1992: 279–82).
Sacriﬁce was ubiquitous among the Yoruba. Most personal prayers were
accompanied by modest offerings (Awolalu 1979: 108). If devotees depended
upon gods for protection and support, gods depended upon devotees to feed
them, glorify them, and keep secret the ritual knowledge that was required to
serve them. This knowledge could be rendered ineffectual or even harmful if
it were divulged to unauthorized humans (Apter 1992: 223; K. Barber 1981:
738). Offerings were normally made to individual deities every four days and
at special annual festivals. The more offerings a deity received, the greater
became his or her power and willingness to help humans (Armstrong 1981: 71;
R.Thompson1976:P/1).Cultsnourisheddeitiesinreturnforpast,present,and
anticipated favours (Apter 1992: 98, 184). Sacriﬁce was part of a cycle in which
life was exchanged for life, making death essential for prolonging and renewing
life. Worshippers did not hesitate to coerce deities by threatening to transfer
their devotions and material support to other, more generous gods (Apter 1992:
223; K. Barber 1981: 737–38). The routine goal of cults was, however, to feed
and empower deities so that they could renew the cosmos and promote the
welfare of the groups and individuals who worshipped them (Apter 1992: 124).
Ogun, the god of iron, consumed the ﬂesh of sacriﬁced dogs and, in return for
this nourishment, supplied the iron tools that made agriculture and therefore
human life possible (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 171).
Yams, kola nuts, palm wine, palm oil, and cowrie-shell money were routine
offerings. More elaborate sacriﬁces included ﬁsh, chickens, sheep, goats, and
cows. The most prestigious and awe-inspiring offerings were human beings:
prisoners of war, slaves, children, and condemned criminals or strangers sup-
plied by the king. Human beings were sacriﬁced infrequently and usually only
a few at a time. The major exceptions occurred during critical phases of wars,
when divine assistance became particularly important (Awolalu 1979: 188–89).
At Ife choice human victims from Ijesa were thought to be preferred by the
gods because of their powerful physiques and phlegmatic natures (S. Johnson
1921: 21). Some human victims were venerated and accorded great honours
prior to their deaths and were believed to become gods afterwards. Others
were assured that their life-forces would be reborn to a higher social position

Cult
479
in a subsequent life (Lucas 1948: 215–17). Victims were often gagged before
being sacriﬁced so they could not curse their executioners (Willett 1967: 49).
Because in many Yoruba rituals the victim represented the sacriﬁcer, in offer-
ing human lives to the gods the king was symbolically offering a substitute for
himself (Apter 1992: 111). The archaeological discovery of forty-one female
skeletons thrown into a pit at Benin City indicates that human sacriﬁces were
made there as early as the thirteenth century a.d. (Connah 1975: 49–66). The
bodies of human and animal sacriﬁces were often left to decay before a symbol
of the deity for whom they had been killed or disposed of in the forest. It was
the life-force and blood of these victims that was offered to the gods.
Individual Yoruba deities had favourite offerings and rejected others. Ogun
preferred dogs and palm wine, Sango rams, and Esu fowls. Orisala liked snails,
whose juices were associated with calmness and easing pain (Awolalu 1979:
163–64). Libations were offered everywhere to the god of the soil to thank him
for the harvest (Ojo 1966a: 168). It was regarded as improper to offer palm
wine to Orisala because it was drunkenness that had caused him to ignore
Olorun’s order to create the world (Awolalu 1979: 164). Particular sacriﬁces
were considered appropriate for speciﬁc requests: dogs for longevity, eggs to
prevent losses, a ram, sheep, and cock together for victory, and a wild hog to
counteract plots (Lucas 1948: 208). The appropriateness of each sacriﬁce was
conﬁrmed by divination prior to its being made, and the sacriﬁce’s efﬁcacy was
veriﬁed by divination afterward (Awolalu 1979: 162–81).
The Yoruba also made sacriﬁces to the dead. Prior to human burials, the
blood of sacriﬁced animals was poured or sprinkled on corpses, especially
those of notable people, in order to strengthen their souls (Ajisafe 1924: 80–81;
K. Barber 1991: 314). Extended families regularly presented food offerings to
their dead ancestors. Some spirits of the dead, including those of a few human
sacriﬁces, became gods and received their own offerings.
The Inka regarded sacriﬁce as the principal focus of religion (Rowe 1944:
305). Its function was to nourish the gods. Smoke rising from burnt offerings
sustained the sun god and gave him the strength to stay young and continue
moving. Without offerings, wakas grew hungry, disconsolate, and ineffectual
(Cobo 1990: 114; MacCormack 1991: 304, 306). Religious sacriﬁces ensured
the continuing circulation of life-giving supernatural energy through the uni-
verse (Aveni 1989: 303; Salomon 1991: 16). The term hucha designated sac-
riﬁcial relations between human beings and the sun and upper world gener-
ally; cuyac designated sacriﬁcial relations with Wiraqucha and the lower world
(Dover 1992: 9). The Inka sacriﬁced male llamas, guinea pigs, birds, and animal
fat but not dogs to their deities. They also offered them cooked vegetables, fer-
mented drinks, cocoa, cloth, and metal. The gods preferred food and alcoholic

480
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
beverages made from maize ﬂour. Libations, sometimes further empowered
by being mixed with powdered seashells, were poured into basins, holes in the
ground, and springs. Other offerings were burned. White llamas were sacri-
ﬁced to the sun, brown ones to Wiraqucha, and parti-coloured ones to Illapa,
the thunder god. In Cuzco, three or four llamas were offered to the sun each
day; their throats were cut in the square in front of the Qorikancha and their
bodies burned on an open altar in the square (Rowe 1944: 306–7).
The most valuable offerings were human lives. When new provinces were
conquered, the Inka sacriﬁced some of the best-looking people of that region
as a thanks offering to the sun. The rest of the human sacriﬁces were children
selected to become chosen women and yanakuna. These sacriﬁces had to be
without any physical blemish. The children were feasted and made intoxicated
and then were strangled, had their throats cut or their hearts removed, or were
buried alive. Human sacriﬁces were offered to the gods during public crises
such as famines, pestilence, military defeats, or the illness of the king (Rowe
1944: 306). They were restricted to major temples and government-sponsored
rituals (Kendall 1973: 196–97). Some children of subordinate rulers who were
chosen for sacriﬁce became objects of veneration and sources of oracles after
their bodies were returned to their birthplaces for burial (Silverblatt 1988b).
The blood of animal sacriﬁces nourished the gods and was daubed on the
faces of worshippers, young men being initiated into adult status, sacred and
royal statues, buildings, and mummies in order to strengthen them. Only the
mummies and statues of Inka rulers and the images of gods were daubed
with human blood (MacCormack 1991: 112–13). Sacriﬁces were also made to
dead ancestors to nourish them so that they could better sustain their living
descendants.
The Shang and Western Zhou Chinese offered sacriﬁces to sustain nature
deities and the souls of their dead ancestors. Deities depended on these offer-
ings to maintain their strength, and powerful deities required more sacriﬁces
than minor ones (Allan 1991: 124; Keightley 1978b: 213; Li Boqian 1999).
Provisioning lavish sacriﬁces was one of the main occupations of the upper
classes and a primary justiﬁcation for both warfare and hunting. Hunting and
warfare had a shared vocabulary, including the word huo, which meant both
‘booty’ and ‘sacriﬁcial victim’. The main reason for hunting was said to be to
provide victims for sacriﬁce (Lewis 1990: 17–21).
The offerings made to Shang royal ancestors and to nature deities consisted
of grains, millet-ale libations, animals, and human beings (Keightley 1978b:
213). Animals that were routinely sacriﬁced included dogs, pigs, wild boars,
sheep, and cattle; birds and horses were less common. The humans appear to
have been mainly prisoners of war, with the Qiang, a western herding people,

Cult
481
being favoured victims. The burial of whole army units, including chariot
crews, during foundation rituals for the palaces built at Anyang appears to
have involved the sacriﬁce of royal retainers (Keightley 1969: 374).
Royal sacriﬁces frequently consisted of combinations of several species of
animals together with human victims. A total of one to ten victims was normally
sacriﬁced, but occasionally several hundred were killed at one time. It was
divined in advance what sacriﬁces speciﬁc gods or ancestors wished. Libations
and blood were poured on the ground, and the bodies of animal and human
victimswereburned,buried,drowned,ordismembered.Deitieswerebelieved
to drink the blood of slaughtered victims, and the large-scale killing of animals
and humans was a central feature of royal sacriﬁcial rites (Creel 1937: 197–206;
Lewis 1990: 20). The heads or ears of human enemies killed in battle were
presented at temples to feed ancestral spirits and deities. Shang kings appear
to have offered the most elaborate sacriﬁces to their more remote and more
powerful ancestors, even though they relied more heavily on their immediate
ancestors to act as intermediaries on their behalf (Keightley 1978b: 218). The
royal ancestors depended on food transmitted to them through sacriﬁces and
could punish failure to deliver these sacriﬁces by harming their descendants
or afﬂicting the Shang kingdom with poor crops, costly wars, military defeats,
and plagues (Creel 1937: 175).
The Maya believed that the gods depended on human beings to care for
and nurture them and renew their powers (D. Carrasco 1990: 107; Schele
and Miller 1986: 176). The Maya’s principal cosmic task was to keep the su-
pernatural realm working by nourishing the gods (Hendrickson 1989: 129;
Schele and Freidel 1990: 65). This was construed as part of a contractual obli-
gation between human beings and the gods in which each side provided the
other with the divine power that they required to survive (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 195). Throughout Mesoamerica, sacriﬁce was regarded as a
form of debt repayment, with humans returning to the gods the cosmic energy
that the gods had expended to provide them with food, make them fertile, and
enable humanity to endure (D. Carrasco 1990: 49, 107).
Freidel, Schele, and Parker (1993: 195) point to the central role that meals
and offerings played in Maya religious life. The gods were offered incense
and a wide selection of foods, but their preferred nourishment was human
ﬂesh and blood (Baudez 1994: 275–76). Individual humans were killed, and
living humans drew blood from their ear lobes, tongues, and other parts of
their bodies and presented it to the gods on strings or pieces of paper (Schele
1984). Maya were expected to offer their own blood to the gods at frequent
intervals throughout their lives. The most potent offering was the blood of a
king or one of his close relatives, and the most prized human sacriﬁce was a

482
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
captured ruler. A royal prisoner was often kept alive for a long period awaiting
a special occasion such as the formal designation of a king’s heir. Kings and
their close female relatives shed copious amounts of blood in painful ways that
caused them to enter into trance states during which they communicated with
their ancestors and with major deities. These offerings were regarded as an
especially effective way to nourish the gods and reinforce the cosmic cycles on
which the well-being of all things depended (Schele and Miller 1986: 71).
The Aztec and other peoples in the Valley of Mexico believed that their
gods were starved for life-giving forces and required constant sacriﬁces to re-
vive them and sustain the cosmic order (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 377). Sacriﬁce
was the means by which human beings could return to the gods the energy that
these deities had expended to keep the world and individual humans function-
ing (Townsend 1992: 136, 154). If this did not occur, the earth would become
infertile, the power of the sun would fail, the cosmos would disintegrate, and
supernatural forces of disorder, terror, and destruction would be unleashed
against humanity. The Aztec made offerings of cooked food and objects made
of precious substances, but it was human blood and ﬂesh that best nourished
and animated the gods (B. Brown 1984; D. Carrasco 1999; Caso 1958: 12, 96;
Clendinnen 1991: 320; Davies 1984; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 376–77; Soustelle
1961: 97).
While some nourishment for the gods was provided by warriors slain in bat-
tle, the most valued and abundant source was human sacriﬁce. The majority of
those killed were captive warriors, and the primary aim of warfare was to obtain
such captives. Prisoners offered to Huitzilopochtli were referred to as ‘stars’,
an allusion to the star brothers that the sun had slain and consumed at the
time of his birth and at the dawn of every day thereafter (Caso 1958: 93). Male
and female slaves of foreign origin and local children born on inauspicious
days or possessed of inauspicious physical traits were also slain. Warriors were
differentially valued as human sacriﬁces according to how closely their culture
resembled that of the peoples living in the Valley of Mexico. The unconquered
Tlaxcalans, living to the east of the Valley of Mexico, were regarded as particu-
larly choice offerings. Victims were despatched in many different ways: heart
excision, decapitation, drowning, burning, and combinations of these methods.
Different techniques were thought appropriate for particular deities (Dur´an
1971).
While it is often suggested that the blood of human sacriﬁces nourished
sky deities and their ﬂesh animated earth deities, the Earth Mother was de-
scribed as crying for human blood and unable to produce crops unless she was
drenched with it (Clendinnen 1991: 183, 195). Sacriﬁced children were be-
lieved to become tepictoton, spirits who empowered the rain and fertility god,

Cult
483
Tlaloc (Broda 1987: 73). The Aztec sacriﬁced the largest number of prisoners
to their patron solar deity, Huitzilopochtli, in the belief that their blood and
hearts would sustain the sun and delay the end of the present creation. This
belief provided an ideological justiﬁcation for the wars that had created and
sustainedtheAztectributarysystem,representingAztecaggressionasaltruistic
and self-sacriﬁcing (Soustelle 1961: 96–101). In addition to human sacriﬁces,
from earliest childhood the Aztec often collected their own blood on bark
cloth or paper which they burned to transmit its life-giving power to the gods
(Clendinnen 1991: 74).
Because human ﬂesh and blood were formed from corn, which was a ter-
restrial manifestation of the gods’ life-force, the sacriﬁce of human life to feed
the gods was a potent means of sustaining the cosmic cycle on which every-
one depended. As among the Maya, such sacriﬁce was construed as a form
of debt repayment (nextlaoaliztli) (D. Carrasco 1990: 49; Clendinnen 1991:
74–75, 208–9). Human sacriﬁcial victims were referred to as ‘tortillas for the
gods’, and their ﬂesh was regarded as equivalent to the maize ﬂour from which
tortillas were made. Thus human sacriﬁces were regarded as equivalent to the
deity to whom they were offered (Soustelle 1961: 98) and eating the ﬂesh of a
sacriﬁcial victim as the same as eating the ﬂesh of a god (Caso 1958: 75).
As the Aztec state grew more powerful, slaves and prisoners of war were
increasingly used as foci for manifestations of the gods. Unlike other human
ixiptlas, slaves and prisoners were sacriﬁced after their representations had
run their cycle and were believed to be suffused with the power of the deity
to whom, through sacriﬁce, this power was returned. Sometimes priests wore
the ﬂayed skins of such sacriﬁces, thus turning themselves into ixiptlas. They
might also dress as the god to whom they were making a human sacriﬁce and
thus temporarily invest themselves with that god’s power; here a terrestrial
manifestation of a god was sacriﬁcing another manifestation of that god to
the deity itself (Clendinnen 1991: 249). Some of the more prominent ixiptlas
enjoyed comfortable and honoured, if circumscribed, lives during the period,
sometimes as long as a year, that led up to their being killed. Prisoners or slaves
were supposed to look forward with pleasure to dying in this manner and were
often made to consume alcoholic beverages or mind-altering hallucinogens
just before their deaths to ensure they behaved appropriately.
In all early civilizations sacriﬁce channelled energy back into the supernat-
ural realm to sustain and animate deities, propitiate them, and make certain
they continued to have the power to maintain the natural and social realms. It
was believed that, without ensuring the continuing power and goodwill of the
gods, crops would cease to grow, women would become barren, and people
would sicken and die. G. F. Il’yin and Igor Diakonoff (1991: 378) note that

484
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
in Vedic India ‘because it was believed that the world exists and that people
thrive only thanks to the gods, and because the gods live by sacriﬁcial offerings,
sacriﬁces were the main duty of believers’. While individuals and society as a
whole depended on the strength and goodwill of the gods, the gods depended
no less on the material support of human beings.
In all the early civilizations gods supplied human physical needs, but farm-
ers ultimately provided the food, services, and human lives that were essential
for the well-being or even the survival of the gods. Thus they played the same
role in relation to the gods as they did in relation to upper-class humans; they
supplied food and labour in return for order. The labour of the lower classes
ensured the well-being not only of the upper classes but also of individual
deities and the universe. This belief differed radically from that of modern
transcendental religions, whose deities require no human support. It also dif-
fered from the religious beliefs of early small-scale societies, which perceived
humans as depending far more on the supernatural forces that animated nature
than those forces depended on human beings.
significance of human sacrifice
One of the most important differences among early civilizations in sacriﬁcing to
the gods was the extent to which human beings were viewed as the primary or
most valuable offerings. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, human sacriﬁce appears
to have been rare even in the earliest periods and soon all but disappeared. In
the ﬁve other early civilizations, human sacriﬁces were a regular occurrence,
although their number and frequency varied.
In Andean myths humans and llamas were regarded as interchangeable
(MacCormack 1991: 171). If animal and human sacriﬁces had generally been
viewed as equivalent, it could be hypothesized that human sacriﬁces would
have been more common in those early civilizations that had the fewest do-
mestic animals, and this might explain the heavy emphasis on human sacriﬁce
in Mesoamerica. It does not, however, explain why there was a strong empha-
sis on human sacriﬁce in Shang China and Inka Peru, where large numbers
of domestic animals were also sacriﬁced, or its restrained practice among the
Yoruba, who kept fewer domestic animals.
It is frequently suggested that human sacriﬁce was common in warlike soci-
eties where there was little need for extra labour, human sacriﬁce being a way
of disposing of prisoners of war. While this might account for the frequency
of human sacriﬁce in the Valley of Mexico, with its high population density, or
among the Shang Chinese, who seem to have resorted to territorial expansion
to keep their population density low, it does not explain the situation in Early

Cult
485
Dynastic Mesopotamia, where large numbers of male prisoners appear to have
been slaughtered but not sacriﬁced. Nor does it account for the Inka, who ei-
ther killed or freed prisoners of war and collected most human sacriﬁces from
among their subject population’s children. The evidence also does not sug-
gest that large-scale human sacriﬁce was widely used to intimidate enslaved
captives, although such intimidation might provide a functional explanation
for the regular but limited sacriﬁce of slaves among the Yoruba. The threat of
human sacriﬁce was not employed to intimidate the large numbers of foreign
captives that the ancient Egyptians sought to incorporate into their society.
I do not have enough evidence to test the hypothesis that human sacriﬁce
was more commonly employed as an instrument of social control in the for-
mative periods of early civilizations than it was after more effective techniques
had been developed (Childe 1945). There is, however, no cyclical correlation
in any early civilization between political weakness and frequency of human
sacriﬁce. Once human sacriﬁce ceased to be practised in an early civilization,
it does not appear to have recurred as a normative practice. Human sacriﬁce
died out in China during the Zhou period and was never as common among
the Zhou as it had been among the Shang. It also declined rapidly soon after the
formation of the Egyptian state and (in the form of retainer sacriﬁce) after the
Early Dynastic period in Mesopotamia. In contrast, it had a long history in West
Africa, Mesoamerica, and Peru. In Mesoamerica the incidence of human sac-
riﬁce appears to have increased in at least some states that acquired hegemonic
status, whose greater power permitted fuller realization of a cultural ideal. It
is also highly probable that the Aztec used large-scale prisoner sacriﬁce to in-
timidate subject peoples over whom their political control was tenuous. There
were cults in the valley, associated with the worship of Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin,
the ruler of the ancient city of Tollan, that questioned the value of human
sacriﬁce and promoted alternative ways to nourish the gods. While this move-
ment may have enjoyed some royal patronage at Texcoco, even there it never
seriously challenged the ubiquitous belief that large-scale human sacriﬁce was
required to sustain the universe (D. Carrasco 1990: 63).
There is thus no simple functional explanation of human sacriﬁce. The vari-
ations in its occurrence appear to be largely cultural. The Maya and Aztec,
who emphasized human sacriﬁce and blood-letting, were part of a common
Mesoamerican tradition, while the Egyptians and Mesopotamians, whose cul-
tures had roots in a Middle Eastern Neolithic tradition, placed special empha-
sis on animal sacriﬁce. Nevertheless, all seven early civilizations in this sample
shared the belief that living creatures were particularly suitable for nourish-
ing the gods, and ﬁve of them (only two of which lacked domestic animals)
identiﬁed human beings as the most valued offerings.

486
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ritual intermediaries
In all early civilizations kings and members of the upper classes claimed a spe-
cial role as mediators between the terrestrial realm and the gods. It was through
their intervention that the energy on which the gods, and hence the universe
and all human beings, depended for their survival was channelled from the
human realm back into the supernatural one. Ordinary people had contact
with the supernatural through household and local cults, prayer, divination,
visions, dreams, and spirit possession. Many minor deities concerned with var-
ious aspects of human well-being were accessible to everyone. Individual fam-
ilies, craft associations, landowning groups, and villages had their protective
deities or ancestor spirits. All these groups offered sacriﬁces to tutelary spirits,
and these sacriﬁces made these groups minor energy-recycling units mediating
between the human and the supernatural world. Kings, high-ranking ofﬁcials,
and major institutions tended to monopolize communication with the more
powerful supernatural forces because their wealth and power enabled them to
make more lavish offerings. The ability to maintain contact with the gods was
the most important source of political authority. As a later Chinese tale put it,
in former times ﬁrst shamans and then everyone could communicate with the
spirit world, but eventually only rulers could do so (K. Chang 1983: 44–45).
In Egypt kings had established, at least by the Middle Kingdom and possibly
much earlier (Seidlmayer 1996), that only they could sponsor the sacriﬁces
that nourished the creator gods and related deities in temples throughout
Egypt. This claim was based on the belief that the king was the son or earthly
manifestation of each creator deity; the king’s offering sacriﬁces to the gods
was equated with sons’ making offerings to their deceased fathers. (In reality,
the king’s role was delegated to numerous priests who presented offerings to
the gods each day in his name.) When the king offered food to the gods, he was
symbolically offering them both provisions and cosmic order (m3t signifying
both) (Silverman 1991: 64–67; Shafer 1997b: 23–25). Kings also claimed the
ultimate right to provision the souls of the dead, all of whom were classiﬁed as
gods.
Mesopotamian kings were responsible for ensuring that offerings were reg-
ularly made to their city’s patron deity and, more generally, to any god or
goddess who had a temple in the city-state. Economic prosperity and social
harmony constituted evidence that a king enjoyed the favour of his city’s prin-
cipal deities. Some rulers had been priests before they became kings, but in
any case they served as religious leaders. They could personally make offerings
on behalf of their city-state and its people to any god and were responsible for
overseeing the construction and repair of temples and ensuring that temple

Cult
487
estates were managed properly. Kings also presented gifts of land, captives,
and valuable ornaments to temples and frequently implied that they sought
to accumulate riches to adorn temples rather than for their own gloriﬁcation.
Mesopotamian kings played key roles in certain religious rites, such as the
New Year festival and the puriﬁcation of armies before battles. The staff of
each temple offered sacriﬁces to its deity or deities every day. Yet, despite
competition between palace and temples, a king’s ultimate responsibility for
ensuring that a city’s gods were well served and his ultimate dependence on
their favour set him apart from and above other men (Postgate 1972; 1992:
262–65).
Among the Yoruba, every residential compound had shrines to one or more
tutelary deities whose worship was directed by the compound’s headman. The
patron deities of the patrilineages of quarter and ward leaders were publicly
worshipped by these ofﬁcials and their followers. In addition to revering family
and local deities, individuals were free to worship whatever gods they chose.
The Yoruba king had special relations with the patron deity or deities of his
royal lineage, whose shrines were located close to or within the outer com-
pound of the royal palace. He also exercised ultimate authority over every cult
performed within his kingdom and had the ﬁnal say in all religious matters.
The king authorized community festivals and was represented by an Ifa priest,
relative, or palace ofﬁcial at all public sacriﬁcial rites (Apter 1992: 21; K. Barber
1981: 730; Bascom 1969: 34). His sacriﬁces and the annual festivals he sanc-
tioned assured the stability and good fortune of his kingdom (Apter 1992: 183;
Awolalu 1979: 17). Richard Bradbury’s (1973: 74) description of the king of
Benin as a living vehicle for the mystical forces that ensured the vitality of his
kingdom applies equally to Yoruba rulers. Kings personally compounded se-
cret ‘medicines’ that promoted the collective welfare of their subjects (Bascom
1969: 37). As did the gods, they accepted sacriﬁces that were offered to them
by individuals and groups so that the gift of life might be given to these people
in return (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 97). In Oyo, the centrally organized
cult of Sango expressed and reinforced the authority of Oyo’s living ruler. At
the royal shrine the senior priests initiated all the king’s bodyguards, ofﬁcial
messengers, and agents into the Sango cult. The ability to be possessed by
Sango provided them with a temporary supply of supernatural power that ex-
ceeded that of tributary kings and could be used, when necessary, for dealing
with such rulers (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 152). Thus, even in this highly
decentralized society, kings played the principal role in guiding the rituals that
empowered the gods.
In the Valley of Mexico, kings were endowed with divine power which made
them the spiritual leaders of their nations. They were expected to watch the

488
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
earth and sky for supernatural signs, offer appropriate sacriﬁces, visit shrines,
and ensure that priests performed their duties properly (Townsend 1979: 42).
In April or May each year, the Aztec king visited the shrine on Mount Tlaloc,
located on the eastern ﬂank of the Valley of Mexico, to call forth rain from
the mountain. Dressed as the god Tlaloc, he entered the long entrance to
the temple carrying food and the blood of a sacriﬁced child as offerings to
its deities. The rituals he performed fertilized the womb of the earth, calling
forth its life. In performing these rituals he was not simply a suppliant but, as
a manifestation of Tlaloc, was believed to play an active role in changing the
seasons (Townsend 1992: 132–36). The king was also regarded as the surrogate
of the Old Fire God, Xiuhtecuhtli (Ometeotl), and therefore as the father and
mother of his people (Heyden 1989: 38–39). At the same time, rejuvenating
the gods and sustaining the cosmic order were activities that upper-class males
and ennobled warriors regarded as their collective prerogative (D. Carrasco
1990: 23). Lords wore or sponsored the wearing of the attire of deities at
festivals. These costumes drew the deities into closer contact with humans
and helped humans to forge more intimate and beneﬁcial relations with them
(Townsend 1992: 22).
The Inka ruler and his queen were the supreme mediators between their
people and the supernatural forces of the sky and the lower world. The Inka
king maintained the cosmic order (Bauer 1996: 333; Classen 1993: 110–11;
Silverblatt 1987: 54). He could replace any priest as the chief worshipper or
oracle medium of a god. State sacriﬁces were offered to all deities in the name
of the king, except those to the creator god Wiraqucha, which were made on
behalf of other deities and possibly paid for by those gods’ foundations (Rowe
1944: 305).
The Chinese nobility was, according to Mark Lewis (1990: 28), set apart
from the general population by the key role it played in sacriﬁcial rites. The
nobles’ wealth and privileged access to the rewards of warfare and hunting
enabled them to conduct more elaborate rituals than commoners (Allan 1991:
124). Their authority was manifested and reinforced by their ability to nourish
and sustain in a spectacular manner the souls of their ancestors and the na-
ture gods who fed them and their followers. Only altars of the soil that were
patronized by rulers were nourished by the blood of military captives and con-
demned criminals (Lewis 1990: 17, 254). The connection between political
power and religious ritual was strengthened by the Chinese belief that an-
cestral souls would accept sacriﬁces only from their most senior direct living
male descendant (21). This meant that higher-ranking nobles had access to
more ancient and therefore more powerful souls. Only the king, through the
mediation of his royal ancestors, could communicate with the supreme sky

Cult
489
god Shangdi (Chao 1972: 143–44). Winning Shangdi’s favour and keeping the
universe functioning properly required not only sacriﬁces but ritually correct
behaviour (Keightley 1978b: 213–15).
The Maya believed that their kings played a crucial role as both sacriﬁcers
and victims in nourishing the gods, thus ensuring that the earth would remain
fruitful and the cosmos would survive (Baudez 1994: 280; Houston and Stuart
1996; Schele and Miller 1986: 17, 104, 301). Rulers mediated between the
different levels of the cosmos and drew deities and divine power into the
human world (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 224). They communicated by
means of elaborate rituals with the gods and the souls of the dead (Schele and
Miller1986:104).Theirbloodsacriﬁcesre-enactedthecreationofthegodsand
of the world order and strengthened both (Tate 1992: 101). Through the king’s
association with ‘God K’, who appears to have been the ancestor of all royal
lineages, life-sustaining essences were able to ﬂow from Maya communities
into the supernatural realm. Waging war provided royal and noble victims for
sacriﬁcial rituals, and this, combined with the personal blood-letting practised
by rulers and nobles, gave the upper classes an especially important role in
nourishing the gods and sustaining the cosmic order. Both rulers and gods
sacriﬁced themselves so that life could continue (Miller 1986: 19).
The principal religious role of kings in all early civilizations was to mediate
between the human realm and that of the gods, either directly or through
royal ancestors who in some instances were also major nature deities. Kings
ensured a continuous ﬂow of energy from the human world to the gods and
from the gods back to the human realm. For Egyptian, Inka, and Aztec rulers
to claim that, without their support, the cosmic order would collapse was not a
metaphorical boast or an ideologically driven exaggeration but a statement of
profound conviction about how the universe functioned (Silverman 1991: 67).
Even in Egypt and Mesopotamia, where it appears to have been believed that
the gods might survive the cutting off of a ﬂow of energy back into their realm,
it was thought that the universe, and in particular the human realm, would be
severely harmed by such a disruption. No such belief appears to have existed
in earlier, more egalitarian societies, and there is no reason to believe that
it diffused from one early civilization to another, except within Mesoamerica
and perhaps between Mesopotamia and Egypt. How could such a belief in the
central role played by kings and the upper classes in maintaining the cosmic
order have originated independently in at least ﬁve and perhaps seven early
civilizations?
In all the early civilizations, the gods and kings, assisted by the upper
classes, played similar managerial roles in relation to the cosmos and soci-
ety respectively. Commoners seem to have tacitly acknowledged that, without

490
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the domestic peace and order and the defence against foreign attack that the
state provided, everyday life would have been far worse for them. Taxes and
labour were the material compensation that commoners paid to the upper
classes for these beneﬁts. It was therefore easy for people in these civilizations
to imagine all human beings performing the same role in relation to the gods
that farmers and labourers performed for the upper classes. Sacriﬁce was the
equivalent of paying taxes or tribute to the supernatural. Just as the upper
classes could not possess the power they did without the surplus food turned
over to them as taxes, so the gods could not survive without sacriﬁces. It was
by the king that offerings were transmitted to provision the major gods so that
they could continue to sustain the universe.
Individual rulers were manifestly inferior in power to the major gods. They
lived no longer than other humans, even if the ofﬁce they held was regarded
as immortal, yet they were pivotal for maintaining the cosmic order. They
alone could discern the will of the gods and ensure that the gods’ needs were
supplied. Kings thus performed dual functions as guarantors of a hierarchical
society and sustainers of the supernatural order on which both nature and
society depended. Because kings mediated between the human world and the
gods, they and their ofﬁce partook to varying degrees of the attributes of both
worlds. Yet farmers and manual labourers were also recognized as playing a
vital role in feeding the gods and therefore in maintaining the universe. Rulers
and deities depended for their survival and well-being on the labour of farmers
no less than farmers depended for an ordered, habitable, and fruitful universe
on the upper classes and the gods. The three groups were linked by a pragmatic
interdependence.
religion as political constitution
Many anthropologists have treated the religions of early civilizations as theoc-
racies, maintaining that the upper classes used assertions of supernatural sup-
port to enhance their authority and frighten the lower classes into obeying
them (Conrad and Demarest 1984; Godelier 1986; Steward 1949; L. White
1949). Instead, however, we ﬁnd a view of cosmic processes in which farm-
ers produced food to sustain themselves, the upper classes, and the gods, the
gods sustained an environment in which crops could be grown, and the up-
per classes maintained order, which permitted populations to produce food,
and played a key role in channelling energy back into the supernatural realm
through sacriﬁce.
In recent discussions of changing views of the supernatural as societies
grew more complex, some anthropologists have argued that in hunter-gatherer

Cult
491
societies nature and the spirits that animate it are believed to provide food
unconditionally to humans as a parent does to children (Bird-David 1990).
Others have pointed out that in these societies nature embraces malevolent as
well as benevolent powers and suggested that addressing nature as parents is
more likely to be an appeal for favourable treatment than the expression of a
belief that it is inevitably generous and caring (Ingold 1996: 151). The Cree of
northern Quebec regard humans as only one among many forms of personhood
that make up the cosmos and believe that good relations between hunters and
animal spirits, usually expressed in terms of kinship, cause animals to sacriﬁce
their lives to feed humans (Feit 1978; Tanner 1979). Human and animal spirits
vary in individual power, and it is this difference which determines the nature
of the personal relations they establish with each other. Cultivators living in
small-scale societies are said to have viewed the environment and the spirits
animating it not as indulgent parents but as demanding ancestors or elders
who yielded the necessities of life only in return for favours rendered (Ingold
1996: 123). In early civilizations, in contrast, nature spirits were thought to
behave like kings. The cosmos was conceptualized as a kingdom, but it was a
kingdom in which the powers of the upper classes were based more on the
consent of the governed and less on the exercise of coercion than in many later
preindustrial societies. Early civilizations stressed not only the dependence
of farmers on kings and gods but also the dependence of gods and kings on
farmers.
The religious beliefs of early civilizations have been interpreted as straight-
forward justiﬁcations of an unequal social order. Were religious beliefs simply
another means of intimidating ordinary people, as Leslie White (1959: 303–28)
used to maintain? The notion that ideological claims made by ruling groups
went uncontested by commoners seems highly dubious (Gailey 1987). Many
groups living in the Inka kingdom had been conquered only a generation or two
earlier, and factional conﬂicts among the ruling class discouraged any mono-
lithic understanding of the nature of Inka power (Patterson 1991). There is no
reason to believe that commoners were inevitably or even habitually duped by
the religious claims of their rulers.
Early civilizations were, in theory at least, absolute monarchies. They had
no political equivalent of modern constitutions or bills enumerating the rights
of the governed. The same ‘Instructions Addressed to King Merikare’ that
deﬁned the role of the Egyptian king as upholding the cosmic order advised
the king to suppress troublemakers and curb the common people (Lichtheim
1973: 99). The Aztec king Mochtezuma II’s execution of potential opponents of
his legislation to restrict government ofﬁces to men whose parents were both
members of the hereditary nobility was praised as evidence of his power and

492
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
determination rather than condemned as unjust. In early civilizations there was
no way to criticize the behaviour of a superior overtly without also challenging
his power.
Segments of Yoruba society could, however, criticize the actions and preten-
sions of their kings and other leaders in seemingly non-political contexts. Dur-
ing major religious festivals, the king, townspeople, ofﬁcials, and lineages all as-
serted their respective rights vis-`a-vis one another and questioned claims made
by others by means of praise songs and ritual performances. Such behaviour
permitted political struggles to be waged without directly challenging the ac-
tions or authority of the monarch, thus preserving a precarious balance be-
tween centripetal and centrifugal tendencies (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996).
The common features of religious beliefs in early civilizations seem to have
been responses to similar political and economic problems faced by all these
societies. By recognizing farmers as the producers of most of the goods and
services on which not only the upper classes but also the gods depended, these
beliefs empowered subordinates. Abuse of power by kings, nobles, or ofﬁcials
could not be protested directly without inviting retribution, but such behavior
could be criticized and opposed indirectly on religious grounds. The Greek
historian Herodotus reported that Khufu and Khafre, the builders of the two
largest Egyptian pyramids at Giza, were remembered as tyrants who had ig-
nored the worship of the gods and oppressed the people, while their successor,
Menkaure, who had constructed a much smaller pyramid, was celebrated as a
good and generous king. This story appears to have roots in beliefs about these
kings that were already current during the Middle Kingdom and may reﬂect
Old Kingdom views. If the ﬁrst two rulers pushed their persistent demands on
the economy to the point where their behaviour began to threaten the unity
of Egypt, Menkaure made a timely adjustment after which no ruler except
perhaps Akhenaton in the New Kingdom ever again tried to monopolize the
wealth of Egypt for his own purposes in this way. Yet opposition to the policies
of Khufu and Khafre seems to have been overtly focused not on their treatment
of people but on their treatment of the gods. Relations between the king and
local groups or their leaders were expressed in religious rather than political
terms, the key issue being how carefully kings attended to the needs of the
gods on whose well-being the cosmic order depended.
Similarly, no human was permitted to criticize the behaviour or policies of
the Inka ruler directly, but objections to his policies could be expressed by
his royal ancestors and by wakas throughout the kingdom speaking through
their oracle priests. On a number of occasions each year, the king encountered
all the mummiﬁed bodies of his royal ancestors and publicly conversed with
them through their attendant priests. Every year the king had portable wakas

Cult
493
brought to Cuzco from all parts of the kingdom so that he might question them.
Children of local rulers who had been sacriﬁced by the king and whose bodies
had been returned to their birthplaces for burial established oracular links
between the king and regions where such ties had not existed previously. By
consulting these oracles, the king in effect sounded the opinions of his subjects
to help him decide if proposed policies would work. While oracles dared to
criticize the king and to predict bad outcomes for his policies, kings exercised
some reciprocal control over wakas by monitoring the accuracy and usefulness
of their pronouncements and altering the amount of material support that
they received from the central government. Wakas that seriously displeased
the king or aligned themselves with rival factions of the royal family might be
decommissioned (Gose 1996).
In Mesopotamia, the expansion of temple estates may have been partly a
response to the growth of royal authority. Community elders, lineages, and
individuals whose power was threatened by increasing centralization appear
to have sought closer association with temples, which consequently increased
in wealth and power as royal authority grew (Yoffee 1991: 301). By the Early
Dynastic period, Egyptian kings were building larger temples and providing
more offerings for deities of provinces whose leaders had conspicuously sup-
ported the emerging central government while at the same time subverting
the authority of all hereditary local leaders (Seidlmayer 1996). Similarly, as
Aztec kings became more powerful they honoured calpolli gods with grants of
land and shares of foreign tribute but curtailed the political power of calpolli
leaders.
Thus in early civilizations the struggle to protect local and individual rights
of subjects against increasing exploitation by kings, government ofﬁcials, and
individual members of the upper classes was conducted primarily in a religious
idiom. Misbehaviour by the upper classes was believed to infringe ﬁrst and
foremost on the rights of local deities. Undue appropriation of resources by
kings and members of the upper classes for their own use endangered the
cosmicorderbyrestrictingorthreateningthefoodsupplyofthegods.Religious
concepts thus supplied a constitution phrased in terms that were intelligible
to people in early civilizations. These concepts did not overtly control or limit
the powers of the king or the upper classes but assigned mutual responsibility
to workers, the upper classes, and deities for promoting their common welfare
and ensuring their joint survival.
Such beliefs exerted moral pressure on farmers to produce food surpluses
to feed the upper classes, who regulated the political order and sacriﬁced to
the major deities that sustained the cosmic order. They also stressed the need
for rulers and administrators to keep ordinary people moderately prosperous

494
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and healthy. The gods had a vested interest in maintaining a cosmos in which
enough energy was returned to them to ensure their survival and well-being.
Far from being theocracies, the early civilizations were societies in which
checks and balances were preserved and ordinary people were understood to
have de facto rights. These ideas were expressed in a form that was appropriate
for political discourse in societies in which religious concepts had replaced
kinship as the principal way of understanding society and the universe. The
development of such ideas explains why early civilizations were considerably
more stable than the early state societies which had preceded them.

22 Priests, Festivals, and the Politics
of the Supernatural
T
o possess the detailed esoteric knowledge necessary to perform the
religious rituals that were patronized by the upper classes in early civ-
ilizations required considerable training. In many instances such knowledge,
including rituals, prayers, hymns, incantations, and divination formulae, was
the prerogative of priests, who were expected to manage the technical details
of human relations with the supernatural. In early civilizations or still earlier
smaller-scale societies, a shaman or sorcerer might learn how to relate to the
supernatural from ecstatic experiences or by seeking personal instruction from
a experienced master of these arts. Most individuals became part of a corporate
priesthood by receiving formal instruction in a religious school or apprenticing
with a religious cult or institution.
One of the fantasies that many religious scholars have propagated concern-
ing early civilizations is that they were characterized by struggles for power
between priests and secular authorities. The extensive nineteenth-century his-
toricalliteratureconcerningcompetitionforpoliticalsupremacybetweenkings
and popes in medieval Europe convinced many anthropologists that such con-
ﬂicts characterized most complex premodern societies (L. White 1949: 233–
81). To evaluate such relations objectively, it is necessary to examine the train-
ing, lifestyle, organization, and roles of priests in speciﬁc early civilizations.
Each city-state in the Valley of Mexico had its own religious institutions, and
every major deity possessed its own temple or temples. All the larger temples
had their own priests (tlamacazqui), who lived in special residences adjacent to
the temple while they were on duty. Calpolli temples were tended by part-time
priests (quacilli) (Soustelle 1961: 41, 51–52).
The king was the spiritual leader of his city-state and the symbolic head of its
priesthood, and he presided in person over many major rituals. In Tenochtitlan,
the two highest-ranking clergy were the high priests (quequetzalcoa) of the
main gods, Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli. Appointed by the king and his council,
495

496
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
they appear not only to have been in charge of the cults of these two deities
but also to have exercised some kind of supervisory control over all public cults
and priests in the city-state.
Under the two high priests was an overseer of all state-sponsored cults
(mexicatl teohuatzin). Some Spanish writers stated that this individual super-
vised worship throughout the Aztec tributary system; more likely, among his
various duties was tending the cult images of foreign deities that the Aztec
kept in a special temple in the central religious complex of Tenochtitlan. These
images were hostages for the good behaviour of their worshippers and the
proper veneration of the images of the god Huitzilopochtli, which the Aztec
required to be installed alongside local deities in the main temples of trib-
utary states. The overseer had two assistants: one responsible for ritual and
the other for supervising the education of priests. There was also a treasurer
(tlaquimiloltecuhtli), who managed temple property, including the land en-
dowed for the support of state religious cults (Soustelle 1961: 52–53; Townsend
1992: 194).
Each temple had its own chief priest or priests and other clergy, whose
number varied according to the importance of the temple and its deities.
Eight or nine of the temples that were part of the central religious complex
at Tenochtitlan had residences where priests lived while they were on duty.
While chief priests seem invariably to have been male, temples dedicated
to goddesses as well as to some male gods, such as Mixcoatl, had numerous
female priests. Some priests served at temples on a long-term basis, rising
from the rank of tlamacazton (novitiate) to tlamacazqui (regular priest) and
sometimes to tlamamacac (high-ranking priest). Others worked on a rotational
basis, usually for months or weeks, or dedicated themselves to a temple for
a brief but ﬁxed period in the hope of being cured of illness or gaining di-
vine favour. More than ﬁve thousand people were reported to have served
in the central religious complex at Tenochtitlan. In addition to their cult du-
ties, highly trained full-time priests directed Aztec artistic and intellectual
life. Priestly specialists also served their communities as diviners, vision inter-
preters, fortune-tellers, and calendricists (Berdan 1982: 10, 63, 130–33; Caso
1958: 82–84, 89; Dur´an 1971: 133–34; Soustelle 1961: 50–56; Townsend 1979:
61–62; 1992: 193–94).
Some Aztec children were consecrated by their parents to become priests
(Berdan 1982: 130), and others, occasionally commoners who displayed spe-
cial aptitude for a priestly career, were selected by religious ofﬁcials. All male
priests were trained in the schools normally reserved for the sons of no-
bles, which were controlled by one of the members of the Council of Four.
Priestly training was rigorous. In addition to learning esoteric knowledge, good

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
497
manners, and self-restraint, students had to fast, bleed themselves, and stay
awake all night to keep watch and perform rituals. Their mistakes were pun-
ished by beating them, stabbing them with maguey spikes, or throwing them
into the lake. Successful students were enrolled as novitiate priests about the
age of ﬁfteen (Caso 1958: 86–87).
Priests are described as wearing their hair uncut, unwashed, and often mat-
ted with blood, with their ears shredded as a result of frequent blood-letting.
While on duty they observed frequent fasts and watches and led an austere life
that left them gaunt (Clendinnen 1991: 128–29; Townsend 1992: 192). Both
students and priests were executed if they did not refrain from sexual activity.
Priests could retire from full-time service of the gods whenever they wished
to marry; high-ranking priests were married and even polygamous but had to
refrain from sexual activity while they lived and served in the temples. During
certain major festivals, all Aztec were forbidden to engage in sexual activity or
to wash their heads to strengthen their supernatural powers. The gods were
believed to punish with illness anyone who violated these prohibitions (L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 306–7). Priests who became intoxicated were executed (Berdan
1982: 97–98).
It has been claimed that Aztec men were trained to be priests while women
wereregardedaspriestsbynature (Clendinnen 1991:207).Yetsomedaughters
of nobles were trained to be priests, partly in the cuicacalli, where all girls and
boys were taught ritual songs and dances, but also in temples, where they spent
a year around the age of twelve learning to cook and clean for the cult images
and the priests. The ecclesiastical training of women was not, however, as long
or as rigorous as that of men. Female priests were required to remain celibate
so long as they served the gods. Most of them left the priesthood at a relatively
young age to marry (Berdan 1982: 88; Caso 1958: 83).
InMesopotamiathetemplesineachcity-statewerecontrolledbylocalrulers
or hegemons to varying degrees at different times, but for the most part each
large temple functioned independently of the rest. Ekur, the temple of Enlil in
Nippur, served as a pan-southern-Mesopotamian religious meeting-place, but
its priests did not control other temples. Temples possessed estates of vary-
ing sizes, and their staff was divided into administrative, cultic, and domestic
personnel. The chief administrator of the temple and its estate was called the
sanga. His position was a full-time one, well remunerated and frequently in-
herited. A single sanga might be in charge of several temples. Under him were
various high-ranking ofﬁcials who bore titles such as iˇsˇsakku (farm steward),
pa ´e (temple overseer), and idu (doorkeeper). These ofﬁcials supervised agri-
cultural labourers, collected rents from tenant farmers, managed commercial
transactions, and guarded temple property (R. Harris 1975: 154–88).

498
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
While kings could personally sacriﬁce to any deity, the most prestigious
religious ofﬁcial in a major temple, such as one belonging to the patron deity
of a city-state, was the en, a title often translated as ‘high priest or priestess’.
Where the deity was male, the en was usually female, and where the deity
was female the en was male. The en lived in the gipar, a palace-like structure
within the temple enclosure, and appears to have been regarded as a spouse
of the deity (Oates 1978: 476). In Ur, the high priest of the moon god, Nannar,
was often the daughter of a hegemonic ruler (Lerner 1986: 66–68).
A regular priest, called the gudu (Akkadian piˇsiˇsu) of the god he served,
offered sacriﬁces and organized festivals. The highest-ranking priests were
called gudapsu (hairy priests), perhaps because they did not cut their hair;
several of them often served in a large temple at one time. Regular priests’ po-
sitions were not necessarily full-time jobs; a particular ofﬁce might be divided
into twelve-day allotments (isqum), each held in turn by a different person
over the course of a year. During Early Dynastic times, libation priests, who
directly tended the needs of a temple’s resident deity, were depicted as naked
or wearing only loincloths, while the offering-bearers who accompanied them
were fully clothed. In the Akkadian period priests were distinguished by having
their heads shaved (Furlong 1987: 266–76; R. Harris 1975: 168–71; Postgate
1992: 128).
Also attached to temples were diviners (barum), dream-interpreters, various
types of omen-readers, and ecstatics, who determined the meaning of differ-
ent forms of divine communications (R. Harris 1975: 176, 188; Postgate 1992:
132). In addition to their regular temple duties, priests and diviners offered sac-
riﬁces for ordinary people, interpreted their dreams, made prognostications,
administered oaths, participated in legal hearings, and assisted with burial
rituals (Postgate 1992: 125). The fees charged for such services belonged ei-
ther to the priests or to their temple. Other ritualists included professional
musicians, praise-singers (nar/narum), and lamentation-singers (gala/kalum)
of various ranks (Crawford 1991: 162; R. Harris 1975: 172–75), who were be-
lieved capable of activating divine power and eliciting divine favour (Jacobsen
1976: 15).
Apart from female en priests, the most important women associated with
religious activities in Old Babylonian times were the naditum (fallow women).
Apparently treated as daughters-in-law of a temple’s resident god, they cleaned
the interior of the temple and presented special food offerings (piqittu) on
festival days. They were often daughters of wealthy men, and each lived with
her servants in relative luxury in her own house, located within a walled en-
closure (gagum) attached to a temple. They were not, however, allowed to
marry, have children, or alienate family property. Other women, who could

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
499
marry but not have children, played a role in the cults of female deities
(R. Harris 1975: 188–200, 305–12; Jacobsen 1970: 185; Postgate 1992: 97–
98, 131–32). Also associated with temples were lower-class women known as
qadistu (consecrated ones), istaritu (devotees of Ishtar), and harimtu (ones
set apart). They appear to have been, perhaps in addition to having other
occupations, prostitutes who modelled their behaviour on that of the god-
dess Inanna (Ishtar), and their sexual promiscuity was believed to promote
the fertility and prosperity of the land. Associations of male prostitutes per-
formed homosexual acts (asakku) that were not practised by the gods but
entertained the fertility goddess Inanna (Bott´ero 1992: 189–92; Lerner 1986:
128–31).
Non-priestly temple staff included snake-charmers, bee-keepers, and acro-
bats, whose jobs may have been to protect, provision, and entertain deities,
cooks who prepared offerings, and sweepers who kept the outer temple build-
ings clean. At least some of these tasks were performed by different people
working in rotation throughout the year (Postgate 1992: 125–27).
Yoruba religious practices were less centralized than were those of the Valley
of Mexico or Mesopotamia. Instead of being focused on temples and con-
trolled by hierarchical organizations of priests, they were associated with a
large number of cults dedicated to the worship of particular deities or sets of
deities. Individuals joined one or more cults as a result of family afﬁliation,
unusual experiences, special physical characteristics, or personal preferences.
A deity might torment a person until he or she agreed to worship that deity.
Hunchbacks, cripples, dwarfs, albinos, and people born in a caul were believed
destined to become worshippers of Orisala, the god who fashioned people in
the womb. Each cult had one or more shrines located within or close to a com-
munity and its own praise chants, songs, rhythms, dances, musical instruments,
insignia, symbols, scar patterns, myths, taboos, and sacriﬁcial foods (Bascom
1969: 81, 97). Initiation into each of these cults could take up to several months
and involved seclusion in shrines, the learning of esoteric rituals, the shaving
of heads, and sometimes spirit possession by the deity (Bascom 1969: 77–78).
Failure to serve a deity once initiated was supernaturally punished. Individual
performance and social status played signiﬁcant roles in determining vertical
mobility within such cults.
Some religious cults were important instruments of social control. The
Ogboni society, which focused on the worship of the earth god, had as its
primary mission to root out and destroy evil and corruption. Its members, who
were mostly town and palace ofﬁcials, collected debts for others, settled blood
disputes, acted as judges, and executed criminals. The Oro society, which wor-
shipped a deity associated with the god of medicine, disposed of witches and

500
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
sorcerers and executed kings who refused to obey orders to commit suicide.
The Egungun society, which was concerned with limiting the powers of death,
also executed witches. Membership in these three societies remained secret, as
did many of their rituals (Ajisafe 1924: 90–93; Bascom 1944; 1969: 31, 92–93;
R. Thompson 1976: 6/1–6/4).
The majority of religious cults had as their aim the worship of speciﬁc deities,
from whom particular beneﬁts were expected. The high god Olorun was ex-
ceptional in having no cult; he was believed to beneﬁt from the offerings made
to all the other deities. Images of the god Esu received frequent offerings in
every household and in public places but he had no priests of his own. One
of his duties was to convey the spiritual power of sacriﬁces to the deities who
were their intended beneﬁciaries.
All other cults had their own local priests, although most of these ofﬁces were
part-time ones. Priests were believed to be especially endowed with the power
of the god they worshipped (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 90). Both men
and women became priests. Although most priestly ofﬁces tended to be hered-
itary (Lucas 1948: 183), qualifying for them required varying degrees of train-
ing, usually in the form of an apprenticeship. Priests and their assistants had
to prepare for sacriﬁcing by prayer, fasting, and observing appropriate taboos
(Awolalu 1979: 170).
Families, lineages, and quarters each worshipped speciﬁc deities or groups
of deities, with their political leaders serving as the hereditary priests of their
cults. Leading ofﬁcials often headed cults that played a key role in commu-
nitywide religious festivals (Awolalu 1979: 113). In many Yoruba states, for-
mer royal lineages that had been dethroned by newcomers or the leaders of
kin groups that claimed to have lived in an area before there was any king
were acknowledged to have special priestly powers (Pemberton and Afolayan
1996: 38).
Cults whose membership cut across lineage organizations were headed by
priests (aworo) who had achieved their positions as a result of outstanding
service in the cult or divine designation. Such priests ofﬁciated at rituals per-
formed every four days and at various annual festivals, offered sacriﬁces, led
devotions, announced their deities’ will, and guarded and maintained shrines
(ile orisa, ojubo) and objects of worship. Divination played a major role in de-
termining what sacriﬁces were required to propitiate speciﬁc deities (Awolalu
1979: 111–13). Priests who served Ore, the god of hunting, atoned for acts of
incest, those of Orisala buried women who had died while pregnant, and those
of Sango puriﬁed houses that had been hit by lightning, which was a certain
sign that Sango was angry with the people who lived in them (Bascom 1969:
80–84). In Ife, special otu priests, attached to the palace, disposed of sacriﬁces

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
501
made within the palace grounds and conducted installation ceremonies for the
king and the city’s leading ofﬁcials (Bascom 1969: 38).
The most highly trained and revered priests were the diviners (babalawo),
attached to the cult of Ifa (Orunmile), the god of divination. Ifa transmitted
requests for sacriﬁces and other messages from the gods, including Olorun,
to human beings. While Ifa divination was usually performed using sixteen
palm nuts, a priest had to have memorized over one thousand verses and
learned their meanings to be able to interpret the 256 resulting combinations.
This knowledge, which has been described as an encyclopedic compendium
of every aspect of Yoruba thought and was kept highly secret, was acquired
during an apprenticeship lasting many years (Abimbola 1973; Bascom 1969:
70–71, 80; Lucas 1948: 72). Diviners determined the causes of illnesses and
misfortunes and identiﬁed possible solutions. Their services were eagerly
sought after, making it proverbial that ‘a babalawo never starves’ (Lucas 1948:
72). The central Ifa shrine was at Ife, where its deity had ﬁrst descended to
earth, but the cult had branches throughout the Yoruba region.
The centre of the cult of Sango was at his shrine in Koso, which was con-
trolled by the king of Oyo. Its operation was supervised by the otun iwefa, the
Oyo royal eunuch in charge of religious matters. Many important ofﬁces in the
cult were held by members of high-ranking Oyo lineages. Priests for provin-
cial branches of the Sango cult were trained by the mogba (senior priests)
at the Koso shrine (Apter 1992: 24–25; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 152).
At Benin sacriﬁcial rites in honour of dead kings were performed by special
priests from Ihoghe who claimed that their ancestors had accompanied the
founder of the royal lineage from Ife to Benin (Bradbury 1957: 55).
While the Maya had priests in the sixteenth century a.d., no evidence of
priests has been found in either Maya art or surviving texts for the Classic
period (Coe 1993: 184). Only kings and members of the royal family are de-
picted presenting offerings to deities. This may have been, as it was in Egypt,
an iconographic convention stressing the crucial role claimed by the king in
communicating with the gods and making offerings to them. Many ofﬁcials,
even if they only acted as substitutes for the king, must have been needed to
manage the numerous temples and carry out the rituals associated with them.
It is unknown whether these duties were performed by priests or by secular
deputies for the king and whether such responsibilities occupied individuals
full-time or only part-time.
In Egypt all cults for both the gods and the dead were performed in the
king’s name, but the only Old Kingdom temples that were fully managed by the
central government appear to have been royal funerary chapels, the main tem-
ples in Memphis and nearby Heliopolis, and some Fifth Dynasty sun temples

502
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
at Saqqara that were associated with royal funerary cults. Priests, craft workers,
and farmers working for funerary temples were granted various exemptions
from taxes and corv´ee labour in the Old Kingdom. Kings supplied cult statues
to provincial temples and may have arranged for provincial government ofﬁ-
cials to ﬁnance the daily operations of these temples. Yet, prior to the Middle
Kingdom, the construction of most provincial temples appears to have been
initiated and carried out locally. Each temple seems to have had its own ad-
ministrators, workmen, and priests, although in the Old Kingdom some priests
may have been responsible for a number of cults in the same district (Goedicke
1979: 129).
The priests who served a particular cult were organized hierarchically. At
the top of the hierarchy were the servants of the god (h
• mw ntr), who might
be under the control of an overseer of such priests (ımy-r h
• mw ntr). They
were responsible for the daily rituals of feeding and tending the deity’s cult
statue (Morenz 1973: 301), assisted by a lector priest (hry h
• bt), who read
aloud the appropriate prayers and incantations, and stm priests, who washed,
clothed, and applied cosmetics to the cult statue. The general care of the
temple was the task of wb priests (puriﬁed ones), who cleaned the buildings,
slaughtered animals, cooked for the gods, and guarded and handled sacred
objects. All priests had to have their entire bodies shaved, bathe frequently,
avoid sex, and wear only linen clothing while they were on duty in the temple.
They were supported by large numbers of farmers, craftsmen, and temple
labourers (Hawass 1995: 241–45; Sauneron 1960; Shafer 1997b; Strouhal 1992:
223–33).
There is no evidence of full-time priests during the Old and Middle King-
doms. Instead priests were drawn from other professions to serve in teams (s3)
for part of each year. The highest-ranking ones were selected from among gov-
ernment administrators and scribes, while lower-ranking ones were recruited
among craftsmen and farmers. In the Middle Kingdom, priests were orga-
nized in four teams, each of which served in rotation for one lunar month. In
the Old Kingdom, there had been ﬁve teams, each divided into two sections,
which served for one of every ten solar months (A. Roth 1991a: 2–4). Such
an arrangement ensured that temples, with their rich endowments, did not
become autonomous institutions that were able to challenge the power of the
king. It also distributed temple revenues widely among ofﬁcials and ordinary
people (A. Roth 1991b: 120). H
• mw k3 were priests who were under contract
to perform the mortuary cults of deceased members of the upper class and of
well-to-do scribes and other professionals and were paid for their services from
perpetual tomb endowments. Offerings frequently came from temples, and
many of these priests probably also worked as ordinary priests in these temples.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
503
In the Old Kingdom many upper-class women served as priests (h
• mwt ntr)
in the cults of deities throughout Egypt, especially those of the female deities
Hathor and Neith. Women also served as funerary priests (h
• mwt k3). While
a few low-ranking wbt priestesses were still attached to the cult of Hathor in
the Middle Kingdom, the priests of other cults had become exclusively male.
Womencontinued,however,toserveasmusiciansanddancersintemplerituals
into the New Kingdom (Fischer 1989: 18–20). Their erotic performances were
believed to play a vital role in sexually arousing male creator deities and thus
ensuring the continued functioning of the universe (Robins 1993: 142–45).
It was not until the New Kingdom that full-time priests began to be put in
charge of temples. They were appointed and could be dismissed at the king’s
pleasure.
In the Central Andean highlands, ayllu or village leaders appointed elderly
men and women to act as part-time priests. Their responsibilities included of-
fering sacriﬁces to the ayllu’s wakas and the souls of its dead ancestors and being
the oracles through whom these supernatural beings spoke to humans (Cobo
1990: 158–59; Kendall 1973: 192; MacCormack 1991: 422–28). Throughout
the Inka kingdom, the government appointed priests and chosen women to
serve in state temples. The highest-ranking priest in the kingdom was the
willaq umu, who was the head priest at the main temple of the sun in Cuzco.
He was a close relative of the Inka king and seems to have belonged to either
Inka Wiraqucha’s or Lloque Qhapaq Yupanki’s panaqa. He held this post for
life or at the king’s pleasure and was the chief oracle of Inti, the sun god. The
Spanish described the willaq umu as a ‘pope’ who was in charge of all priests
throughout the Inka state. He outranked any other priest and was responsible
for organizing the annual visits to Cuzco of portable wakas from the provinces.
Yet, whenever the king wished, he could take the willaq umu’s place and him-
self offer sacriﬁces and transmit oracular messages from the sun god. It is
reported that, early in his reign, King Wayna Qhapaq removed the willaq umu
from ofﬁce and personally assumed the role of high priest of the sun (Gose
1996a: 23; Kendall 1973: 191).
The sun temple, the Qorikancha, was reported to have been served by two
hundred male priests and ﬁve hundred chosen women. Ten priests, called
hatun wilka, were of higher rank than the rest and belonged to the nobility; or-
dinary priests were called yana wilka. These priests were said to come from the
Tarpuntay ayllu, one of the pre-Inka groups in the Cuzco area whose members
had been made Inka-by-privilege (Kendall 1973: 191; MacCormack 1991: 112,
158). It was claimed that the solar temple at Vilcas had forty thousand servants
and forty gatekeepers, but these ﬁgures probably include the farmers who
worked the ﬁelds assigned to the temple and the total number of gatekeepers

504
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
who served the temple in rotation each year (MacCormack 1991: 99). Corv´ee
labour may have played as important a role in supplying staff for temples as
it did in providing other labourers for the Inka state. Bernab´e Cobo (1990: 9)
reported that in the Cuzco area more than one thousand men – priests and
their apprentices, who had to remember ﬂawlessly all the rituals associated
with the wakas they served – were employed solely to conserve religious lore.
Cobo also noted that a small group of nobles was specially concerned with
religious matters.
The title ‘yana wilka’ might indicate that ordinary priests were yanakuna,
but more likely it simply designated them as servants of the gods (Kendall
1973: 191). The priesthood was to some extent hereditary in certain ayllus
or lineages, from which individuals were selected by kinsmen, local rulers,
and the Inka government. Individuals were also called to be priests by vi-
sions, while children born during thunderstorms were destined in old age
to serve the storm god Illapa (Cobo 1990: 158–59; MacCormack 1991: 299,
422). Priests were ranked according to the importance of the wakas they
served, by whether and how well their temples were supported by the govern-
ment, and by their relative positions among the priests serving in a particular
temple.
The principal duties of priests were to tend wakas, sacriﬁce to them, main-
tain their particular traditions, and transmit this esoteric knowledge to their
successors (Cobo 1990: 159). Only nobles and attendant priests were allowed
to enter major temples such as the Qorikancha. That required ritual puriﬁca-
tion and avoidance of foods such as salt, chillies, meat, and corn beer for up to
a year (MacCormack 1991: 67). Priests were expected to serve as oracles for
their deities, interpret dreams and omens, pray for people, transmit messages
from the dead, and diagnose and treat diseases (Kendall 1973: 192). At small
shrines one or two priests probably performed all these duties, but at large
temples there was some division of labour.
Divination and oracular possession were employed to diagnose diseases,
identify hostile sorcerers, locate lost property, determine what was happening
to people far away, establish appropriate sacriﬁcial offerings, and settle contro-
versies. Four hundred seventy-ﬁve ofﬁcially sanctioned diviners (omo), many
of them elderly priests, were reported to have lived in the Cuzco area. Most
divination involved sacriﬁce, and diviners were allowed to keep for themselves
the parts of offerings that were not consumed by ﬁre (Cobo 1990: 160–63;
Rowe 1944: 302).
Hearing confessions was another important duty of priests. Only deeds and
words, not thoughts, were regarded as sinful, but undisclosed sins such as
murder, poisoning, theft, seduction, audibly cursing the king or a god, and

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
505
practising witchcraft were believed to anger the gods and invite supernatural
punishment in the form of illness. The gods might punish persons who com-
mitted crimes, members of their families, or community leaders. Confession
and subsequent puriﬁcation were the only way to avoid such supernatural ret-
ribution. Priests cast lots to determine whether a confession was complete and
prescribed penances, which included sacriﬁces, abstaining from luxury foods,
and avoiding sexual relations for a ﬁxed period, all of which were followed by
washing in running water (Cobo 1990: 122–25; Rowe 1944: 304–5).
The Inka queen was the principal ofﬁciant at Cuzco of the cult of Pak-
samama, the moon goddess. Women made up most if not all the ofﬁciants in
the cults of at least some female deities and participated in many other reli-
gious rituals performed at cult centres throughout the kingdom. Many of the
participants were chosen women, who were ranked and had religious duties
assigned to them on the basis of their age and their families’ social status.
Senior chosen women (mamakuna), who were of royal or noble birth, played
important roles in religious rituals, which made them the female counterparts
of priests, and also heard all confessions by women (Kendall 1973: 70, 192–93;
Silverblatt 1987: 99–106).
There is no clear evidence of a professional priesthood in Shang or Zhou
China. Kings, lords, and lineage heads sacriﬁced to the gods and to their
ancestors, assisted by their wives, mothers, sisters, and retainers (Creel 1937:
338). Female attendants (shifu) supervised the care of ritual vessels and the
preparation of sacriﬁcial foods, attended sacriﬁcial rituals, and organized the
ceremonial activities of other women living in the royal palace (C. Chang
1986: 112).
Divination,whichinvolvedcommunicating(bin)withroyalancestors,played
a major role in determining the detailed content and divine recipients of sac-
riﬁcial offerings. Such divination has been interpreted as an effort to turn
sacriﬁces into a form of spell-casting that would predispose the royal ances-
tors to inﬂuence nature and intervene in human affairs in a predetermined,
favourable manner (Allan 1991: 113–23; Keightley 1978b: 213). At the royal
court divination took the form of scapulimancy, with ﬁre being applied to turtle
plastrons and the shoulder-blades of butchered oxen. Replies were read from
the shapes of cracks that developed as a result of the heat. The dates of divina-
tions, the propositions tested, and sometimes the actual outcomes of events
were recorded in writing on the shells or bones used for divination. Divining
at the royal court clearly required specialized knowledge, but it is not clear
whether royal diviners were regarded primarily as priests or as court ofﬁcials.
Nor is it known whether being a diviner was a full-time occupation (Keightley
1978a).

506
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Royal diviners (bu, zhen) included princes and nobles as well as individuals
of lesser rank. Some diviners appear to have come from settlements or regions
whose names they bore to serve the Shang kings. In the earliest oracle texts
from Anyang, the names of diviners accompanied the records of their ﬁnd-
ings. Towards the end of the Shang Dynasty, divination rites were increasingly
performed only in the king’s name. Yet deputies may have continued to divine
and sacriﬁce for the king (Chou 1968: 60, 137–38; Keightley 1979–80). The
strongest evidence of highly skilled ritual specialists working at the Shang court
are the two so-called schools for sacriﬁcing to the royal ancestors identiﬁed
by Tung Tso-pin. Sacriﬁces were carried out in ten-day cycles, the sacriﬁce to
a particular royal ancestor being performed on the day of the cycle that bore
the same ‘heavenly stem’ designation as appeared in that ancestor’s posthu-
mous name. A full set of sacriﬁces took a whole year to complete (Chao 1972:
132; Creel 1937: 202; Li Chi 1977: 134, 248–54). Tung’s Old or Conservative
School offered elaborate sacriﬁces to a large number of ancestors who had
preceded the ﬁrst Shang king, Dayi; the New or Progressive School restricted
the number of male ancestors and the categories of queens to whom sacriﬁces
were offered and, instead of divining the contents of individual sacriﬁcial rit-
uals, prescribed standardized offerings. The two schools were also associated
with differences in writing styles and calendrical usage. For some reason they
alternated every two or three reigns. This suggests that at least two groups
of specialists, each with its own distinctive practices, persisted alongside one
another in Shang royal circles for over 150 years (Chˆeng 1960: 178–79, 222;
Hsu and Linduff 1988: 110).
Royal sacriﬁces appear to have been offered regularly only at the royal court.
They were also made to some powerful local nature deities when the king was
travelling. Princes sacriﬁced to their own ancestors and to local deities in their
provinces and districts (Chˆeng 1960: 204–6, 223–24). All these rituals must
have required numerous ofﬁcials to ensure that temples were maintained,
gather sacriﬁcial offerings, and assist the king or lord in carrying out major
sacriﬁces. Singers and musicians were also employed in these rituals. These
people were probably religious specialists only on a part-time basis.
There were also ritualists who were called xi if male and wu if female, both
terms usually being translated as ‘shaman’. Such ritualists worked either singly
or in groups. It has been suggested that their primary role was to facilitate
communication with the supernatural by summoning the souls of the dead
back into the terrestrial world or projecting their own souls into supernatural
realms (Allan 1991: 85–86; K. Chang 1976: 162). Kwang-chih Chang (1983:
44–54) suggested that Shang kings claimed preeminent shamanistic powers for
themselves. In divination, the king’s soul ascended into the sky to communicate

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
507
with the souls of his royal ancestors or their spirits descended from the sky
into the body of the king or his diviner. Yet Shang kings were never referred
to as shamans (Yates 1997: 82). David Keightley’s (1978b: 223–24) proposal
that the Shang rulers confronted their ancestors bureaucratically rather than
ecstatically seems to accord better with what is known about royal divination
in China.
One of the clearly attested duties of shamans was to perform elaborate rain-
making rituals (hun wu). Occasionally they seem to have allowed themselves
to be set on a blazing pyre or exposed to the sun in the hope of inducing rain
to end a drought. That these shamans risked being burned to death suggests
that they may have been commoners who were sometimes recruited, either by
farmers or the government, to perform rituals intended to control the weather.
In later times shamans belonged to the lower levels of society and authorities
carefully regulated their activities (Allan 1991: 42; Chˆeng 1960: 224, 226; Yates
1997: 82).
The idea of priests and kings as rivals and of competition between church
and state in early civilizations is not supported by the evidence. Concepts that
seemed appropriate for understanding the history of medieval Europe have
been misapplied to these societies. In all early civilizations individuals were
specially trained to conduct rituals and perform other religious tasks. Often
such training necessitated acquiring large amounts of esoteric knowledge and
maintaining a state of ritual purity. Ritual experts came from different classes
andwereorganizedinhierarchiesofvaryingcomplexity;whilesomeperformed
their religious duties full-time, others alternated religious tasks with admin-
istrative, craft, or agricultural work. The most important role performed by
these specialists was to offer, in the name of the king, the sacriﬁces that played
an essential role in providing the gods with what they needed.
The closest approximation to competition between church and state oc-
curred in Mesopotamia, where from time to time in some city-states there
was considerable rivalry between kings and the managers of major temple
estates. At other times and places, Mesopotamian kings controlled the oper-
ation of temples. In all situations, however, Mesopotamian kings were rec-
ognized as the chief stewards and agents of their cities’ patron deities. In
Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, priests served part-time as deputies for
the king, who alone was deemed capable of offering sacriﬁces to the gods.
The same situation may have prevailed among the Classic Maya, assuming
that they actually recognized priestly ofﬁces as opposed to full-time gov-
ernment ofﬁcials performing religious rites when required. Shang and Early
Zhou sacriﬁces were offered by lineage heads, the most important of whom
were also political leaders. Shang kings and high-ranking nobles were assisted

508
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
by diviners and others who possessed expert knowledge about how to deal
with the supernatural, but these specialists may have simultaneously held
other court or administrative appointments. The Aztec and Inka had full-
time priests, but kings and other ofﬁcials could assume their roles during
major rituals. The Yoruba had many cults, with different and even rival groups
worshipping the same deities. Each of these cults had its own priests and
hierarchical organization. Yoruba kings were regarded as supernaturally es-
sential for maintaining the unity of their kingdom and the well-being of the
world.
There has also been a tendency to imagine that the cult personnel found
in each state constituted a centrally controlled and disciplined hierarchy car-
rying out a common programme of worship mandated by the government or
by religious leaders. In Old Kingdom Egypt, the royal mortuary cults were
centrally controlled. The temples in provincial administrative centres appear
to have remained partly under local management until the Middle Kingdom,
although the central government subsidized their cults to some degree. There
was no overall hierarchy of Egyptian priests, and the part-time nature of local
priesthoods further limited their ability to exercise political power. The Inka
chief priest of the sun in Cuzco, acting in the king’s name, normally dealt with
wakas throughout the kingdom, distributed royal largess to their cults, curbed
potentially dangerous political activities by their oracle priests, and may have
coordinated solar rituals in the various provincial administrative centres. Yet
he did not impose a centralized control over local cults, most of which re-
mained self-ﬁnancing and self-managing. Nor is there evidence to sustain the
view that Aztec high priests controlled worship throughout the Aztec tributary
network.
In none of these societies does there appear to have been an overall re-
ligious hierarchy paralleling or overreaching the political order. Even in in-
dividual city-states, a single high priest rarely regulated all the temples, and
in territorial states it was considered unnecessary to impose a rigidly hierar-
chical religious organization on local cults. The staff of large temples or cults
tended to be complexly and hierarchically arranged. Their priests wore elabo-
rate costumes, observed numerous taboos, and specialized in various branches
of knowledge related to communicating with and serving the gods. Yet in every
case kings claimed to be the chief intermediaries between their people and
the supernatural powers that animated and sustained the universe. This role
did not inevitably confer divinity or even great political power on kings, but
it made them symbols of the unity of the state and responsible for sustaining
the cosmic order. Priests, if they existed at all in particular early civilizations,
were subordinates rather than rivals of the king.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
509
public ritual
Sacriﬁcing to deities was routinely carried out by priests or ofﬁcials in precincts
from which most people were usually excluded. These sanctuaries constituted
a ritually safe environment for encountering the supernatural and protected
unconsecrated people from the dangers of inadvertent exposure to supernatu-
ral power. Such seclusion increased the mystery and importance of these rites
in the minds of the people who were not permitted to participate in them.
Large numbers of people were, however, expected or required to partici-
pate in other public rituals. These rituals sought to tap the fertility, power, and
creativity of supernatural forces for the beneﬁt of the social realm by making
that realm more closely resemble its supernatural prototype. They also sought
to sustain, renew, and stabilize the cosmos for the beneﬁt of humanity, to draw
society into closer harmony with the natural environment, and to reinforce re-
spect for the political hierarchy by stressing its resemblance to the supernatural
realm. These goals were pursued by performing rituals that were believed to
duplicate what went on among the gods or had happened on earth long ago. In
addition to reinforcing cosmological beliefs and promoting social integration,
these public rituals sometimes provided a stage for acting out and partially
resolving political tensions that were not publicly acknowledged (Bauer 1996;
Clendinnen 1991: 235–43).
In the Valley of Mexico, the entire population of city-states joined in numer-
ous acts of collective worship. All the residents of calpollis, quarters, or cities
were expected to attend their religious festivals. All teenage boys and girls
were taught how to participate in these rituals (Dur´an 1971: 289–91). Public
rituals involving large numbers of celebrants drawn from all classes were per-
formed at various times of the year in plazas adjacent to the central temples
of each city, as well as at temples and shrines elsewhere in the city and in the
surrounding countryside.
The elaboration of public rituals expressed the relative power of different
city-states. As Aztec power grew, the frequency and magniﬁcence of Tenochti-
tlan’s religious rituals increased, along with the number of human sacriﬁces that
accompanied them. The Aztec’s main public rituals were keyed to an annual
calendar. Nine twenty-day summer ‘months’ were associated with agricultural
rituals that sequentially blessed the seed, encouraged rain, fed hungry com-
moners before the harvest, celebrated the harvest, and honoured the dead.
The nine winter months, stretching between harvest and planting, were de-
voted to rituals associated with war. Thus the ﬁrst half of the year was focused
on the fertility god Tlaloc, the second half on the solar war god and patron de-
ity, Huitzilopochtli. While most Aztec public rituals involved human sacriﬁce,

510
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the largest numbers of human lives were offered during four brief periods
of religious observance each year. The most were killed at tlacaxipeualiztli
(the ﬂaying of men), the ﬁrst major festival of the solar year, which occurred
at the beginning of the second Aztec month, in late March, and was associated
with the fertility god Xipe Totec (Clendinnen 1991: 91, 295–97; Dur´an 1971:
172, 412–65).
Special public rituals were enacted at four-, eight-, and ﬁfty-two-year in-
tervals, the latter by everyone living in the Valley of Mexico, to renew or
re-create the cosmos at the end of a calendar round (Berdan 1982: 134–35).
Inga Clendinnen (1992: 76) observes that, while Aztec public rituals united all
classes to honour the gods, they also emphasized the hierarchical social order
and the need for commoners to defer to the upper classes. This was paralleled
by general human submission to a supernatural order that was perceived as
being either highly capricious or determined without reference to human in-
terests. The alternative 260-day calendar largely designated feasts related to
individual humans and deities and was used for divination.
Yoruba worship tended to occur in public. Shrines were usually small, com-
pelling all but the most esoteric rituals to be carried out around rather than
inside them. The king performed special rituals for the welfare of the king-
dom in secluded parts of the palace, but even religious societies with secret
memberships conducted masked rituals in the streets. Women were excluded
from participating in some public rituals and men from participating in others.
Religious festivals (odun) played a conspicuous role in Yoruba community life.
At Ife only twenty-ﬁve days each year were without public festivals (Bascom
1969: 34). Elaborate annual ceremonies propitiated deities for the beneﬁt of
the community and sought to draw spiritual power from the bush into towns
and cities to ensure that women remained fertile, make crops grow, and keep
the king strong (Apter 1992: 98). In the course of its major festivals, each
Yoruba urban centre sought to re-create the world from its own point of view
and to re-establish a precarious balance between the political unity of the state
and the diversity of its constituent groups (Apter 1992: 21, 175–76).
In the community of Ila Orangun, the ﬁrst major public festival of the year,
held in March, was Odun Ogungun (the festival of the ancestors). In the
course of this festival, the townspeople reasserted their traditional rights and
freedoms vis-`a-vis the king. Odun Ogun, celebrated in June, dramatized the
conﬂict between an individual’s loyalty to the state, as embodied by the king,
and his loyalty to his kin group. Odun Oba, in late August and early September,
reafﬁrmed the king’s power. These major community festivals were followed
by and interpersed with festivals honouring particular deities (Pemberton and
Afolayan 1996: 101–96).

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
511
At Ife the annual Oduduwa festival celebrated the creation of the world and
the genealogical unity of all Yoruba kings and people. The sacriﬁce of a ﬁve-
toed chicken and the performances of dancers dressed in chicken costumes
commemorated the bird from the sky realm that helped Oduduwa create
the earth (Bascom 1969: 10–11). Three New Year yam festivals performed
by Ifa priests between late June and August allowed the king of Ife and his
retainers, then the worshippers of Ifa and other beneﬁcent deities associated
with the colour white, and ﬁnally the worshippers of other deities to eat new
yams. These festivals also ritually renewed the fertility of the soil (Bascom
1969: 19).
Because of the large number of people living in individual Yoruba extended
family compounds, especially in the northern regions, the cults carried out by
them had a public character. Every four days, the compound head sacriﬁced
to the various deities that were worshipped by his extended family. A series
of major festivals to honour these deities was held during the course of the
year. Women worshipped their husbands’ deities, but in addition every woman
returned to her father’s compound to participate in its cults after she had
married, and her children sometimes joined her (Bascom 1969: 77).
In Mesopotamia, an important form of public ritual was the journeying of
cult statues from one temple to another. Sometimes the images of deities were
transported from their temples to the surrounding countryside. This became
a major feature of the later akitum (New Year) festival at Babylon. Cult statues
from different city-states also visited one another. Pre-Sargonic texts record
such journeys between Lagash and Girsu and as far away as Uruk, while later
recordstellofvisitsbydeitiesfromsouthernMesopotamiatoNippurandEridu
(Postgate 1992: 123–24). The images of deities were also paraded around
cities during their festivals. Standards or symbols of deities were regularly
taken from temples to assist in collecting tithes and to be used for swearing
oaths in legal cases.
New-moon festivals were celebrated in every Mesopotamian temple, along
with feasts speciﬁc to each god (Jacobsen 1976: 97–98). The most important
annual religious festival was the New Year celebration, which extended over
approximately twelve days in March and early April. This elaborate ritual,
which followed the annual harvest, sought to renew the cosmos by re-enacting
its divine creation and supernatural ordering (Kuhrt 1987: 31–40). It was an
occasion for the public to feast on food provided by the king and temples, and
in the third millennium b.c. it was also a time when the fertility of the land
was renewed by a ritual marriage between the king, temporarily incarnating a
god, and his wife or some priestess, incarnating a goddess (Bott´ero 1992: 226;
Furlong 1987: 33–34; Hooke 1958; Postgate 1992: 123). It has been suggested

512
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that this ritual began in Uruk, with a priestess representing the goddess Inanna
and the en priest or king representing the god Dumuzi. In the Early Dynastic
period, sacred marriages were performed in the temples of many fertility
deities (Lerner 1986: 126–27).
Numerous Maya rites were performed in relative seclusion by members
of royal families or their deputies inside temples, palace complexes, or small,
enclosed plazas surrounded by elite structures. It is not known who was per-
mitted to witness these rites or the religious ball games that were played in
courts located within palace complexes, which reenacted the escape of the
Hero Twins from the underworld. Maya urban centres did, however, have
large, open courtyards adjacent to temples and palaces where huge crowds
could have assembled to witness the dedication of royal stelae at the end of
twenty-year periods and to celebrate various other rituals.
At Cuzco, the Inka rulers celebrated an elaborate cycle of religious rites
that corresponded with the solar year. These rituals were primarily concerned
with the planting, harvesting, and storage of crops and with promoting the
welfare of the king and the Inka nobility. They celebrated both the king’s
military prowess and his control over the reproductive resources of society.
The festival of Qhapaq Raymi, at the start of the rainy season in December,
involved an elaborate set of rituals at Wanakawri (Huanacauri), a major waka
associated with the arrival of the Inka royal family in the Cuzco region. In the
course of these rituals, the endurance and military skills of young members
of the nobility were tested and they were formally initiated into adulthood. In
January, rituals were performed for the health of the king. February-March
was the time for encouraging crops to grow, and in May the maize harvest
was celebrated. In June, the feast of Inti Raymi involved elaborate sacriﬁces
on the hillsides near Cuzco to strengthen and ensure the return southward
of the winter sun. In July, irrigation and sod-turning rituals were performed.
In August, new crops were ritually sown in sacred ﬁelds. In September, Quya
Raymi (the queen’s festival) was celebrated and diseases were driven from
the capital. In October, rituals were performed if drought threatened, while
November was associated with preparations for Qhapaq Raymi. Special rituals
were performed at times of major threats to the well-being of the state such as
wars, earthquakes, or widespread disease (Cobo 1990: 126–51; Kendall 1973:
198–99; Rowe 1944: 308–11).
The king, queen, and high-ranking members of the nobility played promi-
nent roles in these rituals. In July, the king, assisted by Inka nobles, ceremo-
nially inaugurated the agricultural cycle by using a gold-tipped foot plough
to begin to turn the sod of a sacred maize ﬁeld dedicated to the sun at Coll-
campata, on Saqsawaman Hill, and at Sausero, east of Cuzco. These two ﬁelds

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
513
were associated with the ﬁrst Inka ruler, Manqu Qhapaq, and his sister-wife
Mama Waqu. The ritual initiated the working of other ﬁelds belonging to var-
ious gods and dead kings and then the rest of the land in the Cuzco region
and throughout the Inka kingdom. The following May, the sacred maize ﬁelds
around Cuzco were harvested by the sons of Inka nobles who were preparing
to be initiated into manhood (Bauer 1996: 330; Cobo 1990: 143–44; Kendall
1973: 199; MacCormack 1991: 162; Rowe 1944: 310–11).
Singing and dancing were important features of Inka public worship. Large
quantities of beer were consumed by celebrants. Coca leaves were chewed
on these occasions by nobles and used for divining and in sacriﬁcial rites
(Rowe 1944: 291–92). The religious festivals that involved the greatest mass
participation were held in the two adjacent central squares of Cuzco or at major
wakas surrounding the city and were attended by the king and the mummies
of previous monarchs together with their oracle priests. During some of these
rituals, residents of the Cuzco region who were not Inka or Inka-by-privilege
were required to vacate the area (Rowe 1944: 310–11). State rituals had set
programmes, including special dances and songs, and different social classes
were assigned speciﬁc roles. The same songs were sung at rituals relating
to war as at those relating to agriculture. Ofﬁcial maize-planting rituals were
performed by young men wearing military regalia, and warriors played a major
role in harvesting ritual crops. The Inka leadership regarded agriculture and
military force as equally important for the welfare of the state and therefore
ritually equated them (Bauer 1996: 331).
Agricultural and other state rituals were also performed in and around the
main temples in provincial administrative centres. There is archaeological ev-
idence that lavish hospitality was offered at these centres to celebrants from
the surrounding province (Morris and Thompson 1985). At the community
level, ayllu priests offered sacriﬁces and libations to local wakas and ancestral
mummies both before planting and after harvesting the crops (Gose 1993:
486–87). Harvests were also celebrated with community dancing, feasts, and
the drinking of corn beer, while shrines containing cobs of corn wrapped in
cloth were set up in every house to honour the maize goddess.
In Egypt public and semi-public rituals sustained the monarch, the seasonal
cycles, and the gods themselves (Morenz 1973: 89). The ceremony that is best
documented prior to the Fourth Dynasty was the Sed festival. For it, cult
statues were assembled from every part of Egypt to assist in the ritual death
and rebirth of an aging king. This ritual revived his power to sustain the cosmic
order. It was usually ﬁrst performed around the thirtieth year of a king’s reign
and every few years thereafter (Frankfort 1948: 79–88; T. Wilkinson 1999:
212–15).

514
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Egyptian cult statues participated in religious festivals that required them
to leave their temples. They often visited one another, sometimes travelling
from one provincial town to another as Hathor of Dendera and Horus of Edfu
did each year to celebrate a ritual marriage. Other deities travelled from one
temple to another within a single district. At the New Kingdom Opet festival,
held during the inundation season, the cult statues of the Theban deity Amon,
his wife Mut, and their son Khonsu left their adjacent temples at Karnak to
visit the Luxor temple. There Amon and Mut conceived the god Khonsu and
by so doing strengthened the powers of the living king, with whom Khonsu was
closely identiﬁed. Beginning early in the Middle Kingdom, the statue of Amon
of Karnak crossed to the west bank of the Nile at harvest time to celebrate the
Beautiful Festival of the Valley. This involved visiting royal mortuary temples
as well as temples of Hathor and of Amon in the form of a primeval creator god
(Finnestad 1997; R. Wilkinson 2000: 95–98). In the Old and Middle Kingdoms,
priests carried cult statues in palanquins; in the New Kingdom the palanquins
were replaced by small portable boats.
Some celebrations, such as the Festival of the Opening of the Year, were
observed annually in every temple. In the Middle Kingdom the festival of
Pokar, which commemorated the death and revival of the god Osiris, attracted
pilgrims from all over Egypt to Abydos. Temples throughout Egypt held annual
festivals to which people came from considerable distances to honour local
deities. The most important of these festivals were subsidized by the king and
supervised by royal ofﬁcials acting in his name (Kees 1961: 241–43). The main
goal of all these festivals was to promote fertility and rebirth and to renew
gods, nature, and human beings (R. Wilkinson 2000: 96–97).
The Shang religious rituals that we know most about were those related to
the royal ancestor cult. These rites were performed privately in a restricted
palace setting. Among the public rituals was that of Ji (royal tillage). Each
February, at the beginning of the farming season, the king and certain high-
ranking ofﬁcials observed a ﬁve-day fast and then cultivated a sacred ﬁeld
and offered sacriﬁces for a good harvest to the god Shangdi. Food and drink
were served to the ofﬁcials and farmers who participated in this ritual. In the
autumn, the king offered the food grown on this ﬁeld as a thanksgiving sacriﬁce
for the harvest. This festival also recognized the farmers’ toil, which made the
production of food possible (Granet 1958 [1930]: 307; Hsu and Linduff 1988:
370; Keightley 1969: 111–23). Nobles may have performed similar planting
and harvest rites in honour of lesser deities at their regional and local centres.
The sacriﬁces that kings and nobles offered at earth altars in connection with
war and agriculture also appear to have been public rituals.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
515
In all early civilizations state religious rituals such as enthronements, royal
funerals, and offerings to the gods had public as well as esoteric aspects. The es-
oteric elements stressed the special and restricted nature of the upper classes’
relations with the gods. The public rituals displayed the wealth, power, and
privileges of the upper classes, who controlled these events, but they required
the participation of ordinary people to align human activities with the cosmic
and divine orders. Public rituals strengthened the cosmos and drew energy
from it for the beneﬁt of humans. They re-enacted the creation of the universe
and reinforced the harmony between the annual cycles of human society and
those of the natural/supernatural world. The social order was justiﬁed by pro-
claiming it to be modelled on the natural world and the supernatural forces
that animated it.
There does not appear to have been any signiﬁcant distinction between the
ways in which religious festivals were controlled and organized in city-states
and in territorial states. The vast resources that rulers of individual territorial
states had at their disposal were lavished on religious rituals to varying degrees
and in different ways. City-states seem to have been characterized by even
more diversity. Early Egyptian rulers devoted more of their resources to con-
structing their burial complexes and maintaining their funerary cults than to
any other form of religious activity. Elaborate, state-managed public calendars
of festivals developed in both the Valley of Mexico and Inka Peru, while less
centralized forms of public ritual, focused on individual temples and cults,
played a more important role among the Yoruba, in Mesopotamia, and in
ancient Egypt.
In Mesopotamia, kings and temple ofﬁcials may have contested control of
religious rituals, while among the Yoruba individual initiative, combined with
even more decentralized political power, made public rituals a focus for po-
litical contestation and mediation. Egyptian kings organized ceremonies of
extraordinary magniﬁcence and national importance, but public ritual away
from the royal court and a few major centres appears to have been left largely
to local management. While the Inka imposed considerable uniformity on ma-
jor cults both in Cuzco and in provincial administrative centres, in Egypt the
central government did not try to control religious cults in provincial centres
to nearly the same extent, at least during the Old Kingdom. In China, respon-
sibility for ritual performance seems to have been linked to the segmentary
allocation of political power. The main role of public religious festivals in all
early civilizations was to establish ritual connections between ordinary people
and gods whose cults were controlled by the upper classes. By constraining the
lower classes to acknowledge this network of unequal relations through their

516
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
participation, these rituals emphasized the subordination of the lower classes
to the powerful and rich.
witchcraft and social control
In addition to the practice of religion in communal and family settings there
were relations between individuals and the supernatural, some of them socially
sanctioned and others entered into for harmful and illicit purposes. Many
turned on the assumption that the powers that could be used for good purposes
could also be used for bad ones.
In early civilizations people greatly feared spirits that sought to harm hu-
mans by causing illness, death, and misfortune to young and old alike. The
Mesopotamians believed that swarms of malicious spirits were unleashed upon
humanity by the deities who ruled the underworld. Neglected souls of the
dead also roamed the world seeking to feed or otherwise prey on relatives and
strangers (Bott´ero 1992: 282–85). The Aztec believed that the souls of women
who had died in childbirth returned to earth to murder children (L´opez Austin
1988, 1: 246). In Egypt, hosts of demons collectively representing the forces of
disorder threatened humans, especially during the night (Pinch 1994: 141–42).
Among the Inka malevolent spirits (sopay) appeared in various forms, such as
ﬂoating heads and long-breasted women (Rowe 1944: 297–98).
To try to control these dangerous spirits, people had recourse to prayers,
amulets, and spells. In Egypt, amulets manufactured in a wide range of mate-
rials were purchased and worn by rich and poor alike. Most Egyptian amulets
referred to and drew their power from episodes in the many myths that related
how the young god Horus was protected from danger by the magical skills of
his mother, Isis, and how he ﬁnally overcame his uncle Seth. Spells, which often
claimed to be ones that the Egyptian gods used to protect themselves, were
written on small pieces of papyrus, which were worn by individuals, dipped
into water which was then drunk, or recited over someone. Priests known as
h
• ry sˇst3 (knowers of secrets), sometimes wearing masks and equipped with
boxes of amulets and charms, deployed supernatural powers (h
• k3) to assist
in childbirth or the curing of disease (Davies and Friedman 1998: 171–76).
The Yoruba used charms and incantations to counteract witchcraft, protect
property, solicit good luck, shorten the distances they had to travel, avoid dan-
gers, and make their enemies obey them. When building a new house the
Yoruba propitiated malevolent local spirits in the hope that they would leave
the new residents alone and apologized to good spirits for having disturbed
them (Lucas 1948: 279–82; Awolalu 1979: 70, 160). The Inka regarded amulets
(ilya, ayaylya) as a form of waka (Rowe 1944: 296).

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
517
Andean peoples, as we have seen, feared supernatural punishment for per-
sonal misconduct. In Mesopotamia, people feared divine punishment if they
disobeyed a god’s wishes or violated his prohibitions, even inadvertently; in
retaliation gods might instruct the demons of illness and misfortune or dis-
satisﬁed souls of the dead to pursue and punish wrongdoers (Bott´ero 1992:
227–29, 283). By the second millennium b.c. there was a growing emphasis
on personal deities, both male and female, who could protect individuals from
such dangers by interceding for them with the high gods. Personal deities were
often passed down from father to son. Individuals petitioned these deities to
identify what wrongdoings they should repent, accept their atonement, supply
them with the good luck needed to succeed in life, and protect them from
demons. Unusually bad behaviour could cause a personal deity to desert the
person being protected (Jacobsen 1976: 150–60). In Egypt there was a gradu-
ally increasing tendency to appeal for help to major deities in times of personal
trouble. It was assumed that some deity had inﬂicted misfortune on a person in
retribution for misbehaviour and that winning the forgiveness and support of a
powerful deity constituted the best hope of redemption (Assmann 1995). The
Yoruba feared misfortune as a consequence of perjury, mistreating others, or
neglecting a god or ancestor. To punish such behaviour the gods might inﬂict
bad luck or even shorten a person’s life. Propitiatory sacriﬁces were necessary
to atone for misdeeds (Awolalu 1979: 156). Aztec, when threatened by per-
sonal misfortune, sought the protection of their calpolli’s tutelary deity (L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 252).
While conducive to moral behaviour, fear of divine punishment also en-
couraged a search for charms, incantations, and rituals that would prevent
individual misconduct from being noticed and punished by the gods. These
were the same means by which the assaults of malicious spirits might be
deﬂected. Individual humans sought to acquire supernatural power that
would protect them from the different forms of supernatural attack being
directed against them either as a result of malice or in the form of just
punishment.
In all early civilizations, people feared witchcraft. It was believed that, con-
sciously or unconsciously, some people sought to harm others by supernatural
means, either because of envy or in retaliation for some injury that a person
or group was believed to have perpetrated against them. Such people were
often well known to their victims, but they could also be complete strangers.
There were also sorcerers who were able and willing to help supernaturally
inexperienced people practise witchcraft against others. These sorcerers might
be clandestine practitioners wholly devoted to the use of supernatural pow-
ers for evil purposes or priests, shamans, diviners, or curers who, while they

518
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
publicly used their skills to protect and cure some people, secretly employed
their knowledge to harm others.
In small-scale societies fear of witchcraft, in combination with gossip and
ridicule, was a powerful force encouraging generosity and modesty. Individuals
who were more skilled, more hard-working, more enterprising, or simply luck-
ier than their neighbours were prepared to share their surplus produce with
them rather than risk illness, misfortune, and death for themselves and their
families as a result of their neighbours’ envy being supernaturally directed
against them. People who exercised leadership in these close-knit societies
likewise took care not to ﬂaunt their power in a way that would arouse envy or
annoy people (Lee 1990; Trigger 1990b).
In early civilizations the fear and practice of witchcraft must have continued
to function in this manner among ordinary people, while members of the
upper classes also practised witchcraft against each other, often with the help
of specialists. Yet the most urgent concern about witchcraft among the rich and
powerful in early civilizations was their dread that lower-class people might
use it to avenge insults, injustices, or mistreatment that they had suffered at
the hands of their superiors. It was especially feared that lower-class people
might resort to witchcraft to harm rulers in situations where overt resistance
was hopeless. Thus, among the upper classes, witchcraft became intimately
associated with concern that the people they controlled and exploited were
seeking to harm them.
To some degree such fears may have helped to curb the exploitative be-
haviour of the rich. Their main effect, however, was probably to make rulers
fear their subjects more than they would have done otherwise, and this en-
couraged a determined effort to uncover and punish witches and sorcerers
who might be seeking to harm them. The power of the upper classes to punish
witches turned the fear that authorities might accuse ordinary people of be-
ing witches into a powerful means for intimidating and controlling the lower
classes. Thus accusations of witchcraft, which in smaller-scale societies had
served to promote social and economic equality, became in early civilizations
a means by which the powerful could intimidate their subordinates.
The Inka state construed all crimes, regardless of the social status of the
victims, as acts of sorcery and treason. Every form of misconduct threatened
the well-being of the kingdom and the health of the king by angering the gods.
Rulers sought to regulate wrongdoers’ relations with the supernatural by mak-
ing the expiation of wrongdoing dependent on confession of the offence to
authorized priests or high-ranking chosen women (Kendall 1973: 194). They
also sought to control the clandestine manipulation of supernatural power by
experts. These included sorcerers (kawco), who killed people by means of

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
519
magical potions and images into which bits of hair, ﬁngernails, or teeth of the
intended victim had been inserted. It was believed that some priests, cur-
ers (hampikamayuq), and authorized diviners (omo) also secretly performed
criminal acts of sorcery. The activities of these clandestine manipulators of
supernatural power were greatly feared by ordinary people as well as by the
state. People carefully destroyed or kept their own hair and nail clippings
(Kendall 1973: 66, 76, 94; Rowe 1944: 302, 312, 314). Divination was employed
to expose clandestine sorcerers, and any person found to have murdered some-
one in this manner was slain along with the rest of his family (Rowe 1944: 314).
Kings must have dreaded that such intriguers would become involved in fac-
tional intrigues among the Inka nobility. At the same time, rulers employed
sorcery to enhance their own power. They had priests burn snakes, toads, and
jaguars to weaken the power of gods who supported rival rulers and then ex-
amined the hearts of sacriﬁced llamas to see if the ritual had been successful
(Kendall 1973: 100–101).
Yoruba of all classes feared witches (aje). Many witches were female, and
the power to be one tended to be inherited in the female line. Such power
could also be purchased from a practising witch and ingested in the form of
ritually treated food. The souls of witches were believed to enter the bodies of
animals at night, while their own bodies slept. In that form they travelled about
spreading disease and sucking blood and vitality from their victims. Witches
were assumed to be inherently evil. They killed close relatives, drained life-
forces from children, ruined their husbands’ businesses, and caused infertility.
Divination was frequently employed to determine whether a death was from
naturalcauses.Apublicformofbehaviourthatwascloselyrelatedtowitchcraft,
epe (formal cursing), involved the overt employment of supernatural power to
injure a rival or an enemy (Lucas 1948: 272–84; Awolalu 1979: 81–92).
There wereinYoruba societyboth people activelyseeking toinﬂictsupernat-
ural harm on those whom they envied or believed had injured or insulted them
and people who believed that they and their families were the victims of such
behaviour. The Gelede society, which worshipped Yemoya, goddess of rivers
and mother of witchcraft, as well as other deities associated with sorcery, sought
to control witchcraft by offering sacriﬁces to the souls of unidentiﬁed witches.
These sacriﬁces were intended to appease witches and deﬂect them from their
intended victims. Individuals who felt threatened by witchcraft attempted to
placate unknown witches by offering them animal sacriﬁces as substitutes for
their own lives. The Egungun society had as one of its missions to confront and
overcome witches, especially when their power was directed against hunters
and small children. Older members of the Egungun and Oro societies hunted
down and killed witches who persisted in threatening the well-being of society.

520
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Some Yoruba communities also performed special rituals that were intended
to drive witches from their midst (Bascom 1969: 93–95; Awolalu 1979: 154–58;
R. Thompson 1976: 14/1–15/2). Diviners were employed to determine who
might be secretly performing witchcraft. Those who were accused of witchcraft
were tried by ordeal and executed if found guilty. If they confessed, however,
they were usually released, since confession was believed to annihilate their
power to do evil (Lucas 1948: 277, 284; Awolalu 1979: 83).
In the Valley of Mexico, curers, midwives, and sorcerers were hired to per-
form various rituals to alter individual destinies and control the weather. These
specialists often worked in conjunction with local priests to help people, but
sometimes they used their knowledge to inﬂict harm on those they disliked
or the enemies of those who employed them. The Aztec especially feared
the activities of sorcerers, who had obtained the power to manipulate the su-
pernatural by having been born on a particular day or having been trained
by a practising sorcerer. Tlacatecolotl (owl men) cast spells on others which
caused them to get ill or die. Nahualli were able to project their souls into
animal forms (nagual), which roamed about while their human bodies slept.
Nahualli intent on harming people penetrated the bodies of their intended
victims and consumed the powers that animated them, causing sickness and
death. If, however, the nagual was killed, the resident soul could not return
to its human body, and this caused the nahualli to perish. Sorcerers also used
charms, especially the arm of a woman who had died while delivering her ﬁrst
child, to render themselves invisible and rob houses.
Aztec priests and curers attempted to discern the source of ailments that
had been caused by witchcraft by tossing twenty maize kernels onto a cloth
and interpreting the pattern they formed. They also counteracted sorcery with
various rituals. Efforts were made to search out and punish those practising
witchcraft and supernaturally aided robbery. In Texcoco such crimes were
tried by the religious rather than the legal council (Berdan 1982: 139–41;
Clendinnen 1991: 54–56; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 364–73; Offner 1983: 149;
M. E. Smith 1996: 261). The Aztec believed that individuals lived to an old
age by stealing life from other people, who as a consequence died young. As a
result, elderly people were credited with possessing great supernatural power,
and people treated them with deference in the hope they would steal life from
someone else. A normal life span was considered to be one calendar round of
ﬁfty-two years (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 257–58).
In Egypt, people had recourse to charms and spells to assist them to commit
criminal acts such as robberies and murders. In the New Kingdom a plot to
murder King Ramesses III involved smuggling into the palace wax images of
the king that would help to ensure the success of the conspiracy. Priests and
sorcerers who were willing to manufacture such equipment (Grimal 1992: 276)

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
521
must have been regarded as a considerable threat by the king and the upper
classes. At the same time, the widespread manipulation of the supernatural
not only to keep the cosmos running but to cure illness and help the souls of
the dead escape punishment for their crimes in life must have made it difﬁcult
to determine who was using the same powers to harm other people. Moreover,
the Egyptian state used magic to weaken and subdue its enemies. The Middle
Kingdom ‘execration texts’ employed supernatural techniques to control the
foreign enemies of the Egyptian king (Posener 1940).
ritual and hierarchy
A vast amount of wealth was expended in early civilizations on temples, sacri-
ﬁces, religious festivals, and priests. Remains associated with religious beliefs
and activities loom large in the archaeological and textual records of early civi-
lizations. Yet early civilizations were not theocracies. Priests did not constitute
a social order in any of the early civilizations we are studying; they were drawn
from and remained members of various social classes. In ancient Egypt and
amongtheYorubathepriesthoodwasonlyapart-timeoccupation,andinChina
and among the Maya priests as a group may not have been distinguished from
administratorsandsupportstaff.Themostimportantpriestswerehigh-ranking
ofﬁcials and the king was ultimately responsible for his society’s relations with
the supernatural. Local or family cults might express a group’s political aspira-
tions to manage their own affairs, but they could not directly challenge royal
authority. Because political and religious roles were not clearly distinguished,
there was no opportunity for serious political competition between priests and
secular rulers.
Much of the routine worship of the gods was conducted in enclosed areas
without public participation, but at various times of the year religious festivals
required the participation or at least the presence of large numbers of peo-
ple. These public rituals reinforced the collective identity of society but also
reafﬁrmed the hierarchical organization of early civilizations by stressing the
key role that the upper classes played in representing society as a whole in
its relations with the supernatural. Finally, fear of witchcraft, now focused on
the concerns of the upper classes about malevolent forces that the weaker and
less afﬂuent members of society might direct against them, was transformed
from what it had been in smaller-scale societies – a way to frighten the more
prosperous members of society into being more generous – into yet another
means for the upper classes to intimidate and repress the lower classes. Yet
witchcraft also provided the lower classes with a way of resisting the demands
of the upper classes that was covert and considered effective.

23 The Individual and the Universe
I
f views about humans’ relations to the cosmos – about the creation of
human beings, the purpose of human existence, and the fate of individ-
uals after death – reﬂected the roles that different classes played in society,
one might expect the self-image of lower-class people to have been humbler
and more pessimistic where the upper classes advanced the most extravagant
claims concerning their own superiority. Such assertions tended to be made in
territorial states and in city-state systems where nobles were distinguished as
a hereditary group from commoners. Combining these two criteria, one might
expect the lower classes to have had the most positive self-image among the
Yoruba and Mesopotamians (city-states with no formally deﬁned hereditary
nobility) and progressively humbler ones among the Aztec and Maya (city-
states with hereditary nobles), in Egypt (a territorial state that deemphasized
its hereditary nobles), and in Shang China and the Inka kingdom (territorial
states with strong hereditary nobilities).
The ethnographic literature on the Yoruba provides no detailed account of
the creation of the ﬁrst human beings. Oduduwa, the god most often credited
with creating the earth, was also the ancestor of the ﬁrst Yoruba kings. The god
Orisala was charged by the high god Olorun with the ongoing task of creating
individual humans – shaping their bodies (ara) from semen and menstrual
blood in their mothers’ wombs. If Orisala were angry, he might produce defor-
mities in fetuses. Olorun then gave each infant life (Bascom 1969: 10; Awolalu
1979: 12; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 97, 218).
The Yoruba believed that the human body was animated by multiple souls
or life-forces. One of these was the emi (breath), which Olorun breathed into
each individual. The emi was associated with the lungs and chest and was
believed to be the force that allowed people to live, move about, and work.
It required food in order to continue functioning. The emi was able to leave
the body when a person was asleep and travel about, its experiences taking
522

The Individual and the Universe
523
the form of dreams. If a wandering soul was captured and prevented from
returning to its body, the deprived body would die after four days (Bascom
1969: 74; cf. Lucas 1948: 247–48).
Equally important among the Yoruba was a soul called the ori (head), which
supplied an individual’s intellect, personality, destiny, luck, and supernatural
protection. Often called the ancestral guardian soul, it was sometimes de-
scribed as made up of a person’s mind (iye) and inner self (ori inu), as distin-
guished from the personality that an individual revealed in public (ori ode).
It was given by Olorun to someone about to be reborn. The ori was regarded
as a minor orisa, living inside a person’s head. Its well-being depended on its
being fed regularly with sacriﬁces. Individual emi and ori were associated with
particular descent groups, and lineage members fed their heads on the same
day. In Benin, warriors and other prominent men also sought to strengthen
the supernatural power in their right arms, sacriﬁcing to them both before
and after special undertakings. In addition, the Yoruba accorded supernatural
status to their shadows (ojiji), although shadows performed no special func-
tion, received no sacriﬁces, and remained closely linked to the body. (Apter
1992: 199; Awolalu 1979: 9, 12, 53–54; Bascom 1969: 71–74; Bradbury 1957:
58; Lucas 1948: 246–47).
At the time of a person’s death, both souls left the body. If the person had
died prematurely, they might continue living in a ghostly form in some other
community until their allotted life span was used up. Sooner or later, however,
all souls travelled to the spirit world, which was generally believed to be located
in the sky (Bascom 1969: 75).
The dead were buried in the ground. Men who lived in towns were interred
beneath the rooms or courtyards of their residential compounds. Country
dwellers were brought for burial to their patrilineages’ urban compounds,
while women were interred within their fathers’ residences. People without
descendants were buried simply, while those who had children were interred
with elaborate rites and venerated as long as their children lived. Lepers,
albinos, hunchbacks, pregnant women, and people killed by lightning were
buried in the sacred groves of various deities by priests who ensured that these
individuals were reconciled after death with the deity who was responsible for
their misfortune (Bascom 1969: 65–66). Various prohibitions were observed;
burying red cloth with the deceased, for example, might cause the person to
be reborn a leper.
Elaborate burial rites ensured that the souls of the dead reached the su-
pernatural world and did not become wandering ghosts. Animal sacriﬁces, the
blood of which was sprinkled on the corpse, strengthened the souls of the dead
and ensured that they were well disposed towards the living (Bascom 1969:

524
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
65–68). After the burial, offerings continued to be made to the body in the
form of blood and other libations, which were poured down a hole into the
grave. The bodies of the dead were also believed to share in the ﬁrst-fruits
offerings that were made to the earth god (Ojo 1966a: 168). The body appar-
ently ceased to have a personal existence after death (Lucas 1948: 246) but
was identiﬁed with the life-giving powers of the earth.
The Yoruba believed that after death both the emi and the ori went before
Olorun, who punished the souls of evil people, sometimes by forbidding them
to be reborn. After death, the emi could visit relatives in dreams (Bascom 1969:
75), while the ori became an ere spirit, supernaturally supporting its lineage
in the sky world by acting as an intermediary on its behalf with Olorun and
the other gods (Awolalu 1979: 60; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 25). These
ancestral souls were feared as a possible source of supernatural punishment for
misbehaviour. The ori was called back by the dead person’s living descendants
to their family shrine to receive offerings of animals and kola nuts in a ritual
performed on the same days that its owner had sacriﬁced to his head while
alive (Bascom 1969: 72). Senior Egungun-society priests caused ori to enter the
bodies of cult members during festivals in order to bless their descendants, and
the ori spoke through the individuals whose bodies they possessed (K. Barber
1991: 253).
The chief aim of an ancestral soul living in the sky was to be reborn, prefer-
ably back into its patrilineal extended family as a grandchild of its previous
incarnation. It could be reborn as the same or the opposite sex in successive
lifetimes. When the time to be reborn had arrived, the ori appeared before
Olorun to receive its body (ara), breath (emi), and destiny (iwa). It could bar-
gain with Olorun concerning the day of its next incarnation’s death and the
speciﬁc personality, occupation, and luck this incarnation would have. Actions
during a person’s subsequent lifetime could alter most of these arrangements,
either for better or for worse, to some extent, but they could not change the
day of death. Therefore much of an individual’s fortune depended on the de-
mands that his or her ori made at this time. These concepts reﬂected the great
importance that the Yoruba placed on bargaining and individual self-reliance
in everyday life. The former identity of the ori of a newborn child was revealed
to his or her kinsmen by the child’s physical appearance and behaviour or
through dreams and divination (Bascom 1969: 71–72).
Problems were posed by the belief that ancestral guardian souls were re-
born but remained in the sky world acting as intercessors for their families.
Sometimes it was claimed that there were two guardian souls, one of which
stayed in the sky while the other was continually reborn. If the sky-dwelling
version, or ere, were an essence from which individual ori were derived, that

The Individual and the Universe
525
would explain the Yoruba belief that a number of living people might share the
same soul. Although the ori conserved the basic personality and behavioural
traits of a dead person, it is unknown whether it retained personal memories
of previous incarnations. Such memories were more likely associated with the
ancestral guardian spirits that continued to live in the sky world than with ones
that returned to earth. In Benin it was maintained that there were two versions
of each soul, which alternated generationally with each other in living in the
sky and on earth (Awolalu 1979: 58–61; Bascom 1969: 71–76; Bradbury 1957:
56–58).
Mesopotamian myths concerning the creation of human beings were associ-
ated with different city-states and ethnic groups. Sumerian texts recount that,
at the request of the other gods, after Enlil had separated the earth and the
sky he used his hoe to break the hard crust of the earth in Uzu´e (The Flesh
Grower), a garden located within the temple of Inanna in Nippur, where the
ﬁrst humans sprang up like grass. In another Sumerian myth the god Enki
created humans from the ‘engendering clay’ of the watery underworld. These
creations were brought to term by Enki’s mother Nammu. In an Akkadian
version of this myth, when the gods decided to create humans Enki advised
that a rebellious minor god named We´e be slain and that the birth goddess
Nintur mix that god’s ﬂesh and blood with clay to create humans. Fourteen
womb goddesses then gestated this mixture and gave birth to seven human
couples. In the Enuma Elish, Enki alone fashioned humans, using the blood
of the slain rebel deity Kingu (Jacobsen 1970: 112–14, 116, 207; 1974: 1004;
1976: 118; Kramer 1963: 123).
In some of these creation myths, human beings were conceived as clay
infused with an element of divinity, often the soul (etemmu) of a slain god.
Originally less important deities, under Enlil’s supervision, had performed the
physical labour required to shape the terrestrial world and feed, clothe, and
house the gods. When they refused to continue working, Enki created or super-
vised the creation of human beings to do this work instead. The earth goddess
Ninhursaga taught humans the arts that transformed them from simple pas-
toralists into city dwellers, and the institution of kingship was introduced to
Mesopotamia from the sky world. Eventually, there were so many humans
that they disturbed Enlil’s sleep. With the agreement of the other gods, he
sent them plagues, drought, crop failures, and ﬁnally a great ﬂood that de-
stroyed all but one family and then, to keep population growth in check, he
shortened their lives, afﬂicted them with barrenness and child death, and intro-
duced virgin priestesses and homosexual behaviour amongst them (Jacobsen
1976: 113–21). The Mesopotamians valued competitiveness, and individuals
boasted of their efforts to outdo rivals and to gain fame, wealth, and positions

526
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of leadership (Kramer 1981: 11). Yet they dreaded the ability of supernatural
powers to harm them and sought the support of personal guardian spirits to
avoid illness and misfortune. Individual well-being depended on having sup-
portive supernatural powers present inside one’s body. These were called ilu
(god), if male, and lamassu (angel), if female, and they promoted good luck
(ilanu), vitality and sexual potency (ˇsedu), and a favourable destiny (ˇsimtu).
Without them an individual would quickly fall prey to disease and misfortune
(Oppenheim 1964: 199–201).
After death, it was believed, the corpse (ˇsalamtu) dissolved back into clay.
The bones (esemtu) remained forever asleep but were often taken along when
families moved from one place to another, and the soul (etemmu) survived
as a phantom, ghost, or shadow. If, by mischance, a body remained unburied
and no proper funeral rites were performed, its soul wandered the earth as a
malevolent spirit. Most souls descended into the underworld (eretsu) by way
of the grave or various openings (ablal) and then had to cross a dangerous river.
Once there, they lived a cheerless existence in a dark, arid, dusty realm. This
was the home of the gods of death, under the command of Erishkegal and her
husband Nergal, and of the demons of disease and misfortune. The sun passed
through the underworld each night, brieﬂy lighting portions of it; the moon
remained for one day each month. Because nothing could be grown there,
the souls of the dead were deemed useless to the gods except for assisting the
deities of the underworld to harass the living. Escape was impossible, although
on rare occasions the soul of a dead person or god might be released in return
for the soul of a living one.
Offerings were made to the souls of dead family members at each new moon.
These souls were petitioned to intercede for the welfare of their descendants
before the council of the Annunaki, the gods who decided the fate of humans.
Yet they could not grow their own food or produce their own clothing in the
underworld, nor were these necessities provided for them by the deities of
that realm. They depended on food offerings from their living descendants if
they were not to starve.
The dead were socially ranked in the underworld as they had been in life.
Kings lived in gloomy palaces built of lapis lazuli. They received larger food
offerings than commoners, and in Early Dynastic times some were accom-
panied by the souls of slain household servants. They took riches with them
into the underworld so that they might bribe the gods of death into treating
them better. Even so, their lives were wretched. Conditions were worse for the
souls of ordinary people, especially those who were no longer supplied with
offerings by their descendants. The sole exceptions to this fate were Utnapish-
tim and his family, who had survived the great ﬂood. The gods had permitted

The Individual and the Universe
527
them to live without aging in a pleasant but inaccessible enclave on the edge
of the world.
Mesopotamians believed that the dead maintained their personal identities,
at least as long as their souls were fed. The gods of the underworld were said
to ‘judge’ the souls of the dead, but that seems to have involved conﬁrming
their rank rather than rendering a moral evaluation; there was no reward
or punishment for what they had done while alive. While the deities of the
underworld were supposed to have prayed for the welfare of the souls of the
dead, these souls endured an etiolated, marginal existence in a realm that
was physically little different from the grave. Many, willingly or unwillingly,
helped to harass and injure the living. Living people attributed some of their
misfortunes to the souls of the dead, especially ones whose bodies had been
left unburied or who did not receive offerings. Such souls might attack (literally
‘eat’) strangers or their own kin. Yet appropriate exorcisms could return the
most malevolent souls to the underworld (Bott´ero 1992: 230, 271–85, 288;
Kramer 1963: 130–35; Postgate 1992: 92).
A favourite myth of the Aztec and their neighbours described how human
beings had been created when the cosmic order was restored at the beginning
of the era of the Fifth Sun. The god Quetzalcoatl had descended into the
underworld (Mictlan) and, having failed to persuade the god who ruled it to
part with some bones of the dead from earlier creations, he stole some from
Mictlan’s lowest depths. Quetzalcoatl accidentally dropped these bones on
his way out, and, as a result of his losing some, the humans of the Fifth Sun
were smaller than the intelligent creatures of previous creations. Quetzalcoatl
brought the bones to Temoanchan, the place of creation at the centre of the
cosmos. There the earth mother Cihuacoatl (Snake Woman) ground the bones
into a powder or meal, which the male gods moistened with blood drawn from
their genitals. From this mixture men and, four days later, women came into
being (Clendinnen 1991: 173; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 107–11; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 188; M. E. Smith 1996: 206–7).
According to another version of this myth, at the time of the creation of the
Fifth Sun sixteen hundred gods descended from the sky world to Teotihuacan
in the form of a ﬂint nodule, which shattered into that many pieces when it
hit the ground. The mission of these gods was to help animate the new sun,
create humans, and become the patron deities of ethnic groups and calpollis.
These gods were instructed to retrieve the bones and ashes of the people of
former ages from Mictlan. The chief creator of humans was either the god
Quetzalcoatl or all four of the primary emanations of Ometeotl. These deities
mixed their blood with these bones and ashes to create human beings. The
ﬁrst humans lived in caves or wombs in the earth, from which they emerged

528
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
to serve their patron deities. A less elaborate myth suggested that the sun had
shot an arrow into the ground and a man and woman with no bodies below the
waist had emerged from the place where the arrow struck; by kissing they had
given birth to the ﬁrst humans (Le´on-Portilla 1963: 107; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 240–43).
A more erudite myth claimed that the supreme deity, Ometeotl, had created
the ﬁrst humans. The calendar was born with them and a gender-based division
of labour, men being ordered to work the soil and women to spin. This original
couple appears, however, to have existed prior to the creation of the sky, earth,
and underworld and to have been the ancestors of the gods as well as of
humans. It is therefore uncertain whether they were humans or gods. It is also
unclear whether a few humans were believed to have survived each of the four
successive destructions of the cosmic order or different human-like creatures
had to be created at the beginning of each cosmic era. Some versions claimed
that the human-like creations of one era survived as animals in succeeding
ones (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 238–40).
Hereditary nobles claimed that they, unlike commoners, were descended
from the god Quetzalcoatl. Yet, while this descent distinguished nobles from
commoners, it may not have indicated that nobles and commoners had been
created differently. The nobility claimed as its ancestor Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin,
the ruler of the ancient city of Tollan. Following rebellions, he had abandoned
hiskingdomandmadehiswayeasttotheGulfofMexico,whereheroseintothe
sky to become the Morning Star. It was ambiguous in Aztec mythology whether
Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin was the parthenogenic incarnation of the cosmic deity
Quetzalcoatl or an entirely human ruler who was empowered by that god
(Gillespie 1989: 123–72).
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that each child was created by
or at the command of Ometeotl, who recycled the life-forces that descended
with the dead into the lowest point of the underworld and were drawn from
there back to the highest level of the cosmos, where the creator deity lived. In
the womb the fetus was nourished by energy that came from Ometeotl rather
than from the sun (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 208–10).
The Aztec and their neighbours believed in a complex set of souls or life-
forces. The human body became ﬁlled with these supernatural powers at con-
ception, birth, and ﬁrst exposure to ﬁre and sunlight. Tonalli, which was re-
ceived from Ometeotl at conception, was associated with the head, body heat,
and blood. It was an impersonal animating power and the source of individual
qualities such as strength, vigour, growth, temperament, appetites, rationality,
and destiny. Loss of tonalli resulted in illness and disability. Tonalli could leave
the sleeping body in dreams or be dissipated as a result of drunkenness, drug

The Individual and the Universe
529
use, and too much sexual activity. It could also be stolen by means of witchcraft
or by evil spirits or old people who were anxious to appropriate other people’s
strength to prolong their own lives. Tonalli was the life-force offered to deities
in human sacriﬁces. Hair, because it grew, was believed to inhibit tonalli from
leaving the body; hence the forcible cutting of hair not only constituted a severe
public humiliation but also threatened a loss of vitality. Teyolia, associated with
the heart, was the source of memory and personality and was closely related
to personal identity. The teyolias of nobles and outstanding commoners were
strengthened by gifts of divine force from speciﬁc deities, which returned to
these deities after a person died. Ihiyotl, associated with the liver and with
breath, was the source of strong emotions such as bravery, love, hatred, desire,
and exhilaration. A person or animal who could separate his ihiyotl from him-
self or draw another’s ihiyotl inside his body was a nahualli and could use this
power to harm others surreptitiously. People sought to maintain a harmonious
balance among these three soul forces in order to ensure their personal health
and well-being. They were not, however, able to prevent the disaggregation of
these forces after death (D. Carrasco 1990: 53, 68–70; Clendinnen 1991: 315;
J. Furst 1995; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 213–36, 318–19, 329–31).
The Aztec believed that human life was characterized by hard work, hunger,
illness, worry, pain, and sorrow. Individuals were expected to curb their selﬁsh
tendencies and try to exercise stoical self-control, limit their appetites, and
work hard to support their families and serve their communities. They ex-
pected little in return. Humans always had to be ready to sacriﬁce their lives
to maintain a cosmic order that was ultimately beyond human control. The
gods compensated humans for their toil and suffering with routine pleasures
such as sleep, laughter, families, and sex, although the latter had to be indulged
in with appropriate moderation (Clendinnen 1991: 70–72, 238; Le´on-Portilla
1992: 190; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 189, 249–51, 342–43).
Each individual received a destiny that was determined by the day on which
he or she was born. Some days, especially the ﬁve supernumerary days at the
end of the solar year, were less lucky than others. An unfavourable birth day
could be partially offset by selecting a favourable day for naming a newborn
child. It was also believed that human effort could alter an individual’s fate.
Eachchildwassaidtobebornwithoutaface(ixtli),andoneofeveryindividual’s
chief goals in life was to create a face. Through courage and self-discipline one
could gradually acquire a good reputation, and by surrendering to frivolous
inclinations and dissipation one could very quickly lose it. Just as people sought
to promote equilibrium among their inner forces, so they sought equitable
relations with the gods, their communities, and their families. An imbalance
could be corrected to some degree by a confession, usually made once in a

530
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
lifetime by a man to a priest of the deity Tlazolteotli (Eater of Filth) or by a
woman to a midwife (Clendinnen 1991: 141; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 104, 115–19;
L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 267–69).
After death the animating forces left the body and went their own ways. The
tonalli or life-force returned to Ometeotl, perhaps later to be infused into a
child born to the family of the deceased. The unaugmented teyolia or sentient
soul, which preserved the personality of the dead person, experienced a variety
of fates determined not by a person’s social status or behaviour in life but by
the nature of his or her death. Only the souls of infants, who had never had
any direct contact with the dirt and ﬁlth of the earth, returned directly to the
sky world, from where, after a period spent nursing on a breast tree, Ometeotl
sent them back to earth to be reborn.
Beginning four days after their bodies had been cremated and their ashes
buried under the ﬂoors of their houses, the teyolias of people who had died
ordinary deaths journeyed to the underworld. Teyolias of kings and some high-
ranking nobles were accompanied by those of slain household slaves, while
commoners’ dogs were often killed so that their teyolias could accompany
those of their masters. The teyolia spent four years making its way ever deeper
into a cold, dark, barren, and dangerous underworld. If it did not perish from
hardship or the terrible dangers encountered on its journey, it passed into
oblivion after it had reached the ninth and lowest level. Offerings were made
to the souls of the dead every eighty days for four years to help them during
their passage through the underworld. After that, their identities were pre-
sumed to be extinguished. The power that constituted teyolias survived in some
shadowy, vestigial form until it was anonymously recycled back into the living
universe by Ometeotl (Caso 1958: 62–64; Coe 1978: 21; Le´on-Portilla 1963:
90, 109).
In contrast, the teyolias of warriors who had died in battle or been killed as
human sacriﬁces travelled to the east, where after eighty days they joined the
sun. Each morning for four years these souls accompanied the sun from the
eastern horizon to the zenith. After four years they were turned into humming-
birds or butterﬂies and lived a carefree and memoryless existence for as long
as the Fifth Sun lasted. Women who had died in their ﬁrst childbirth travelled
westward and each afternoon for four years carried the weakening sun in a lit-
ter from the zenith to the western horizon. Then they became evil spirits who
haunted the earth on the ﬁve supernumerary days of each solar year, seeking
to kill children by means of paralysis or convulsions. People who died as a
result of drowning, being struck by lightning, diseases that caused the body to
swell, or being sacriﬁced to Tlaloc and other fertility deities were transformed
into spirits who lived in paradises located inside hills. Some believed that these

The Individual and the Universe
531
souls were reborn on earth after four years but without any memory of the
past.
For the people in the Valley of Mexico, a human being made sense only
in this world. After death, the elements that made up an individual had only
a short and uncertain existence separate from one another before they were
reabsorbed by the gods and recycled to form new human beings or were
transformed into birds, butterﬂies, spirits, or demons, none of which recalled
their human identity. There was no belief in punishment or reward after death
for what an individual had done while alive (Caso 1958: 58–62; Clendinnen
1991: 178–79; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 124–26; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 253, 332–41).
No Classic Maya account of the origin of human beings has survived, but
myths recorded in the sixteenth century claimed that two ancestral gods had
created human beings after they had fashioned the world. The ﬁrst imperfect
creations were formed from mud, the next from wood, and the third from
ﬂesh. Finally present-day humans were made from maize ﬂour mixed with the
gods’ own blood (Coe 1993: 29; Schele and Miller 1986: 144). Ruling families
claimed descent from major deities, usually identiﬁed with ‘God K’ (Houston
and Stuart 1996: 297; Tate 1992: 20; Taube 1992: 69–79).
The Maya believed that every human shared souls with one or more animal
or spirit companions (wayob). (The word way was etymologically connected
with ‘sleep’.) Royal spirit companions were represented as fantastic beasts or
combinations of beasts. The White Bone House Centipede was associated with
the ruler of Palenque, while the Sun-bellied Jaguar was one of the wayob asso-
ciated with the kings of Calakmul (Houston 2001; Martin and Grube 2000: 81).
Through dancing, massive blood-letting, drug-induced trances, and dreams,
people sought, individually and collectively, to transform themselves into their
spirit companions as a way of accessing the supernatural (Schele and Mathews
1998: 83–84, 417).
The souls of the dead descended into the underworld (xibalba) through
caves, down the trunk of the cosmic tree (wakah kan), or by falling through the
open jaws of the earth monster. All these openings were designated ol (door
or hole). The souls of the dead, especially those of powerful rulers, could
hope to escape from the underworld by challenging, outwitting, and ﬁnally
killing its rulers, the Lords of Death. Then, by identifying themselves with
gods associated with the sun and the planet Venus, they could rise temporarily
out of the underworld into the daytime sky. The life-forces of dead rulers
could likewise ascend from their tombs and be reborn as future monarchs of
their dynastic lines. Divinized souls of kings were brieﬂy called back into the
world by their descendants’ vision quests. Ordinary souls appear to have been
trapped and doomed to oblivion in the underworld (D. Carrasco 1990: 52;

532
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 76–78; A. Miller 1989: 183–86; Schele and
Mathews 1998: 414; Schele and Miller 1986: 244–45).
The ancient Chinese appear to have believed that each person had at least
two souls: the po, which supplied the vital life-forces of a living person, and
the hun, which provided the intellect, emotions, and consciousness. The po,
sometimes referred to as the lower soul, was believed to come from the un-
derworld and the hun or upper soul from the sky realm. A child was born
with only a po and acquired its hun when it ﬁrst cried or laughed. Because the
souls of peasants were fed mainly on grain, they were believed to be weaker
than those of upper-class persons, who frequently ate meat and other more
nourishing foods (Granet 1958 [1930]: 256, 323–24; Lewis 1990: 77). When
people died, their po souls, like their bodies, descended into the earth. The
po travelled from the grave down to the Yellow Springs (huang quan), where
it remained as a ghost (gui) at least until its life-force was recycled. The hun
ascended into the sky, where it lived as a shining spirit (shen ming) that was
able to communicate with its living descendants and intercede for them with
the sky deities that controlled the natural world.
Dying lords sought to eat rich food and drink wine to nourish their hun souls
and increase their power to survive. The hun souls of dead members of the
nobility regularly received offerings of sacred harvests, domestic animals, and
game killed in their honour and could punish living descendants who failed
to provide them with satisfactory nourishment. Over time, the individuality
of dead ancestors faded from memory, as a result of which their hun came to
resemble nature spirits more. As this occurred, their name tablets in temples
were removed from view and put into a box with those of more remote ances-
tors. Berthold Laufer (1913) surmised that these tablets were a replacement
for earlier ancestral images. Peasant souls, being weaker, seem not to have
endured long after death and soon ceased to be useful intermediaries for their
descendants. Commoner lineages did not have special temples where the souls
of their ancestors were worshipped, but at speciﬁed times each year ordinary
families seem to have made offerings to their ancestors at altars located within
their homes (Granet 1958 [1930]: 256–57, 323–24; Lewis 1990: 87).
It has been suggested that the po, unlike the hun, originally received no
cult (Allan 1991: 66). In later times the po was believed to live near the body
in its tomb while the hun could be contacted at its lineage’s ancestral shrine
and communicated with by means of divination. Sacriﬁces, including human
beings and animals, were offered year after year around Shang royal tombs.
These rituals appear to have been focused on small mortuary structures atop
low stamped-earth platforms. Thus it appears that in the Shang period the
po souls or ghosts of royal ancestors were revered at individual graves, while

The Individual and the Universe
533
their hun souls were venerated collectively at ancestral temples inside palace
complexes (Wu 1988).
Prominent among the Andean accounts of human origins was the Inka claim
that, after Wiraqucha had created the sun at Lake Titicaca, he modelled ani-
mals and people from clay at the nearby site of the ancient city of Tiwanaku.
He distinguished ethnic groups by painting different clothes and hairstyles on
these ﬁgures, assigned them their distinctive languages, songs, and customs,
and endowed them with the materials and skills they needed to survive. In an
alternative creation myth, the sun and moon gave birth to Camac Pacha (Lord
Earth) and Mama Cocha (Lady Ocean), from whom in turn men and women
were descended (Classen 1993: 19–25; Rowe 1960). Wiraqucha commanded
the humans he had created to descend into the earth and travel through
underground passages to designated dawning places (pakarina), which were
distributed throughout the world. The ancestors of each ayllu emerged from
a speciﬁc pakarina. Some pakarinas were caves, others were mountains, tree
roots, or other natural features that facilitated movement back and forth be-
tween the surface of the earth and the underworld. The founders of each ayllu
claimed ownership of the land and water surrounding their pakarina for them-
selves and their descendants. At the same time, domestic plants emerged from
cave pakarinas and domestic animals from lake ones. Before disappearing into
the Paciﬁc, Wiraqucha visited every human community, teaching people how
they should live.
At every pakarina, one or more of the new arrivals was turned into a waka,
often in the form of a rock. Each waka embodied the life-force that would sus-
tain and be revered by a speciﬁc ayllu. From the ﬁrst arrivals future gener-
ations of human beings were born as the life-force, which had been created
by Wiraqucha and taken up permanent residence in the waka, combined with
local water sources to create living descendants. The most powerful beings
that Wiraqucha sent to inhabit the earth were four pairs of brothers and sis-
ters, who were children of the sun god, Inti. They emerged from a cave at
Paqariktambo, near Cuzco, at the dawn of the ﬁrst day to become the ances-
tors of the Inka royal family (Gose 1993; Kendall 1973: 182–83; Rowe 1944:
315–16; 1960; Sherbondy 1992: 63: Urton 1990).
The Andeans believed that life was created as a result of the combination of
dry,enduringsubstancessuchasearthandrockandmovingwater.Eachhuman
being was believed to have two kinds of souls, one associated with each of
these elements. The personal soul (kamaquen) was derived from the enduring
power to fashion and vitalize that was possessed in perpetuity by the founding
ancestor of an ayllu, who had been transformed into a waka or preserved as
a mummiﬁed (dried) body (mallqui). The power which vitalized such a waka

534
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
provided its descendants with food, clothing, agricultural fertility, reproductive
capacity, health, and oracular advice. Living in the heart (sonqo) of each of its
descendants, this eternal power shaped every individual’s bodily form and
character. The upani, an impersonal life-force, was associated with water. Its
main role was to transform the enduring essence of the kamaquen into a living
being. The upani was regarded as deaf and mute, a force that animated the
individual but did not otherwise shape the personality (Gose 1993; Salomon
1991: 14–16). Death resulted from the separation of the kamaquen and upani
souls. The physical manifestation of this separation was desiccation, which
occurred as water was withdrawn from the body. When a person died, his
or her heart and the personal kamaquen associated with it rejoined the waka
from which they were derived. For this reason, local wakas were used as burial
sites. The upani soul, attracted to water, drifted away and rejoined the nearest
lake, river, or spring, increasing its volume and helping to return water to its
ultimate source in the ocean.
The survival of an ayllu was made possible by an ongoing cycle of kamaquen
souls emanating from their waka to become human beings and then return-
ing to their source when people died. Mummiﬁcation, which involved drying
corpses while preserving their form, was an essential manifestation of this
process. While water drained away, the personal kamaquen soul endured as
long as the mummiﬁed body it was associated with lasted. That mummies of
commoners were preserved, fed, reclothed, and consulted as oracles indicates
that, while individual humans were manifestations of the generic kamaquen
dwelling within their ancestral waka, their individual souls survived after death
(Gose 1993; 1995; Salomon 1991: 19–20).
Dead ancestors issued oracles and punished their living descendants with
crop failures, disease, and death for improper conduct or neglect. Groups
that relocated took the bodies of their ancestors and all or portions of their
wakas with them and continued to venerate them in their new homes. Mum-
miﬁed bodies of dead kings became wakas of great importance, living kings
having been shaped by and embodying the power of the sun. Their per-
sonal kamaquens survived in association with their mummies and cult statues
and spoke through their oracle priests. Their kamaquens also rejoined the
kamaquen of the sun, and their hearts were placed in an image of the sun god
kept in the main temple in Cuzco. Dead kings continued to live in their palaces
and country houses but they were also said to have rejoined or become the
sun (Gose 1993; MacCormack 1991: 91–98, 424–32).
The Egyptians’ solar creator god was said to have formed human beings
(rmt) from his tears (rmyt), as a result of which humans lacked the clear vision
of the gods. Egyptian deities, according to some accounts, were formed from

The Individual and the Universe
535
the creator’s sweat or the blood that he lost while circumcising himself. Some
rebellious deities were believed to have been transformed into humans as well
as into animals destined for sacriﬁce (Faulkner 1985: 45; Hornung 1982: 149–
50; Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 33; Morenz 1973: 183). The potter god
Khnum was portrayed as fashioning the body of each child from clay on his
potter’s wheel. Female deities known as the Seven Hathors assigned individ-
uals their destiny (ˇs3w) when they were born. Their pronouncements greatly
inﬂuenced a person’s quality of life, life-span, and cause of death. However,
the gods could adjust individual destinies for better or worse throughout a
person’s lifetime. Responsibility for altering an individual’s fate may have been
assigned to a guardian deity (Baines 1991a: 140–41; Morenz 1973: 70–73).
The Egyptians believed that at least six elements were necessary for a human
being to exist. The body (ht, h
• ) or physical shell within which every person
existed was animated by its heart (ıb), the source of reason, memory, character,
emotions, desire, and pleasure. The name (rn) and the shadow (ˇswt) were
components of personhood, along with multiple souls, most notably the k3
and b3.
The k3, associated symbolically with the placenta and etymologically with
the concept of food or provisioning (k3w) and fertility (k3, bull; k3t, vulva)
(L. Bell 1997: 282 n. 2), was moulded by the god Khnum at the same time as
he fashioned the mortal body. It was portrayed in Egyptian art as a duplicate
of the living person. Described as related to physical nourishment, vitality,
and emotions, the k3 appears to have been the creative power passed from
parents to children within a family line. Each new k3, created for a speciﬁc
individual and apparently capable of enduring as long as the cosmos, seems to
have been a speciﬁc manifestation of a supernatural life-force transferred from
one generation to the next since the time of creation. Kings and gods possessed
multiple k3s while ordinary humans had only one and unlike ordinary humans
were able to communicate with them. Periodic unions of rulers and their k3s
in special ritual contexts rejuvenated and re-empowered monarchs. The b3
has been described as a supernatural force that provided perception, speciﬁc
appetites, and the power to inﬂuence other sentient beings. It could leave the
bodyandtravelindreamsabouttheearthaswellasvisittheskyandunderworld
and has therefore been described as a travelling soul (J. Allen 2000: 79–81;
Baines 1991a: 145; L. Bell 1997: 130–32; Kemp 1989: 208; Lichtheim 1973:
65; Morenz 1973: 158).
Death occurred when the k3 departed from the body. It was a depressing
event that stole living beings from their families and transferred them from
a fertile, living world into a realm of infertility, thirst, darkness, and uncon-
sciousness, where most of the time one person did not know another. Death

536
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
disrupted the unity of the life-forces that constituted an individual, although
Egyptians sought to do all they could to arrest this process. To prevent the dis-
integration of the corpse (h3t) they mummiﬁed and buried it in as elaborate
a tomb as an individual could afford. Once the body and its internal organs
were embalmed, the mouth of the dead person was symbolically opened prior
to interment so that the body might once again speak and eat.
In the tomb the corpse was reunited with its k3, which made the deceased
like a god (ntr). Each night, as the sun passed through the underworld (with
which the burial chamber was identiﬁed), the corpse was restored to life. Both
the corpse and its k3 were sustained by offerings of food, drink, and clothing
that were supposed to be provided on a daily basis. Rich tombs were decorated
with scenes of offerings being presented to the deceased and food being grown
and processed for these offerings to nourish the deceased if real food offerings
ceased. Texts promising offerings were erected in the accessible parts of tombs;
the reading of these formulae would also provide the corpse and its k3 with
food. Substitutes for the mummy in the form of cult statues and relief images
of the dead person were placed in the tomb chapel and local temples. Equally
important for the survival of the deceased was the preservation of his or her
name, which sustained the dead person’s identity and ensured that offerings
reached their intended recipient.
The corpse, animated by its k3, was able to journey to the kingdom of
Osiris, a fertile land where food was grown and corv´ee labour was performed
by wˇsbty (shawabti, ‘answerers’), human ﬁgurines magically programmed to
act in place of the dead person. It was only possible to stay in the kingdom of
Osiris, however, if the heart – the locus of memory – did not supply evidence
that a person had committed any one of forty-two misdeeds (h
• ww) of a ritual,
ethical, or criminal nature during his or her earthly existence. If the deceased
was not found innocent and acclaimed worthy (m3 h˘
rw) by the court which
judged the dead, his or her soul would be eaten by m mwt (the swallower of
the dead). Once again, magical means were employed to ensure a favourable
verdict. The dead who reached the kingdom of Osiris became identiﬁed with
its mummiﬁed ruler. Life in the tomb and in the kingdom of Osiris provided
the dead with a dt eternity.
The b3, represented in hieroglyphs by a jabiru stork or a human-headed
bird, maintained its life-force by periodically reuniting with the corpse and
k3 of the person to whom it belonged. It also visited the terrestrial world to
bring back food and drink for the corpse, communicating with living relatives
and friends of the dead person in dreams and visions that either reassured
or threatened them and haunting people in the form of a dangerous spirit of
the dead (mwt). The b3 was also the means by which dead males periodically

The Individual and the Universe
537
experienced sexual gratiﬁcation. (This belief was based on the homophony
between the words b3 [soul] and b3h
• [phallus].) B3s also descended into the
underworld and travelled to the sky, thus participating in the endless cycles
of death and rebirth that took place in the natural world and ensuring their
possessors of a nh
• h
• eternity for as long as the cosmos lasted. By ascending to
the sky the b3 could also become an 3h˘
, a radiant or transﬁgured spirit, in the
form of a star. As one of the circumpolar stars, the b3 could enjoy the same
dt immortality in the sky that the k3 did in the tomb. The k3, the b3, and the
corpse could hope to continue their association for as long as the universe lasted
and the individual sustained an existence and a personal identity provided that
some trace of his or her name, image, and provisioning endured. The corpse
also continued to be associated with attributes such as its shadow.
The Egyptans believed that the dead could use their supernatural powers
(h
• k3) to harm people who had treated them badly during their lifetime or
relatives who neglected to provision them after death. They could also use
their easier access to the gods to intervene in favour of relatives who pleased
them. If the dead were thought to be causing harm, letters addressed to them
were left at their tombs, seeking to learn what was troubling them and what
had to be done to win their approval. Answers appear to have been received
mainly in dreams. The supernatural powers of the dead do not appear to
have been markedly greater than those they possessed while alive. Moreover,
contact between the living and the dead seems to have lasted only as long as
people who had known the dead person remained alive (J. Allen 2000: 94–95;
Faulkner 1985; Morenz 1973: 187–212; Reeder 1998).
Egyptologists used to maintain that in the Old Kingdom it was believed
that only monarchs and those who were able to construct elaborate tombs
and endow them with perpetual funerary offerings were able to enjoy life
after death. It has long been evident, however, from the village cemeteries
that George Reisner (1932) excavated at Naga ed-Deir, in Upper Egypt, that
from Predynastic times ordinary people performed scaled-down versions of
the funerary cults of the upper classes. Excavations of the burials of craftsmen
and workmen who constructed the Fourth Dynasty Giza pyramid complex
have revealed small tombs and evidence of cults that were based on the same
general ideas that guided the burial practices of the upper classes (Davies
and Friedman 1998: 85–88). Hence it appears that, at least as early as the
Old Kingdom, all classes had generally similar aspirations concerning life after
death, even if the same marked social distinctions were observed in realizing
these aspirations that applied in everyday life. By the Middle Kingdom, all
who could afford it sought to identify themselves after death with Osiris, the
supreme exemplar of a god who was surviving in a changeless dt state. This

538
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
required embalming and the performance of costly, esoteric rituals that dur-
ing the Old Kingdom had remained the prerogatives of royalty. In the Old
Kingdom, the carving in tombs of magical texts to ensure the well-being of
the dead was limited to kings and occasionally queens. At the end of the Old
Kingdom, these writings became more widely known and, in the form of the
Cofﬁn Texts, were part of the burial equipment of all who could afford them.
belief and self-image
Myths concerning the creation of humanity indicate that in early civilizations
it was believed that the ﬁrst humans were brought into existence not only
by the gods but at least to some extent from the substance of the gods. This
view accords with the more general belief that the entire natural world was
animated by supernatural power, which seems to have been linked to beliefs
that prevailed in still earlier and less complex societies. Yet it was also empha-
sized in early civilizations that human beings had been created differently from
the gods and were inferior to them in their capacities. Moreover, upper-class
people often asserted that their origin was different from that of commoners.
In early civilizations the human body was believed to be animated by multi-
ple supernatural forces rather than by a single soul. (The Mesopotamians are
generally assumed to have viewed the body as being animated by a single soul,
but their beliefs may have been inadvertently misinterpreted to make them
more closely resemble modern Western ones; the bones may have constituted
a separate life-force that complemented the etemmu-soul, which embodied
consciousness.) Often the main distinction was between the life-forces that an-
imated the body and made it function and an intellect power that constituted
an individual’s mind. One or the other of these souls generally had the power
to move beyond the living body in dreams and the imagination. In general, it
was believed that these souls constituted a unity focused on the body while
the person was alive but separated from one another after death. In Egypt and
among the Inka the body was regarded as an important component of the dead
person; the Mesopotamians, Yoruba, Chinese, and Maya attached importance
to the bones of their ancestors and continued to guard and venerate them.
Various life-forces were thought to survive the deaths of individuals and
be recycled to younger generations of the same family or to become part of
a pool of cosmic energy that animated future human beings or the universe
generally. While personality traits or the appearance of the deceased might be
transmittedalongwithsuchforces,suchenergydidnotconserveanysigniﬁcant
aspects of individual consciousness, personal identity, or memory. In contrast
to the conception of reincarnation of some later preindustrial South Asian and

The Individual and the Universe
539
East Asian civilizations, the soul does not appear to have been conscious at any
point of previous existences. Nor was moral behaviour in one life believed to
inﬂuence how that energy was reincarnated as it did according to the Hindu
doctrine of karma. What varied considerably in early civilizations was the extent
to which a personal identity was believed to survive the dispersal of life-forces
following death. Wherever such a personal identity survived, it was believed to
depend heavily on offerings made by the living, usually its own descendants, for
its power and quality of life. There was only a limited tendency to view the fate
of human personalities after death as being linked to an individual’s conduct
while alive. Morality appears to have been generally viewed as a communal
matter rather than as a personal or religious one.
The evidence concerning beliefs about the destiny of the individual after
death does not indicate that ordinary people living in city-states imagined a
better fate than was anticipated by commoners living in territorial states. All
the inhabitants of territorial states, whatever their class, seem to have believed
they had a better chance of individual survival and a tolerable existence after
death than did the inhabitants of city-states. The well-demarcated class hier-
archies and the opulence of upper-class life in territorial states encouraged the
upper classes to anticipate a comfortable personal survival after death, and this
belief may have spread as a result of status emulation among the lower classes
(Cannon 1989). In Egypt, for example, from Predynastic times on, burial cus-
toms diffused from the royal court to progressively lower social strata, with each
class imitating the practices of the upper classes to the extent that its more
limited resources and access to esoteric religious knowledge permitted. The
spells contained in the Pyramid Texts, which were collated for royal burials,
ceased to be royal prerogatives during the First Intermediate Period, when all
aspired to be identiﬁed after death with the god Osiris (Davies and Friedman
1998: 85–88; Lehner 1997).
In city-state civilizations the existence of a hereditary upper class might
be thought to have encouraged the development of a similar optimism about
life after death that would have diffused among commoners. Yet the most
pessimistic early civilization in our sample was that of the Valley of Mexico,
where, despite having a hereditary nobility, people believed that no individual
identity survived for more than four years after death. The Yoruba, who did not
have a hereditary nobility but had royal clans that traced their descent from
the gods, may or may not have believed in the long-term survival of a personal
identity for any dead person. The Maya, who appear to have had a hereditary
nobility, believed in a relatively favourable survival after death for resourceful
members of the upper class but had lower expectations for commoners. The
randomness of these cases suggests that formal class stratiﬁcation by itself did

540
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
notmakeasigniﬁcantdifference.Asimilarsituationprevailedamongterritorial
states, where the Egyptians, who tended to de-emphasize hereditary descent
and inherited membership in an upper class, were at least as optimistic about
life after death as the Inka and Chinese, for whom hereditary upper-class status
was a basis of political order.
While the upper classes in territorial states stressed their similarities to the
gods, the upper classes in rivalrous city-states, whether or not these classes
were formally deﬁned, viewed the world as a risky place in which they as well
as commoners existed to serve the gods. While the optimism that all ancient
Egyptians and both Inka rulers and their subjects shared about personal life
after death contrasted with the pessimism of the Aztec, Mesopotamians, and,
to a lesser extent, the Yoruba, the Chinese may have been less optimistic about
the fate of commoners than people in other territorial states, while the Maya
appear to have been more optimistic about the fate of the upper classes than
people in other city-state civilizations. Even so, the view that all Maya shared
concerning the underworld was a gloomy one, while the early Chinese appear
to have envisaged everyone as sharing a more promising fate after death than
the Mesopotamians or the peoples of the Valley of Mexico.
Beliefs about souls and life-forces in early civilizations appear to have been
based on ideas that were widespread if not panhuman prior to the develop-
ment of these civilizations. Yet the adaptation of these views to the needs of
hierarchical societies produced numerous unanticipated parallels among his-
torically unrelated societies. In general, the beliefs evolved by the upper classes
played a major role in inﬂuencing what the lower classes believed. While sta-
tus differences in early civilizations are reﬂected in beliefs about the fate of
individuals after death, the greater sense of security and self-importance of the
ruling classes and the greater opportunities for status emulation in territorial
states were very important in determining how these views were expressed in
particular societies.

24 Elite Art and Architecture
C
lass hierarchies are held together by the ‘unproductive uses of eco-
nomic surplus’ (Eyer 1984: 52). In early civilizations conspicuous con-
sumption afﬁrmed the power of the upper classes and served to distinguish
strata amongst them. Ordinary people – supporting themselves with simple
technologies, able to produce only meagre food surpluses, and allowed by
rulers to keep only a small portion of those surpluses – easily appreciated the
social signiﬁcance of the ruling classes’ being able to expend large amounts
of surplus energy on non-utilitarian projects. Key examples of such undertak-
ings were the creation of costly luxury goods and monumental architecture –
cost being measured by the amount of labour required to produce them
(Maisels 1999: 344). The ability of the upper classes to sponsor such produc-
tion reinforced their political power in the imaginations of ordinary people,
even though it was lower-class craft workers and corv´ee labourers who were
the producers. Public displays of such production encouraged the loyalty and
obedience of the lower classes (Tate 1992: 31).
Yetsuchafunctionalistapproachdoesnotaccountforalltheevidence.While
temples, palaces, and tombs were often impressive from the outside, much
elaborateartandarchitectureremainedhiddenfrompublicview.Mostpalaces,
temples, and government buildings were located behind walls that prevented
ordinary people from observing what was inside them. Functionalists can argue
that what was visible only to the upper classes reinforced their self-image and
helped to demarcate and reinforce internal hierarchies. Even so, some of the
most costly and elaborate art was hidden away in the darkened, innermost
rooms of temples, which only a few ofﬁcials and priests ever entered, or went
straight from the workshop to the tomb. This magniﬁcent art was intended to
be viewed only by the gods and by the dead, not by living humans.
In considering the art and architecture of early civilizations, it is impos-
sible to separate functional considerations from symbolic ones. An Egyptian
541

542
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
pyramid complex may have been the supreme manifestation of royal authority
because of its size and elegance, but it was also built to protect the body of
a dead pharaoh, nourish his k3 souls, facilitate the movement of his b3 souls
back and forth between the earth and the sky, and maintain the cosmic order.
Mesopotamian temples were expressions of community pride and identity and
of royal power, but they were also manifestations of the supernatural power
or auras of their resident deities (Jacobsen 1976: 16). Maya temples were be-
lieved to be animated by supernatural power that accumulated as the result
of a divine presence within them and made them ever more effective loca-
tions for communicating with the gods (Fox 1996: 485; Schele and Freidel
1990: 72–73). Egyptian tomb art sought to nourish the dead, while Egyptian
and Yoruba cult statues were created and used to focus supernatural power
(R. Thompson 1976: 20/1). In early civilizations, art and architecture were no
less vehicles for managing sacred powers and conducting relations with the
supernatural than they were social-regulatory statements. Claims of supernat-
ural power acquired meaning and validity through the expenditure of material
resources.
Art and architecture are both commonly viewed as quintessential products
of idiosyncratically variable cultural traditions. While buildings perform social
functions and their design is subject to various material limitations, stylistic
innovation in art and architecture is regarded as relatively free from environ-
mental and social constraints and predominantly inﬂuenced by cultural tra-
ditions. Even modern neophytes can soon learn to distinguish the formal art
and monumental architecture of one early civilization from those of another.
This is much harder to do with the less elaborate symbolic creations and house
types associated with commoners in the same societies. It is therefore assumed
that, stylistically, thematically, and iconographically, art and architecture var-
ied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another and, of the two, art
probably varied more because it was subject to even fewer formal constraints.
While the highly stylized art and architecture that were associated with
the upper classes had their origins in the less hierarchical cultures that had
developed into early civilizations, both art and architecture were strongly in-
ﬂuenced by increasing social complexity. They evolved distinctive forms that
reﬂected the growing class hierarchy. This development constituted the differ-
entiation of what Robert Redﬁeld called a ‘Great Tradition’, the deliberately
cultivated lifestyles of the upper classes, from the ‘Little Tradition’ of the lower
classes. While Little Traditions routinely absorbed elements of elite lifestyles,
they were basically continuations of long-established cultural traditions at the
community level. Within these local traditions, themes, iconography, and style
were not consistently harmonized to the same degree as they were in Great

Elite Art and Architecture
543
Traditions (Maisels 1999: 355–56; Marriott 1955; Redﬁeld 1941). It seems ap-
propriate to refer to the art associated with these two traditions as ‘elite art’
and ‘commoner art’ respectively. Philip Dark (1973: 61–62) has noted that in
Benin there were what he called ‘court’ and ‘plebeian’ versions of the cutaway
mud sculpture used to decorate the walls of shrines, the court style being lim-
ited to Benin City and the work of specialized priests. While ordinary people
might carry on traditions inherited from earlier and simpler times, each Great
Tradition and its associated elite art and architecture were new creations that
involved the radical transformation of old ways of doing things to satisfy new
social needs (Haselberger 1961).
elite art
Formal, highly sophisticated art was produced by unusually skilled craft work-
ers for the upper classes. Some were employed full-time by particular patrons.
Especially in territorial states, the most skillful artisans worked for the gov-
ernment or for kings, setting standards of excellence for the whole society. In
these cases, Redﬁeld’s Great Tradition is often called a ‘court culture’ (Kemp
1989: 64–65; Willett 1967: 162). The quality of what skilled artisans created
reﬂected the extent to which patrons supported their work, greater investment
permitting more specialization, the use of more costly and exotic materials, and
greater attention to detail.
Highly sophisticated art that is acclaimed for its aesthetic qualities was also
produced by part-time specialists working in small-scale societies. The sculp-
ture of the aboriginal peoples of coastal British Columbia, for example, has
been compared to that of Classical Greece (L´evi-Strauss 1982). Art of this sort
did not, however, employ as wide a range of exotic materials or such elabo-
rate technologies as did the art created in early civilizations. Moreover, even if
high-ranking persons commissioned the production of such art as a strategy for
self-promotion, this art resulted from the relentless competition for prestige
among rival individuals, kin groups, age-grades, and communities rather than
the use by established upper classes of distinctive forms of art to represent
their superior status in early civilizations. What the two forms of artistic pro-
duction shared was the investment of wealth to produce highly visible material
status symbols.
While modern scholars conventionally refer to the items that were specially
produced for the upper classes in early civilizations as works of ‘art’ and to their
producers as ‘artists’, there is no evidence that concepts genuinely equivalent
to these existed in early civilizations (Tate 1992: 30). High-quality work was
produced by elite artisans who possessed the specialized skills, raw materials,

544
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and resources needed to create the superior work desired by their patrons.
Minor ofﬁcials who had special drawing skills and knowledge of iconography
were often involved in designing such items and overseeing their production.
These ofﬁcials would have been the intermediaries between upper-class pa-
trons and the craft workers who physically manufactured luxury goods.
Individual works of high quality were frequently produced by teams of
artisans labouring together. Egyptian workshop scenes depict a number of
sculptors working simultaneously on large stone statues. Bas-reliefs appear to
havebeendesignedanddrawnontolimestoneorplasterwallsbyliteratescribe-
artists who specialized in such work and then chiselled out by stonemasons and
coloured by specialized painters (Andreu 1997: 61–65). Designing and drawing
also seem to have been separate from stone-carving among the Classic Maya.
Two or more Maya designers, as well as two or more stonecutters, sometimes
worked on the same monument (Tate 1992: 40–49). Fourteen sculptors are
reported to have jointly carved a now destroyed statue of the Aztec ruler
Mochtezuma II at Chapultepec (Berdan 1982: 153). Shang bronze-casting
requiredlarge,well-coordinatedteamsofhighlyspecializedartisanstoproduce
high-quality vessels (Treistman 1972: 84–93). At least one Egyptian sculptor
recorded his name and a small image of himself in a tomb that he decorated for
a high-ranking ofﬁcial of the Old Kingdom, presumably with the permission of
thetomb’sowner(Strouhal1992:166–67).Mayaindividualsassociatedwiththe
production of stone monuments recorded their names on some carved stone
lintels and stelae (Tate 1992: 45–47). However, while skilled artisans appear
to have been greatly valued and well-treated by their patrons or clients, most
of them remained anonymous.
The teamwork and general anonymity of the people who produced the major
art works of early civilizations more closely approximate the modern concept of
a skilled artisan or master craft worker than they do the idea of an artist. Like
modern artisans, master artisans in early civilizations sought to work within
established aesthetic traditions rather than to transcend them by dramatic acts
of personal creativity. Especially skilled Yoruba wood-carvers acquired reputa-
tions for being able to infuse their creations with unusual amounts of spiritual
power, and this ensured that they received important commissions. Yet such
reputations were based on their ability to innovate within a traditional frame-
work (R. Thompson 1976: 19/1). Master craft workers were the response to a
growing demand for outstanding products by upper-class individuals or insti-
tutions. Such patrons provided artisans with the resources that allowed them to
devote large amounts of time to developing skills and producing high-quality
items.

Elite Art and Architecture
545
In early civilizations there was no equivalent of art for art’s sake. Artistic
creations indicated their owners’ or donors’ social standing as well as serving
religious and practical functions. Upper-class Egyptian jewellery, in addition
to signifying the social status of its wearers, incorporated or took the form of
amulets that protected such individuals from attacks by evil spirits. The elab-
orate gold vessels used to serve food and drink to the Inka ruler distinguished
him from other people and also symbolically reafﬁrmed his connection with
the sun god. John Baines and Norman Yoffee (1998: 235) have proposed that
‘aesthetic items’ would be a more appropriate designation than ‘works of art’
for the special creations of early civilizations. It is tempting to go still farther
and designate these items ‘elite goods’, thereby eliminating any reference to
subjective and little understood artistic considerations. Moreover, some highly
prized crowns and royal insignia were manufactured from inexpensive, locally
available materials using widely practised and not especially elaborate tech-
niques. What distinguished these products was that only certain people were
allowed to make and use them. These elite insignia may have been no less
valued by the upper classes, but they differed in terms of how they were man-
ufactured from goods produced from rare and valuable materials by highly
specialized artisans. The cost of producing the latter items ensured that they
could not be copied or usurped by the lower classes. It therefore seems ap-
propriate to retain the designation ‘elite art’ as an admittedly approximate and
ethnocentric gloss for elite goods that required special skills and high economic
expenditures to produce.
Each early civilization created elite art that was stylistically unique. Even
the Classic Maya and the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, whose cultures
were expressions of a single Mesoamerican cultural tradition, created highly
divergent art. Egyptian relief sculpture, with its serene, hieroglyphic-like hu-
man ﬁgures arranged in registers against a ﬂat background, shared numerous
features with Aztec relief sculpture (Pasztory 1983; Nicholson and Qui˜nones
Keber 1983; Robins 1997; Townsend 1979), but the iconographies of the two
sculptures were completely different. The Egyptian symbolic variations in ﬁg-
ure size, more open backgrounds, and more elaborate arrangements of regis-
ters are not found in the relief styles of the Valley of Mexico. Neither relief style
can be confused with that of the Classic Maya, with its ﬂowing lines and dense,
convoluted layouts (Baudez 1994; Benson and Grifﬁn 1988). Nor can Maya
vase-painting, with its sinuous lines and washed colours, be confused with the
mural or codex paintings of the Aztec and their neighbours, which featured
heavy outlines ﬁlled with bright, uniform colours, expressionless faces, and a
strong emphasis on the symbolic details of costumes (Coe 1978; M. E. Smith

24.1. Classic Maya and Valley of Mexico painting styles: (a) detail from the Quirarte vase, apparently showing gods of the Maya
underworld; (b) ﬁrst page of a ritual almanac, the Codex Fejervary-Mayer. The highland Mexican Fire God Xiuhtecuhtli is shown in the
centre, east is at the top. Sources: (a) after Bassie-Sweet 1991: 139; (b) with thanks to the Board of Trustees of the National Museums
and Galleries on Merseyside [Liverpool Museum].

Elite Art and Architecture
547
0
20 cm
0
10 cm
a
b
24.2. Early Shang ritual vessels cast in bronze from Zhengzhou. Sources: Wen Wu, no. 3, 1983,
pp. 53–57.
1996: 263–64; Smith and Heath-Smith 1980) (Fig. 24.1). Shang metallurgy
and wood-carving, with their abstract, balanced, and geometricized ﬁgures of
animals or parts of animals covering whole surfaces (Fig. 24.2), cannot be
mistaken for the more realistic and simply decorated statues of people, an-
thropomorphic deities, and animals fashioned by Inka craft workers (Chˆeng
1960: 233–38; Stierlin 1984). Yoruba wood sculpture, with its large heads, sim-
pliﬁed extremities, and emphasis on cylindrical shapes, was very different from
Egyptian stone or wood sculpture, with its frontality, symmetry, blockiness, and
idealized naturalism, and from Mesopotamian stone statues, with their large
round eyes, introspective gaze, and elongated forms (Abiodun, Drewal, and
Pemberton 1994; R. Armstrong 1981; Ben-Amos 1995; Ben-Amos and Rubin
1983; Dark 1973; Forman, Forman, and Dark 1960; R. Thompson 1976)
(Fig. 24.3). Mesopotamian relief sculpture differed from that of Egypt in
terms of its more deeply cut ﬁgures, greater emphasis on human muscula-
ture, and more crowded compositions, as well as its different themes (Caubet
and Pouyssegur 1998).
In territorial states centralized control and patronage of the production
of sophisticated art tended to promote a polity-wide uniformity of style. In
Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, the production of luxury goods was centred
around the royal court, near Memphis, while in the New Kingdom there were

548
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
Egypt
Mesopotamia
Yoruba-Benin
Shang China
f

Elite Art and Architecture
549
subtle stylistic differences between goods produced at Memphis and at Thebes
(Fuerstein 1999; Martin 1991). The Inka rulers established a uniform style of
elite craft production that was evident both in objects made of precious metals,
created at a small number of government workshops, and in painted pottery,
manufactured at numerous sites throughout the kingdom. The Shang state was
characterized by a distinctive art style that would have required standardizing
bronze-casting activities at various administrative centres (Thorp 1985).
Each city-state system also had a distinctive, shared art style, presumably
disseminated and sustained by interstate contacts among the upper classes
of neighbouring city-states, the trading of luxury produce, and sometimes
the movement of elite craft workers from one state to another. Shared styles
reﬂected and reinforced a sense of cultural identity among the upper classes of
neighbouring city-states and facilitated communication concerning numerous
matters of common interest. Yet individual city-states and their upper classes
also expressed their identities with local variations in art styles. Western Maya
kingdoms such as Palenque and Piedras Negras were the only Classic Maya
states to move from single-ﬁgure to multiple-ﬁgure sculptural compositions. In
addition to erecting the free-standing vertical stelae found in most Maya states,
the rulers of these kingdoms decorated buildings with elaborately carved stone
wall panels and lintels. While upper-class costumes and the use of symbols
also varied from one Maya urban centre to another (Tate 1992: xii), changes
in the representation of dress and the positioning of ﬁgures permit stelae
throughout the Maya area to be dated to within less than a century on the basis
of stylistic criteria (Proskouriakoff 1950). This suggests that artists in different
Maya centres must have communicated extensively with one another.
Yoruba art also varied in style and motifs from one region and one urban
centre to another (R. Armstrong 1981: 91). This variation is clear in both wood-
carving, which varied regionally, and the ritual bronze heads produced at Ife
and the brass ones of Benin. Although the tradition of casting these heads
24.3. Statues in early civilizations: (a) Egyptian painted limestone statue of Nofret, wife of
Rahotep, a high ofﬁcial and member of the royal family, from Meidum, early Dynasty IV, height
120 cm; (b) painted limestone statue of a scribe from Saqqara, name lost, Dynasty V, height
50 cm; (c) Mesopotamian limestone female worshipper statue, from Khafaja, Early Dynastic
period, height 37 cm; (d) bronze head of Akkadian monarch, either Sargon or Naramsin, found
at Nineveh, height 37 cm; (e) brass head of the Late Period (nineteenth century) from Benin,
probably associated with the cult of a dead ruler, height 52 cm; (f) jade statuette of a standing
dignitary, Shang period, height 9 cm. Sources: (a),(b) Egyptian Museum, Cairo (photos courtesy
ofScala/ArtResource,NYandFototecaInternacionalLda/ArtResource,NY);(c)IraqMuseum,
Baghdad (photo courtesy of Scala/Art Resource, NY); (d) J. G. Macqueen, Babylon (London,
1964), 25; (e) after Willett 1967: 155; (f) courtesy of the Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Harvard
University Art Museums, Bequest of Grenville L. Winthrop (photo Michael Nedzweski and
Junius Beebe, c⃝President and Fellows of Harvard College).

550
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
is reported to have been introduced to Benin from Ife, the oldest surviving
headsatBeninhaveadifferent,morestylizedformfromcontemporaryIfeones
(Dark 1973: 8–9). Art styles also appear to have varied from one Mesopotamian
city-state to another and among different states in the Valley of Mexico. It has
not been ascertained, however, to what extent observed differences repre-
sented expressions of local identity. Both in the Valley of Mexico and among
the Yoruba, towns tended to specialize in the production of different kinds of
luxury goods, which were traded over considerable distances.
Elite art traditions could evolve rapidly when social circumstances were
propitious. In Egypt such a tradition developed, beginning in Upper Egypt, in
the generations that immediately preceded and followed the uniﬁcation of the
country. Rows of animals and antithetical arrangements of humans on stone
palettes and ivory knife handles gave way to scenes that were increasingly
dominated by the monarch, who came to be represented as acting without any
human assistance. At the same time, human beings, animals, and plants were
represented in ever more conventionalized forms that were to persist with only
minor modiﬁcations for over three thousand years. Apart from the appearance
of a few short-lived motifs that may have been of Mesopotamian or Elamite
origin, this appears to have been a purely internal development (Joffe 2000;
Kemp 1989: 19–63).
The Aztec, in contrast, acquired their ﬁrst elite stone-sculptors following
their conquest, early in the ﬁfteenth century, of the neighbouring hegemonic
city of Azcapotzalco, to which they had hitherto been tributary. Previously
Azcapotzalco and Culhuacan had been the two major centres of stone-carving
in the Valley of Mexico. Aztec sculptors drew inspiration from the large stone
images visible in the ruins of the ancient city of Tula, seventy kilometres to
the north, some of which they brought to Tenochtitlan. They and others in
the southern part of the valley also adopted Huaxtec models for producing
three-dimensional cult efﬁgies. As Aztec power grew, craft workers evolved a
dynamic new style that emphasized bolder compositions and more dynamic
and anatomically observant representations of the human body. By the late
ﬁfteenth century Tenochtitlan was the pre-eminent centre of stone-carving in
central Mexico.
While the Egyptians had to invent their own style of monumental art, the
Aztec were able to draw upon various older traditions. Relatively quickly, how-
ever, they evolved their own distinctive style of stone-carving, which they em-
ployed alongside introduced ones (Townsend 1979). Maya art was inﬂuenced
by earlier Olmec and Izapan styles, which the Maya transformed to create a
new and distinctive style (Coe 1977; Quirarte 1977). Shang elite productions
retained the basic shapes of the Neolithic art of northern China while their

Elite Art and Architecture
551
technical expertise and the ﬂamboyance of their decoration increased dramat-
ically, creating an ever-greater contrast with the goods produced by and for
the lower classes (Bagley 1999: 146–53; Keightley 1969: 60).
In some early civilizations elite art acquired a uniform style regardless of
the material that was being worked. In Egypt jewellery, furniture, sculpture,
and relief carvings that were produced for the upper classes exhibited the
same style and ornamentation whether they were manufactured from stone,
metal, or wood. Pottery by this time had become purely utilitarian and was
largely undecorated. Throughout the course of ancient Egyptian civilization,
the elite style slowly changed, but any innovations continued to inﬂuence goods
produced in all materials. It is known from historical records that different
materials were worked by separate groups of craft specialists. The stylistic
unity of Egyptian art therefore reﬂected the taste of patrons and the control
that the royal court and bureaucracy were able to exert over various groups
of artisans. It also indicated the extent to which the upper classes viewed the
goods made for their use as material expressions of their class identity and unity
vis-`a-vis ordinary people. Although the stylistic unity of elite craft products was
disrupted during the First Intermediate Period, a uniﬁed style remained the
ideal and once again became a reality in the Middle Kingdom (W. Smith 1958).
Shang bronze-casting, the carving of jade, turquoise, marble, ivory, shell,
and wood, and the manufacturing of ornate pottery all employed the same
highly stylized composite animal motifs and the same complex geometrical
patterns (Chˆeng 1960: 233–38). This uniformity attests to the ability of upper-
class patrons to impose their shared tastes on groups of craft specialists living
and working in small communities.
Inka production of elite goods appears to have been less stylistically uni-
ﬁed. Gold and silver ornaments produced for the state tended to emphasize
simplicity and plainness, while pottery and fancy cloth were decorated with
extremely complex geometrical patterns (Fig. 24.4). These varied produc-
tions tended to share an underlying sense of order, formal clarity, balanced
proportions, and clean outlines (Jones 1964: 5; Stierlin 1984). Thus in each
territorial state an elite art style which exhibited varying degrees of stylistic
homogeneity in relation to different raw materials played a major role in rein-
forcing a sense of unity within a governing class that was dispersed over a large
region.
In city-states elite and commoner art tended to be less sharply differenti-
ated than in territorial states. There was also less stylistic unity in the output
of different crafts. The lack of a clear distinction between art created for
the upper classes and commoner art resulted in part from skilled artisans’
producing for a broader social spectrum than artisans in territorial states.

552
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
f
24.4. Inka art styles: (a) hollow anthropomorphic silver ﬁgurine – such ﬁgurines, often clothed
in miniature textile garments were used as offerings, height 20.3 cm; (b) silver image of a llama
made of pieces of hammered sheet silver soldered into place, also used as offering, height
12.7 cm; (c) – (f) Inka decorated ceramics. All these objects would have been manufactured
in state production centres. Sources: (a) – (f) after V. W. von Hagen, Realms of the Incas
(New York, 1957), 78, 90, 168, 172.
Particularly in city-state systems that lacked a hereditary nobility, different
crafts tended to have their own styles. Among the Yoruba, the style em-
ployed by wood-carvers in any one community differed from the styles as-
sociated with ironworking, bronze- or brass-casting, terracotta-ﬁgure-making,
stone-carving, pottery-making, bead work, leather work, resist-dyeing, and
the decoration of calabashes (Bascom 1969: 111; R. Thompson 1976: 1/1). In
Mesopotamia the same motifs and styles were used on stone cylinder seals,
metal temple and palace decorations, and stone relief-carving but absent on
a wide range of mundane objects, including clay statues intended for house-
hold use. The representational motifs employed in painting and sculpture
were totally absent from elite jewellery. This suggests that temple and palace
institutions imposed some degree of uniformity on artisans who worked for
them full-time or even part-time but could not (or chose not to) inﬂuence
the full range of their production. That temples and palaces appear to have
patronized similar art styles may reﬂect either an attempt to impose a com-
mon elite identity on the art sponsored by these two types of institutions or,
more likely, kings’ patronizing the production of major art works for temples

Elite Art and Architecture
553
(Caubet and Pouysseggur 1998; Collon 1987; Crawford 1991: 155–67;
Frankfort 1954).
Aztec stone-carvers, employed mainly by the state, evolved a distinctive
style, although stone cult images continued to be manufactured in the Huaxtec
style.Featherworkers,whomayoriginallyhavebeenofforeignorigin,carefully
adhered to local iconography. Gold jewellery stylistically resembled what was
produced by the Mixtec, but it too incorporated local iconography. Manuscript
and mural-painting were executed in a style that appears to have been derived
from Puebla and Cholula. While there were some tendencies towards greater
stylistic unity in Aztec art, the upper classes appear to have tolerated and even
valued foreign styles that enjoyed regional prestige. This same attitude may
have encouraged the highest levels of Aztec society to use only painted ceramic
vessels imported from Cholula (M. E. Smith 1996: 99–107).
The Classic Maya employed similar styles for carving stone, wood, and jade
objects and for painting murals such as the ones that decorated the interior
of a small three-room temple at Bonampak. Scenes painted on high-quality
ceramic vessels were executed in a more ﬂuid style, and the iconography was
different from that used in public art, but the general approach was much the
same. Similar forms governed the production of elaborate representational
(so-called eccentric) ﬂints (Hanks and Rice 1989). The stylistic uniformity of
Classic Maya art may partly reﬂect the greater geographical isolation of most
Maya groups from alternative artistic traditions than was the case with states in
the Valley of Mexico. It may also, however, indicate that the Maya upper class,
like that of territorial states, exerted stronger controls over the production of
various groups of elite specialists, who lived and worked in separate residential
groups in Maya urban centres.
The materials used to manufacture high-quality art varied considerably from
one culture to another. The ancient Egyptians produced stone statues, re-
lief sculpture, and fancy jars and dishes. In the Old Kingdom, statues varied
from small to more than life-size. By the Middle Kingdom, some colossal stone
statues were being produced for kings and hereditary nobles. Limestone and
sandstone were most frequently worked, but harder rocks, such as granite
and diorite, were also carved (DePutter and Karlshausen 1997). In addition,
life-size statues were made of wood and sheet copper and small ones cast
of precious metals. Gold and semiprecious stones were used to create fancy
jewellery, copper and gold to fashion serving vessels, and imported cedar wood
and gold leaf to produce ornate furniture and burial equipment. Faience, or
blue frit, was a cheap substitute for turquoise.
The Mesopotamians used limestone and alabaster, which they quarried close
by, and sometimes imported harder rocks, such as diorite, to carve reliefs,

554
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
stelae, small statues, doorpost sockets, and cylinder seals. Precious metals
were employed to produce jewellery and copper and bronze to manufacture
vases and statues.
The Maya carved stelae, lintels, and decorated panels from limestone, tufa,
and hardwoods and fashioned painted reliefs of moulded or carved plaster.
Painted scenes were also applied to ﬂat plaster surfaces. Jewellery was made
of jade and fancy painted vessels and statues of pottery.
The Aztec carved statues, temple furniture, and relief sculpture from stone,
painted murals on plaster, and manufactured jewellery and ornaments from
jade, obsidian, wood inlaid with turquoise, gold, and copper. Feathers and
feather work were highly valued. While high-quality pottery vessels were im-
ported from beyond the valley, large terracotta statues were manufactured
locally.
The Shang Chinese lavished their greatest artistic skills on the casting of
ritual vessels and elite weapons from bronze. They also carved and lacquered
wood, sometimes in the form of large room panels, and manufactured orna-
ments from jade, shell, and bone. Only a few small human and animal statues
were carved from stone. Fancy pottery was decorated with stamped and incised
patterns.
The Inka fashioned statues and ornaments from gold, silver, and bronze.
They also produced high-quality painted pottery and wove fancy clothing. Al-
though they could work hard stone with great precision, they did not carve
statues or bas-reliefs from it. Stone buildings were ornamented with trape-
zoidal niches but only rarely with simple carved motifs.
The most elaborate and highly prized Yoruba artistic creations were rit-
ual human heads cast from copper or brass and elaborately decorated metal
plaques that were used to cover wooden doors and pillars. The most common
material for works of art was wood, which was carved and painted to produce
statues, masks, and fancy doors for shrines, palaces, and ofﬁcials’ houses. Art
works were also made of ivory. At Ife nearly life-size statues were moulded from
terracotta (Ojo 1966a: 252). Jewellery and cult equipment were manufactured
from brass, iron, and carved ivory. Red coral and glass beads, especially glass
beads fom Ife, were highly valued. The stone statues carved in some localities
were very crudely executed (Stevens 1978).
There was no cross-cultural uniformity in the materials preferred for artis-
tic expression. Egyptians, Maya, Mesopotamians, and Aztec lavished particular
attention on carved stone, but other early civilizations did not. This neglect
was especially curious for the Inka, who worked even the hardest types of rock
expertly for architectural purposes. Moreover, the ruins of Tiwanaku, which
may have inspired Inka stone construction, contained numerous stone reliefs

Elite Art and Architecture
555
and statues. Metals were important vehicles for artistic expression among the
Chinese, Inka, Mesopotamians, Egyptians, and Yoruba but of minor impor-
tance in the Valley of Mexico and rare and entirely imported among the Classic
Maya. Various forms of jadeite were highly valued by the Chinese and Maya
and in the Valley of Mexico. Wood-carving was a signiﬁcant art form among
the Yoruba, in Egypt, in Shang China, and among the Maya. Pottery vessels
were a focus of elite art among the Maya, Inka, and Shang Chinese and to a
lesser degree in the Valley of Mexico, while high-quality ceramic statues were
produced by the Aztec, Yoruba, and Maya. Elsewhere, even where ceramics
had formerly been a signiﬁcant artistic medium, as in Egypt and Mesopotamia,
it was reduced to utilitarian status as new, more exotic materials became the
preferred means of artistic expression. Murals painted on plaster played an
important role in Aztec, Maya, Mesopotamian, and Egyptian culture. Feather
work was greatly prized in the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya. Fancy
cloth was an especially important medium of artistic expression among the
Inka.
It is difﬁcult to correlate these variations with the availability of materials.
Egyptians and Andean highlanders had equal access to many types of stone, but
the Inka made almost no use of them except for their extensive architectural
projects. While both the Yoruba and the Maya had access to a wide variety
of hardwoods, the Maya tended to use stone instead. Everywhere there was
some preference for durable materials and for scarce and exotic ones, but this
emphasis was not overwhelming. The selection of materials for creating elite
art seems to have reﬂected many idiosyncratic cultural preferences.
More cross-cultural regularity can be discerned when art is examined the-
matically. Elite art in most early civilizations emphasized images of rulers and
deities. In general, anthropomorphic beings were portrayed in a more de-
tailed, naturalistic fashion and to a much greater degree in early civilizations
than in the small-scale societies from which they had evolved. The Assyriologist
V. K. Afanasieva (1991: 128) suggests that art produced prior to the develop-
ment of early civilizations depicted human beings, if at all, only as integral
parts of nature. She maintains that the emphasis on human ﬁgures and their
more realistic portrayal in early civilizations reﬂected a new self-conﬁdence
and sense of power resulting from greater control over nature and perhaps
increased isolation from it. There is, however, no obvious support for this
generalization.
The elite art of the ancient Egyptians, Mesopotamians, Classic Maya, and
the Valley of Mexico accorded prominence to naturalistic, if often highly styl-
ized, anthropomorphic ﬁgures, with a special emphasis on deities, kings, and
other persons of high rank. The Yoruba produced naturalistic representations

556
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of rulers and their retinues but frequently rendered other anthropomorphic
ﬁgures in a more abstract style that was also applied to animals. Yoruba an-
thropomorphic religious ﬁgures were usually representations of kings or wor-
shippers rather than of deities (Bascom 1969: 111).
Apart from metal statues of gods and rulers, which were used for cult pur-
poses, the Inka did not produce anthropomorphic representations of any sort;
human ﬁgures on Inka-style pottery appear to date from the early colonial
period. Nor did they create naturalistic representations of anything else, apart
from the metal images, sometimes life-size, of plants and animals produced for
ritual purposes (Earle 1987: 73). Despite the prominence of anthropomorphic
representations in the elite art of earlier civilizations in the southern Andean
highlands and the contemporary lowland states that had been absorbed into
the Inka kingdom, their overwhelming preference was for elaborate aniconic
designs.
Shang art was focused heavily on animal ﬁgures, with human or humanoid
representations playing only minor and subordinate roles. Kwang-chih Chang
(1983) has interpreted the general absence of human ﬁgures in Shang and
Western Zhou art as resulting from the inspiration of shamanistic themes, with
humans being less important than the animals into which shamans transformed
themselves. Yet there is much uncertainty about what roles shamans actually
played and the beliefs associated with shamanism in early Chinese society. By
contrast, Maya artists rendered indubitably shamanistic themes in a format
that emphasized the human aspects of the participants (Schele and Miller
1986). One might, following Afanasieva, argue that the minimal importance
accorded to human ﬁgures in Shang art indicates that Shang society remained
at a chiefdom level of development, as Judith Treistman (1972: 130) once
claimed. Yet later Chinese elite art, while representing humans to a much
greater degree than Shang or Western Zhou art, never accorded as much
importance to representations of kings as the art of Egypt, Mesopotamia, the
Valley of Mexico, the Maya, or the Yoruba. The art associated with the early
civilizations of China and Inka Peru seems to have been based on culturally
distinctive choices concerning what was important or appropriate to represent.
In Maya civilization the decoration of temples underwent a major alteration
during the Classic period. In Late Preclassic and Early Classic times, temple
platforms were faced with elaborate murals executed in moulded and painted
plaster. These murals portrayed frontal images of deities or cosmic forces rep-
resented in a highly abstract and symbolic form that in some of its general
principles resembled Shang art. In the Late Classic period relief sculpture,
conﬁned to the shrines atop temple platforms, represented relations between
realistically portrayed human kings and anthropomorphized supernatural

Elite Art and Architecture
557
beings and was accompanied by texts documenting the dynastic claims of the
rulers. Arthur Miller (1986: 28–29, 72–80) interpreted this change as reﬂect-
ing a growing emphasis on the linear inheritance of Maya kingship. Yet more
recently deciphered Maya inscriptions indicate that linear inheritance was al-
ready well established by the Early Classic period. Stelae displaying the images
of kings were ﬁrst produced in the Tikal region and spread from there to other
urban centres in Early Classic times. This makes it unlikely that the switch
from cosmic symbolism to royal representations was associated with a major
redeﬁnition of kingship. It may, however, have reﬂected the growing political
and ritual power of kings, who became capable at this point of imposing their
own identities on major temples until then associated with communities.
A similar increasing emphasis on rulers in monumental art appears to have
occurred in Mesopotamia during the Early Dynastic period. Small stone stat-
ues that have been conventionally identiﬁed as ‘priest-kings’ and other images
that have been speculatively interpreted to be of rulers were produced in
Mesopotamia as early as the Uruk period, but ﬁgures of kings identiﬁed by
name do not occur before Early Dynastic times. The appearance of these
named images did not, however, correlate with major changes in the pro-
grammes of temple decoration as happened among the Maya. Depictions of
rulers became common on stone cylinder seals beginning in Ur III times;
up to this point such seals had been decorated with banqueting, mythological,
and religious scenes (Collon 1987: 123–30). Maya and Mesopotamian evidence
casts doubt on the likelihood that the sparseness of surviving anthropomorphic
representations in Inka and Shang art necessarily indicates that these civiliza-
tions were institutionally less developed than the others. Instead, it suggests
that the development of anthropomorphic and royal themes was neither an
inevitable nor an automatic concomitant of the rise of early civilizations.
Nevertheless, the early civilizations in which representational art did de-
velop show signiﬁcant cross-cultural thematic parallels. Statues of gods, rulers,
and members of the upper-classes were produced for cult purposes. Life-size
statues of rulers and of high-ranking ofﬁcials and their families were manu-
factured for funerary purposes in ancient Egypt. These statues were usually
carved from stone in an idealized but naturalistic style by sculptors attached
to the royal court (Fuerstein 1999). Smaller stone statues of kings and ofﬁcials
were set up in Egyptian temples so that the k3 souls of these individuals could
share in the daily food offerings made to the gods. The creation under royal
auspices of cult statues of deities was regarded as important enough for years
to be named for such events during the First Dynasty. Although no early ex-
amples have survived, these statues appear to have been small and made of
precious metals (T. Wilkinson 1999: 267–69).

558
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Mesopotamians manufactured statues of deities, kings, and prosperous
citizens for placement in temples. Cult statues may have been made of wood
overlaid with metal. Stone statues of men and women were placed in temples to
offer perpetual devotion to a deity on behalf of some individual or to remind the
deity of that person’s devotion. Royal statues were sometimes works of high
quality portraying kings in a semi-idealized form. Most worshipper statues
exhibit relatively simple workmanship and few, if any, individualizing traits
and may have been bought ready-made by well-to-do persons to place in
temples. Some of the statues of kings who aspired to divine status may have
been intended as objects of worship rather than as images of worshippers
(Crawford 1991: 160–64; Postgate 1992: 118).
The Inka made some large sheet-metal statues of major deities and of living
and dead rulers. The power of living and dead kings was thought capable of
entering into such statues and speaking through their medium priests, thus
allowing kings to be present in two or more places at once and facilitating the
delegation of royal power (Gose 1996a: 19–20). While no large statues of this
sort have survived, small metal images of anthropomorphic beings and llamas
have been recovered from the burials of sacriﬁced children.
In the most powerful Yoruba states, metal heads were cast to serve as cult ob-
jects for the veneration of dead rulers. Lesser families were restricted to using
ritual heads made of wood or ceramics. Other three-dimensional bronze cast-
ings depicted kings or queen-mothers with their retainers. Statues of Yoruba
deities or their worshippers were normally carved from wood (Bascom 1969:
111–13; Dark 1973).
The Aztec produced numerous stone statues of deities, while others were
fashioned from wood. They also carved stone images of warriors, ﬂag-bearers,
and various guardian ﬁgures to ornament their temple precincts. Statues of
Aztec kings were carved in stone outcrops at Chapultepec, among them one
showing King Ahuitzotl wearing the costume of the fertility god Xipe Totec
(Townsend 1979: 32–33). These images, which were probably objects of vener-
ation, did not survive the early colonial period. The Maya equivalents of royal
statues were deeply carved stelae, each displaying the image of the monarch
on its front face. The Maya also carved wooden cult statues of deities, which
appear to have been kept wrapped in cloth bundles in temple sanctuaries
(Baudez 1994; Houston and Stuart 1996: 303–4).
It therefore appears that in any civilization where anthropomorphic statues
were produced, some of them represented gods and others kings. Only in
Egypt, Mesopotamia, and among the Yoruba were high-quality statues regu-
larly created representing other prominent individuals: in Egypt as recipients
of funerary offerings and in Mesopotamia and among the Yoruba as suppliants

Elite Art and Architecture
559
or worshippers. The Egyptians also produced small worker statues for inter-
ment with the upper classes.
The number of anthropomorphic statues produced varied considerably from
one early civilization to another. Scarcely any such statues were fashioned by
the Shang, but large numbers were created by the Egyptians. They also varied
according to the type of being portrayed. The Aztec produced many statues of
gods but relatively few of rulers, while, in the Old and Middle Kingdoms, the
Egyptians manufactured many life-size statues of kings, administrators, and
their families but fewer and much smaller statues of the gods. Most statues
were produced in a style that emphasized a youthful and idealized rather than
a literal likeness of an individual.
Relief carvings and painted murals (which are usually not so well preserved)
depicted anthropomorphic creatures doing things to a much greater extent
than did statues, which in early civilizations tended only to portray prominent
individuals standing, sitting, or kneeling. Much of the elite relief art of early
civilizations was focused on kings. Scenes portrayed rulers interacting with the
gods or with their ancestors, performing rituals, defeating or dominating their
foes (Fig. 24.5), and being attended by high-ranking subjects.
Except in the Terminal Classic period, Maya stone relief sculpture appears
to have been a monopoly of rulers. It often portrayed kings alone or in the
company of supernatural beings, including their ancestors. Occasionally kings
were accompanied by a female member of the royal family, and in the western
part of the Maya zone they were sometimes attended or assisted by nobles and
courtiers. Maya kings were depicted wearing the costumes of gods, performing
rituals such as bleeding themselves, militarily defeating enemy rulers, and
dominatingandhumiliatingrivalsandenemiesinvariousways,suchasstanding
on their crouching, bound bodies. Sometimes kings were portrayed on a larger
scale than commoners or vanquished enemies. Enemies were often shown
stripped of their regalia and dishevelled. Stone relief sculpture is found in
other than royal or temple settings only from the end of the Classic period,
when, at places such as Copan, it began to appear in the residential complexes
of some high ofﬁcials (Baudez 1994; Fash 1991: 162–63; Joyce 1992; 1996;
Tate 1992).
In Egypt little ofﬁcial, non-funerary relief art did not portray the king. Pub-
lic monuments and temple reliefs depicted kings defeating their enemies,
receiving blessings from the gods, and performing rituals, which most often
involved offerings to deities. Defeated foes were often represented stripped of
their insignia and the clothing that was appropriate to their high social status.
These themes endured with only minor changes throughout ancient Egyptian
history. Kings were represented on a larger scale than any other humans

a
c
b
24.5. Kings subduing enemies: (a) Egyptian King Narmer defeats Wˇs, the leader of a northern Egyptian or Libyan people, ca. 3000 b.c.; (b) Bird
Jaguar IV, ruler of the Maya city of Yaxchilan, captures Jewelled Skull, a.d. 755; (c) the Aztec ruler Tizoc is represented defeating a warrior from nearby
Culhuacan, probably its king – this scene is one of a set of similar images around the circumference of the Tizoc Stone, dated ca. a.d. 1481, symbolizing
Aztec hegemony over various city-states. Sources: (a) after Gardiner 1950: 7; (b) adapted from John S. Henderson, The World of the Ancient Maya,
2nd ed. (Ithaca, 1981), c⃝1981 by Cornell University, and used with permission of the publisher, Cornell University Press; (c) adapted from Joyce Marcus,
Mesoamerican Writing Systems (Princeton, 1993), c⃝1993 by Princeton University Press, and used with permission of Princeton University Press.

Elite Art and Architecture
561
except royal wives and on the same scale as the gods. No one was ever shown
helping the king. If anyone else was present, it was simply to witness his
achievements.
During the Old and Middle Kingdoms, neither the king nor the gods were
represented in the tomb art of the upper classes. Tombs of nobles and ofﬁcials
contained wall reliefs showing food being grown, processed, and presented to
the deceased tomb owner. The owner was represented on a larger scale than
the commoners who served him. A considerable amount of private tomb art
of this sort was produced during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. An unusual
religious genre consisting of scenes celebrating the earthly creativity of the sun
at different seasons was associated with Fifth Dynasty solar temples (Harpur
1987; Lustig 1997b; Robins 1997).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian reliefs, often carved on stone stelae, depicted
kings leading armies in victorious battles, building temples, and presiding over
the feasts that celebrated such accomplishments. Kings were often portrayed
on a larger scale than other individuals, but many reliefs emphasized the partic-
ipation of large numbers of commoners in civic enterprises. Defeated enemy
soldiers were depicted naked, being caught in a net by the victorious ruler,
clubbed by uniformed and well-armed adversaries, trampled by foot-soldiers
and chariots, led away as prisoners, or with their bound and prostrate bodies
forming a deity’s throne (Caubet and Pouyssegur 1998; Furlong 1987: 16, 21;
Parrot 1960; Strommenger and Hirmer 1964).
Aztec relief sculpture depicted mainly deities, anonymous warrior ﬁgures,
standard-bearers, stacked human skulls, calendrical dates, and miscellaneous
religious symbols. Fewer deities were depicted on stone in relief than in the
form of three-dimensional sculptures. Royal ﬁgures were rare, but the reliefs
on the monumental Tizoc stone portrayed that king defeating a series of elab-
orately dressed human ﬁgures, each associated with a tributary city-state. A re-
lief celebrating King Ahuitzotl’s enlargement of the main Aztec temple in 1487
records that date and shows him and his predecessor, Tizoc, dressed as priests
and engaged in ritual blood-letting (Nicholson 1971a: 112–33; Townsend 1979:
41–42).
Benin brass plaques, which were the equivalent of relief sculpture, were
produced not as cult objects but as palace decorations recording historical
events and scenes of everyday life. Some showed the king, occasionally on
horseback, accompanied by retainers (usually soldiers) and larger than some
of them. None showed him in action (Dark 1973: 24–28). Nor did any of
these plaques portray recognizable deities. No examples of relief art depicting
human or anthropomorphic ﬁgures are associated with Shang China or the
Inka state.

562
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Where anthropomorphic ﬁgures were depicted, their relative size often
corresponded with the social importance of the individuals they represented.
In Egypt and to a lesser extent in Mesopotamia and among the Maya and
Yoruba, kings were shown larger than their subjects. Egyptian ofﬁcials were
likewise portrayed on a larger scale than their subordinates in tomb art.
Conventions for portraying human beings in relief also displayed consider-
able cross-cultural uniformity. Human faces were usually depicted in proﬁle,
eyes and shoulders frontally, and the lower torso, legs, and feet as if viewed
from the side. This style of representation, which emphasized each aspect of
the body in its most easily drawn or most easily recognized form, exhibited
the most intricate conventions in Egypt. In Egyptian relief art, both feet were
shown from the side but with their big toes facing the viewer.
In public representational art, the main focus was generally on the king. He
was frequently portrayed leading others in Mesopotamian art and as a passive
ﬁgure accompanied by his followers among the Yoruba. Egyptian rulers and,
with some exceptions, Maya ones were shown either alone or as the dominant
human ﬁgure. In Egypt only the king could be represented as performing a
signiﬁcant action in any scene in which he was portrayed, and therefore in the
Old and Middle Kingdoms kings are shown personally defeating enemies but
not leading armies. In one panel from Yaxchilan, an eighth-century Maya king
is shown ﬁghting alongside one of his subordinate lords, each of them subduing
an opponent.
It is not surprising that what many art historians judge to be the ﬁnest art
of early civilizations was produced in the two territorial states that endured
the longest: the stone sculpture and relief carving of Old Kingdom Egypt
and the bronze ceremonial vessels of Shang China. The quality of such art
was largely determined by how much wealth patrons were able and willing to
invest in its production. The best work was produced in small quantities and
its distribution controlled by the state and a small upper class. In Old Kingdom
Egypt all elite art appears to have been produced by craft workers associated
with the royal court and displayed a uniform style. From earliest times, even
the smallest and least signiﬁcant products of royal workshops were coveted
by minor ofﬁcials and village leaders (Aldred 1971: 174–75). While multiple
centres of bronze-casting and jade-working appear to have ﬂourished within
the Shang kingdom, the uniﬁed style of this art suggests that its production
was under centralized control. The Inka elite maintained a uniform style for
luxury goods that were manufactured from precious metals at a few places and
for decorated pottery and fancy cloth fabricated in production centres located
throughout the kingdom. In all three territorial states there was a vast gap
between the consistently high-quality luxury goods produced by the state and

Elite Art and Architecture
563
the inferior and uneven quality goods produced in farming villages and market
towns.
By contrast, in smaller and less centralized Mesopotamian city-states, the
decorations and furnishings of temples and palaces were cruder and less clearly
distinguished from what was found in ordinary houses. Temples, palaces, and
individuals purchased the work or services of the same full-time artisans. The
quality of palace and temple art was much higher in hegemonic cities. The
bronze statue head often attributed to Sargon I and the excellent composition
and carving of the stela celebrating Naram-Sin’s victory over inhabitants of
the Zagros Mountains provide examples of the high artistic levels achieved by
elite specialists working for the Akkadian Dynasty. The royal statues of the
Ur III Dynasty and the stela bearing Hammurabi’s law code are examples of
the distinguished artistic accomplishments made under the patronage of later
rulers (Strommenger and Hirmer 1964).
In the Yoruba ritual centre of Ife bronze-casting reached its highest level
of sophistication during the fourteenth century and then declined in quality
as that city’s political power waned (Willett 1967: 149). The casting of brass
heads for the royal court is said to have begun in Benin in the fourteenth
century and achieved peaks of excellence in the sixteenth and again in the
eighteenth century. These peaks corresponded with exceptional periods of
unity and prosperity in Benin’s history (Dark 1973: 5–13). The production of
Oyo’s best art likewise coincided with that city’s greatest power and prosperity
in the eighteenth century and was disrupted by internal strife and military
defeat in the nineteenth. For this reason, Frank Willett (1967: 162), Mich`ele
Coquet (1998), and others identify the highest-quality art in the Yoruba region
as court art.
In the Valley of Mexico, high-quality artistic production also tended to be
correlated with periods of heightened power and prosperity of various city-
states and especially with Tenochtitlan’s gradually becoming the dominant
regional centre. Richard Townsend (1979: 20) praises the dynamic forms and
great plastic force of the key artistic achievements of Aztec sculptors in the
late ﬁfteenth century. A similar pattern prevailed among the Classic Maya city-
states, with major episodes of artistic creativity generally corresponding with
periods of military success and the cessation of production of public monu-
ments with periods of disastrous military defeat and external domination. Yet
the leadership of some Maya states continued to produce notable works of art
despite political setbacks. In the eighth century, Copan’s leaders responded
to the capture and sacriﬁcial killing of their thirteenth king by the ruler of
the smaller neighbouring state of Quirigua by erecting richly decorated struc-
tures that reafﬁrmed Copan’s unity and dynastic history (Fash 1991: 139–46).

564
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
More than in any other early city-state system, numerous Maya dynasties suc-
ceeded in sustaining distinctive local traditions of elite art over long periods.
This accomplishment cannot be attributed simply to major Maya centres’ be-
ing farther apart than Mesopotamian ones or those in the Valley of Mexico,
since the Yoruba states, whose main centres were also relatively far apart, ex-
perienced severe cultural ﬂuctuations similar to those of the other city-state
systems in our sample.
Elite art differed radically in style from one early civilization to another. Less
extreme variations in style also occurred among city-states. The upper classes
sponsored the creation of elaborate works of art that symbolized their power
and social exclusivity. The degree of elaboration of such art, its stylistic unity,
and the extent to which it was differentiated from ordinary artistic productions
depended on the wealth and political stability of its patrons. These conditions
favoured greater development of elite art in territorial states.
The preferred media of artistic expression and their thematic content also
varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another. Human imagery was
highly restricted in Shang and Inka culture. This absence calls into question
claims that poorly documented early civilizations that lack obvious represen-
tations of kings must have had no kings. In early civilizations where human
representation was common, its primary focus tended to be on the king alone
(most Classic Maya states), the king and members of the upper class (Egypt), or
the king and larger groups of people (Mesopotamia, Yoruba). Only the Aztec,
among those early civilizations that portrayed human forms regularly, appear
to have paid relatively little attention to kings in their surviving monumental
civic art. Kings and members of the upper classes were often depicted wor-
shipping the gods and defeating their enemies in battle. Yet, when civilizations
that did not widely portray human forms are taken into account, the art of early
civilizations was characterized by almost as much thematic as stylistic diversity.
monumental architecture
Among the creations of the upper classes in early civilizations, buildings of
unusual size and splendour played a special role. Large buildings were highly
visible and attested publicly to the ability of governments, institutions, and
individuals to concentrate labour and resources. Royal tombs, palaces, and
temples bore witness to polities that were believed to be legitimated by divine
power and inseparable from the cosmic order. In most cases the size and elab-
orateness of such buildings and the costly materials used to embellish them
far exceeded what their practical use would have required. This explains, at
least in general and functionalist terms, why, as societies grew increasingly

Elite Art and Architecture
565
inegalitarian, monumental architecture loomed larger in the archaeological
record (Abrams 1989; Trigger 1990a). It has been suggested that, in some
chiefdoms, phases dominated by monumental construction may have alter-
nated with phases characterized by elite-controlled production of high-status
goods (Trubitt 2000). While periods of hypertrophy in the construction of
monumental buildings suggest that this process also may have ﬂuctuated in
importance in early civilizations, monumental construction and the production
of elite goods occurred together at all times.
Despite architecture’s symbolic role only a few functional types of buildings
were constructed. Temples, royal palaces, and upper-class residences existed
in all early civilizations and elaborate upper-class tombs in many of them.
Palaces often combined royal residences with administrative centres, meeting
places for the upper classes, storehouses, workshops, and barracks. Kings
sometimes had private residential and recreational palaces as well as ofﬁcial
ones. Temples were the dwelling places of deities or places where contact
could take place on a regular basis between the supernatural and designated
representatives of human communities rather than places for congregational
worship (L. Bell 1997: 135). Temples, palaces, and tombs were not as clearly
differentiated in all early civilizations as they are in modern nomenclature.
Aztec and Maya temples were often the burial places of rulers. Most Maya
temples seem to have been constructed for the cults of dead rulers as well as
for the worship of cosmic deities. Yoruba palaces contained important public
shrines, and Inka palaces became the tombs of dead kings. Maya ‘palaces’ were
ritual as well as residential and administrative in function. In early China,
temples for the veneration of royal ancestors were located inside palaces.
Temples, palaces, and royal tombs appear to have been clearly distinguished
from one another only in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Temples, palaces, and tombs were all derived from and generally continued
to be identiﬁed as the houses of deities, rulers, and the dead. The Sumerian
word for temple, ´edingir, signiﬁed ‘house (or household) of a god’, while the
Yoruba term ile orisa and the Nahuatl teocalli meant literally ‘house of a god’.
The Egyptians called a temple pr ntr (house of a god) or h
• wt ntr (mansion
of a god). Maya terms for temple included yotot (his house) and k’ulnah (holy
house). In Sumerian a palace was called ´egal (great house) or ´elugal (house of
a king). The Egyptian term was pr nsw (house of the king) or h. In Egyptian
an elaborate non-royal tomb was called a h
• wt k3 (mansion of the life-force).
Some early civilizations constructed city walls, frontier forts, and border
defences. In highland Mexico and the Maya region, ritual ball courts were
elaborate stone structures (Fox 1996). The Inka constructed large halls with
gabled roofs (kallanka) to shelter soldiers or corv´ee labourers travelling on

566
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ofﬁcial business and as places where public festivals could be held indoors in
inclement weather. Few other buildings were constructed for public use.
Archaeological studies of temples in precolonial Hawaii demonstrate that, as
state power developed, open structures, which had been used for public feast-
ing, were walled off and access to them was restricted to high-ranking ofﬁcials
(Kolb 1994). In early civilizations entry to temples, palaces, and administrative
buildings was carefully monitored. Such buildings were often raised on mas-
sive platforms or enclosed by walls penetrated by only a few carefully guarded
entrances. Rituals were performed by ofﬁcials high above the commoners who
witnessed them or within enclosures to which ordinary people were denied en-
try. These arrangements heightened the mystery of what was going on in such
places and made it easier for the upper classes to emphasize the importance
of their activities.
The materials used for monumental construction varied from one early civ-
ilization to another. The Yoruba and Shang employed stamped earth to con-
struct monumental buildings and thatch to cover their gabled roofs. Chinese
palaces were erected on stamped-earth (hang-tu) platforms. Wooden pillars
and poles supported gabled roofs, while the curtain walls of houses were also
constructed of stamped earth (Chˆeng 1960: 52–53; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 22–
24). Roof tiles were not employed in China until the Zhou period, and even
in early Zhou times tiles covered only the crests of roofs (Hsu and Linduff
1988: 297). The Yoruba’s buildings were erected directly on the ground and
had thick roof-bearing walls constructed of stamped earth. Free-standing en-
closure walls and the houses inside them were covered with broad thatched
roofs to protect the stamped earth from tropical rains (Bascom 1969: 30; Ojo
1966b: 63–66).
Large Mesopotamian buildings were constructed mainly of mud-brick, al-
though ﬁred bricks and stone slabs were sometimes used for foundation
courses. Outer walls were either plastered with mud or lime or encased in
ﬁred bricks. Roofs were ﬂat and constructed of logs covered with mats and
several layers of clay (Crawford 1991: 53–56).
The Inka built elaborate structures with thick stone bearer walls or con-
structed the lower walls, which were most exposed to the rain, of stone blocks
and used stamped earth above. The most important buildings were constructed
of carefully shaped stone blocks, while more utilitarian structures were built
of ﬁeld stones set in mud. The broad, gabled roofs of Inka buildings were
thatched, and important state structures had intricate patterns worked into
their roofs (Gasparini and Margolies 1980; Hyslop 1990: 6–18; Protzen 1993).
People living in the Valley of Mexico and in the Maya area constructed
major buildings of cut-stone facing blocks and rough stone ﬁll. In the Valley

Elite Art and Architecture
567
of Mexico, roofs of residential structures were either ﬂat and covered with
poles and waterproof plaster or gabled and thatched. Major temples had high,
sloping wooden roofs. Important Maya buildings either had thatched roofs or
were covered by corbelled vaults (Abrams 1994; M. E Smith 1996: 153–61).
The Egyptians constructed elaborate tombs and later temples of cut stone,
but palaces, large houses, and administrative buildings continued to be built of
plastered mud-brick, although they often had stone doorways and decorative
elements. Roofs were ﬂat and constructed of mats and earth supported on
horizontal poles. Outer enclosure walls were constructed of mud-brick.
Choices of building materials were inﬂuenced at least partly by practical
considerations. The Mesopotamians, Shang Chinese, and southern Yoruba
lived on plains where stone of any sort was rare. It is therefore not surprising
that they used stamped earth or mud-brick to construct even large buildings.
Yet, in northern Yoruba territory, where there was abundant Precambrian rock,
people did not use it as building material. While this stone is difﬁcult to cut, it is
friable and could easily have been used to construct house walls. Nevertheless,
stoneworking of any sort was limited among the Yoruba.
The Maya lived in a karst region, where there were vast deposits of lime-
stone and the scarcity of groundwater encouraged the excavation of massive
reservoirs to sustain large population centres. The digging of these reservoirs
provided building stone and raw material to make plaster, reducing the cost of
these materials for construction purposes (Abrams 1994). The Maya also econ-
omized on construction costs by subtly incorporating natural features such as
hillsides into temple platforms wherever possible in order to create buildings
that looked larger and higher than they really were. The Egyptians, the Inka,
and the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico lived in areas where stone was
abundant. In the highland Peruvian countryside, constructing buildings and
terraces using boulders and rough stone blocks set in mud had long been part
of the tradition of vernacular architecture. The Inka government used large
blocks of limestone to build forts and lay foundations for other structures,
polygonal blocks of diorite to build enclosure walls, and carefully squared
blocks of andesite to erect their highest-quality buildings (Rowe 1944: 226).
The Egyptians constructed tombs and temples of limestone and sandstone
blocks, using granite (which was much harder to work) for special features.
Such construction often required transporting blocks of stone by boat for long
distances along the Nile.
The amount of energy that had to be expended to utilize these different
raw materials varied. Stone was the most difﬁcult material to work, and the
extent to which it was employed provides an approximation of the amounts of
labour invested in different forms of architecture. Stone was used sparingly in

568
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the monumental architecture of Mesopotamia, the Yoruba, and Shang China,
in considerable amounts (usually in the form of small blocks) in the Valley
of Mexico and by the Classic Maya, and in large amounts (often in the form
of massive blocks) by the Inka and the ancient Egyptians (Heizer 1966). Yet
the Mesopotamians constructed mud-brick temples, palaces, and city walls of
monumentalproportionsandgreatarchitecturalbeauty;theShangsurrounded
some of their administrative compounds with stamped-earth walls of immense
size; and the larger Yoruba and Benin palaces were impressive stamped-earth
structures. It therefore seems misleading either to overrate the inﬂuence of
the environment on the choice of materials used for monumental architecture
or to equate architectural achievement with a preference for any particular
material.
Architectural styles differed greatly from one early civilization to another.
Despite their common use of stamped earth, a Shang palace, with its bilater-
ally symmetrical arrangement of buildings around a linear series of courtyards,
could never be mistaken for a Yoruba one, with its cluster of state and private
rooms located within a large enclosure wall. Temples were built on solid plat-
forms of varying heights in Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico and among
the Maya. In all three early civilizations higher, multistage platforms, often
referred to as truncated pyramids, were associated with major temples. Yet
no one could confuse a Mesopotamian ziggurat with a major temple from the
Valley of Mexico. In addition to being constructed of brick rather than stone
and rubble, a ziggurat had steeper sides, a single or triple rather than a dou-
ble stairway on the front face, and one rather than two shrines at the top. Nor
would a large platform temple in the Valley of Mexico, with its squarish proﬁle,
fail to be distinguished from a Maya temple, with its more slender, steep-sided
platform and elaborately decorated roof comb (Fig. 24.6).
Within the Maya region, each major urban centre developed styles of monu-
mental architecture that expressed its own identity or that of its ruling dynasty
(Tate 1992: xii). Temples similar to those of Late Classic Tikal, which rose
steeply for over forty-six metres, were not constructed in any other Maya city.
These temples celebrated the revived political power of Tikal’s rulers after a
long period of subordination to Calakmul (Harrison 1999). Palenque, to the
northeast,wasamuchsmallercentre thatlackedanotableEarlyClassichistory.
Chan-Bahlum, one of its ﬁrst major rulers, sought to emphasize the legitimacy
of his royal lineage by erecting a series of triple temples that emulated standard
types of the much earlier Late Preclassic Maya period. He also had himself
portrayed wearing Early Classic–style regalia long abandoned at established
centres such as Tikal. Although Palenque’s resources were limited, its archi-
tecture was distinguished by its elegance (Freidel and Schele 1988b: 64–67).

b
c
d
e
0
50 m
a
24.6. Temples on raised platforms in city-states shown at a common scale: Maya temples – (a) Tikal, Temple I; (b) Palenque,
Temple of the Inscriptions; (c) Piedras Negras, Structure K-5; (d) Valley of Mexico – Tenayuca Pyramid; (e) Mesopotamia –
ziggurat at Ur. Sources: (a) – (c) after Andrews 1975: 40–41; (d) after G. Kubler, The Art and Architecture of Ancient America
(Harmondsworth, 1962), 49.

570
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The architecture of Copan was distinguished from that of other Maya cities
by the connected arrangements of its buildings and the impression of mas-
siveness achieved by juxtaposing various structures (Fash 1991). Distinctive
architecture and urban plans made every Maya urban centre visually unique.
Bycontrast,Inkastatearchitecture,withitsheavy,unadorned(thoughsome-
times gold-plated) rectangular buildings and distinctive trapezoidal niches,
exhibited a uniform style throughout the central Andean highlands. This ar-
chitecture was visually different from that produced by any earlier or con-
temporary Andean culture. Egyptian formal architecture, with its distinctive
geometrical precision and ﬂat surfaces, likewise evolved as a homogeneous
correlate of the Egyptian state.
Constructing large buildings required far more engineering and managerial
skills than building ordinary houses. As size and weight increase, even solid
structures can collapse from internal stresses if they are not properly built
(Mendelssohn 1974). The largest single Egyptian pyramid, at Giza, is estimated
to contain over 2.3 million blocks of limestone, each weighing an average of
2.5 tonnes. Even if most of these blocks were quarried nearby, using them
to build a massive symmetrical structure 160 metres high in about twenty-
ﬁve years (the reign of a single king) would have required a vast amount of
specialized knowledge (Kemp 1989: 130–36; Lehner 1997: 200–225).
Engineering techniques were limited, although what was understood was
applied to good effect. The outside walls of large buildings in most early civi-
lizations were battered, not only giving them an imposing appearance but also
helping to steady them. The Egyptians made limited use of corbelled stone
ceilings in royal tombs and regularly used barrel vaults to roof mud-brick store-
rooms, but the roofs of major temples invariably consisted of ﬂat stone slabs
supported on short beams running between heavy pillars. The Mesopotami-
ans used bricks to construct true arches in doorways and small domed ceilings.
The more elaborate of Maya stone buildings had corbelled roofs. In the other
early civilizations, large buildings had walls of stone or stamped earth that sup-
ported ﬂat roofs formed of poles covered with earth or plaster in relatively dry
climates and gabled, thatched roofs where rainfall was more abundant. Only
the Chinese used pole-and-beam structures, a prototype of modern structural
steel construction, to support the weight of roofs. The basic architectural tech-
niques that were applied to monumental architecture were generally the same
ones that were used to construct ordinary houses, but the increasing size of
buildings and sometimes the use of unfamiliar construction materials required
the development of new and more specialized engineering skills.
The Egyptians ascribed the construction of the Step Pyramid complex at
Saqqara, the oldest collection of stone buildings in Egypt, to Imhotep, a high

Elite Art and Architecture
571
ofﬁcial of Djoser, the ﬁrst king of the Third Dynasty, and regarded him as
the inventor of stone architecture. However, recent discoveries suggest that
large-scale stone construction may have begun at Saqqara at least a generation
earlier (Davies and Friedman 1998: 64–69). In the Fourth Dynasty, work on
royal funerary complexes was under the control of the Overseer of All the
Works of the King (ımy-r k3t nbt nswt), who at that time was a close relative of
the king. Under him a large team of ofﬁcials and scribes dealt with engineering
problems and scheduled, fed, and deployed large numbers of full-time masons
and the still more numerous rotating teams of corv´ee labourers who hauled
the stone blocks. Many later Egyptian mathematical texts were concerned with
the pragmatic reckonings involved in administering such projects (Strudwick
1985: 217–50).
Archaeologists have observed how, in successive pyramid construction
projects, better solutions were found to problems of ensuring the stability
of the building blocks and preventing the collapse of inner chambers under
the weight of the heavy masses erected above them. Over the course of a
few reigns, builders learned that it was more efﬁcient to work with large stone
blocks, that horizontal courses were more stable than courses aligned obliquely
to the face of a pyramid, and that heavy structures needed to be sited on ﬁrm
bedrock. Given their unprecedented size, it is surprising how few serious errors
were made in constructing these early stone pyramids (Lehner 1997: 218–23).
The largest single Inka building project was Saqsawaman, a fortress and
ritual centre located on a hill adjacent to the royal residential precinct at
Cuzco. According to Inka tradition, twenty thousand people had worked on
this construction at any one time for about seventy-six years prior to the Spanish
conquest. Major Inka building projects were supervised by members of the
Inka nobility. Sinchi Roka, a half-brother of Wayna Qhapaq, was responsible for
major state buildings erected in and near Cuzco during that king’s reign. While
clay and stone models guided the construction of Inka state buildings, we know
little about the lower-level ofﬁcials who routinely supervised such work. The
large size of the buildings that were erected in provincial centres and elsewhere
throughout the core of the Inka kingdom and of many of the individual stones
that were used to construct them required manipulative techniques that were
unfamiliar to ordinary workers (Hyslop 1990: 51–57; Kendall 1973: 122; Niles
1993: 161; Rowe 1944: 224).
The kinds of monumental structures that were accorded greatest promi-
nence varied from one early civilization to another. In most city-states, tem-
ples were the earliest monumental buildings. Later one large temple or temple
complex in the centre of the city continued to symbolize the unity of the state.
Throughout Mesoamerica, temples were repaired periodically and enlarged

572
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
if resources were available to do so. In the Valley of Mexico, the main temple
honouring the two principal gods of each city-state stood in the centre of a
complex of smaller temples, priests’ residences, elite schools, and ritual plazas
enclosed by a wall (Matos Moctezuma 1988: 59–83). Maya temples consisted
of a shrine to a single deity built atop a pyramidal platform. Large ones tended
to be free-standing, while smaller ones were often incorporated into an ar-
chitectural agglomeration that included plazas and palaces (Andrews 1975).
The earliest Mesopotamian temples were erected on low platforms that grew
higher as they were rebuilt. In the Ur III period ziggurats were erected in hon-
our of the patron deity of each major city throughout southern Mesopotamia.
At the same time, standardized plans replaced the more variable temple lay-
outs of the Early Dynastic period. The central room of a temple, which was
approached from the side, contained the cult statue of the resident deity. Ma-
jor temples were surrounded by a walled area containing the residence of the
high priest or priestess, storerooms, workshops, and sometimes cemeteries
(Crawford 1991: 57–81).
Mesopotamian temples were referred to as mountains (kur) and believed
to be places for communication between the earth and the sky; ziggurats rep-
resented an extreme expression of this concept (George 1993). Aztec temples
were viewed as microcosms of the universe, mountains of fertility, symbols of
mythic events that had happened long ago to deities who were patrons of local
ethnic groups, and places where special connections with the sky world and
the underworld could be achieved (van Zantwijk 1985: 200). The Maya de-
scribed their temples as world trees (wakah kan) or mountains (witz) through
which it was possible to communicate with the higher and lower supernatural
realms. The shrines inside temples, where images of the gods were kept, were
regarded as caves, which provided direct contact with the gods. These shrines
were called pib nah (underground house), kunul (conjuring place), kun (seat),
or waybil (resting place) (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 136–55; Schele
and Freidel 1990: 72; Schele and Mathews 1998: 29).
At the centre of each Yoruba city was a royal palace (aﬁn), which contained
complexes of private living quarters for the king, his wives, and his children,
ofﬁcialmeetingrooms,servants’quarters,storerooms,andshrinesofimportant
deities. The royal palace at Benin also had a series of large enclosures each
of which contained the shrine of a dead king. Neither the palace nor ordinary
houses were more than one storey high, but the royal palace at Benin had
a tower rising over twenty metres, ornamented with the wooden image of
a python, which provided a visual focus for the whole city (Gallagher 1983:
26). Leading town ofﬁcials occupied large house compounds located around
the perimeter of the palace, and the central market was usually in front of

Elite Art and Architecture
573
its entrance. Near the market were important temples or shrines, the more
elaborate of which had one to three forecourts or rooms. Prior to the disruptive
wars of the nineteenth century, Yoruba temples were reported to have been
elaborately decorated with carved wooden beams and mud sculpture. Some
of them were also larger than any temples of more recent times (Apter 1992:
100; Awolalu 1979: 114–17; Krapf-Askari 1969; Mabogunje 1962; Ojo 1966a:
186; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 201).
In other city-state systems, palaces seem to have developed later than tem-
ples (Fig. 24.7). Maya ‘palaces’ were one- or two-storey stone structures built
on low platforms. They consisted of large numbers of relatively small, corbel-
vaulted rooms arranged around open courts. It has not been resolved whether
these structures were inhabited by the royal family or used for administrative
and ritual purposes while the royal family lived in lighter and airier wooden
buildings nearby (Schele and Miller 1986: 134). David Freidel (1992: 122–25)
has suggested that at least parts of ‘palaces’ served for communication with
the supernatural and as dynastic shrines, while ‘temples’ were the cult places
of speciﬁc royal ancestors.
In the Valley of Mexico, palaces were built of stone, with rooms opening
off a number of inward-facing courtyards. Usually these palaces were located
just outside the central temple precinct and close to the main city market.
The palace of Mochtezuma II was described as a rectangular structure 220
metres long, with blank outer walls and few entrances. Its rooms were arranged
around three courtyards, with the apartments of the king and his family being
located on the second storey. The ground ﬂoor contained council halls, law
courts, guest rooms, meeting rooms for warrior societies, dining halls, servants’
quarters, kitchens, a jail, arsenals, accounting rooms, and storerooms. Nearby
palaces of former rulers, considered too small or old-fashioned to be lived in,
were used as storerooms and perhaps ofﬁces (Bray 1968: 104–6).
Mesopotamian palaces were located either near the central temple complex
or in a different part of the city where more building space may have been
available. They consisted of complexes of rooms, sometimes two storeys high,
arranged around one or more internal courtyards. These rooms served as
residences for the king and his dependents, audience chambers, barracks,
workshops, and storerooms (Crawford 1991: 81–91; Margueron 1982).
In three of the four city-state civilizations there was little emphasis on royal
funerary monuments. Aztec kings were cremated along with a few sacriﬁced
retainers and their ashes interred in or near the platform of the main temple
(Dur´an 1964: 178, 210). Yoruba kings were buried in sacred places in the palace
grounds or outside the city. Their bodies were often dismembered and parts of
them buried in different locations. The heads of at least some of the rulers of

a
b
0
20 m
0
100 m
24.7. Royal palaces in city-states: (a) Yoruba – aﬁn of the king of New Oyo surrounded by the
compounds of his functionaries and state ofﬁcials; (b) Mesopotamia – plan of Palace A at Kish,
Early Dynastic Period; (c) Maya – palace at Palenque, seventh-eighth centuries a.d.; (d) Valley
of Mexico – a courtyard of the palace of King Nezahualcoyotl at Texcoco, from Mapa Quinatzin,
ofﬁcials sit in council (illustrations not to common scale). Sources: (a) after Mabogunje 1962:
ﬁg. 12; (b) after Strommenger & Hirmer 1964: 391, ﬁg. 17; (c) adapted from Tracy Wellman,
Chronicle of the Maya Kings and Queens by Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube (London, 2000),
with permission of the publisher Thames & Hudson Ltd.; (d) after G. Kubler, The Art and
Architecture of Ancient America (Harmondsworth, 1962), 54.

Elite Art and Architecture
575
c
d
0
20 m
(no scale supplied)
24.7. Continued.
Benin were interred at Ife in a special burial ground called Orun Oba Ado (The
Spirit World of the Benin Kings) (Bradbury 1958: 22; Pemberton and Afolayan
1996: 27). At Oyo and elsewhere, the underground wooden burial chamber for
the body of the king and some of his sacriﬁced retainers was covered by a small
mound and became a place where his remains were venerated (S. Johnson

576
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
1921: 55). Some Mesopotamian kings and high-ranking women were buried
underground in domed or vaulted brick or ﬁeldstone chambers. The Early
Dynastic royal burials at Ur were accompanied by richly dressed court women
and male servants. Ur III rulers had large brick funerary chapels erected over
their graves. (Crawford 1991: 104–12; Huot 1989: 209–18).
Maya provisions for dead rulers were considerably more elaborate (Coe
1988). Kings were buried with a few retainers in underground tombs dug
out of bedrock or constructed of masonry. The most elaborate was that of
King Hanab-Pakal at Palenque, which contained a magniﬁcently carved sar-
cophagus. On top of or near these tombs rulers built large funerary temples
dedicated to the gods with whom they were identiﬁed (Houston and Stuart
1996: 296–97). Michael Coe (1957; 1961) has drawn a close parallel between
these temples and the royal funerary temples in which deceased Cambodian
rulers were once identiﬁed with Hindu deities.
Considerable energy was expended on large-scale defensive architecture in
some city-state civilizations. Yoruba cities were surrounded by moats and earth
ramparts pierced by fortiﬁed gateways (Connah 1975: 244). Some Yoruba city-
wall systems expanded or contracted over time, creating multiple fortiﬁcations,
and in certain urban centres internal walls separated one section of the com-
munity from another. Defensive walls, often planted with thorn bushes, were
also constructed along the borders of some Yoruba states. The small kingdom
of Ijebu-Ode had a rampart 130 kilometres long enclosing 1,036 square kilo-
metres of farm land (Bascom 1969: 4). The mud-brick walls that surrounded
Mesopotamian cities in Early Dynastic times were celebrated as physical tes-
timonials to the relative power and afﬂuence of different city-states, becoming
a major component of their identity as well as their defence (Jacobsen 1976:
196). Vanquished states were required to breach or demolish their walls.
Mesoamerican cities were rarely walled. Tikal, with its north and south earth
ramparts, was a partial exception. Tenochtitlan was connected to the mainland
by four causeways and by aqueducts that carried fresh water into the city
centre. In addition to serving a defensive function, the causeways were major
architectural works that added to the splendour and impressiveness of the
Aztec capital.
The symbolic role of monumental architecture in city-states was to glorify
and express the power and unity of the community and the effectiveness of its
leaders. Yet different kinds of buildings occupied city centres in the various
early civilizations. Yoruba palaces were the residences and property of succes-
sive kings, but they were also identiﬁed with the multifocal government of a
state and played a major role in the religious life of the community. In the
Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia, temples marked the city centre. Palaces

Elite Art and Architecture
577
were located either adjacent to the central temple complex or elsewhere in
the city. They tended to increase in size as royal power grew and were largest
in relation to temples in hegemonic city-states. At the same time, victorious
rulers also manifested their power and wealth by building larger and more
splendid temples. In small city-states, both palaces and central temples were
small. Among the Maya, the major ‘temples’ were higher and more prominent
than the ‘palace’ complexes, but these temples were associated with the fu-
nerary cults of dead kings as well as with the worship of the gods with whom
kings were identiﬁed.
In territorial states, monumental architecture celebrated the power of the
king and of the central government. The Inka rulers constructed imposing
temples, palaces, residences for chosen women, and public halls in Cuzco and
other highland administrative centres from Ecuador to Lake Titicaca. The
uniform style of Inka state buildings made them symbols of royal power in a
kingdom that was characterized by great ethnic diversity and numerous pock-
ets of settlement separated by rough mountainous terrain. Artisans were sent
to Tumipampa, in Ecuador, to teach local masons how to construct Inka-style
buildings after the area was incorporated into the Inka state (von Hagen 1959:
77). While Inka ofﬁcial buildings were constructed of cut stone, their basic
pattern was that of the traditional commoner farmstead, a rectangular walled
enclosure with a number of rectangular one-room, one-storey dwellings, con-
structed of ﬁeld stones set in mud plaster, located around the inside of the wall.
Inka palaces consisted of a series of intercommunicating courtyards sur-
rounded by a blank stone wall. A main entrance, which was well guarded, led
into the outer courts, which contained large and small reception halls and of-
ﬁces and accommodations for palace ofﬁcials. The inner, more private, courts
were reserved for the king and his family. This section also contained gardens
and bathing facilities, as well as apartments and work areas for retainers and
domestic servants (Kendall 1973: 128–29). Kings and other members of the
royal family built rural palaces in the vicinity of Cuzco as places for relaxation
(Niles 1987; 1993; von Hagen and Morris 1998: 161–98).
The main temple in Cuzco was constructed of especially ﬁne masonry and
partly covered with gold plaques. Cuzco also contained a large residential
complex for chosen women and large halls for state rituals. At least in the
highlands, every provincial capital was a little Cuzco, with its own state temple,
government residences, ofﬁces, residence for chosen women, rest-houses for
people travelling on state business, and, on the edge of the settlement, well-
built government storehouses. The residences of provincial governors were
smaller versions of royal palaces that the king probably occupied when he
visited. Provincial nobles lived in local-style residences in ethnic communities

578
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
rather than at the provincial administrative centres (D’Altroy 1992; Hyslop
1990; LeVine 1992; Morris and Thompson 1985; Malpass 1993b).
The greatest architectural creations of Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt were
the tombs of kings built near Memphis, which remained the capital of a united
Egypt except during the Eleventh Dynasty, when the capital was located at
Thebes. The most complete royal funerary complex of the Third Dynasty, that
of King Djoser, had a rectangular stone enclosure wall 1,645 metres long and
10.5 metres high, containing a 60-metre-high step pyramid, as well as stone
chapels and other facilities for celebrating the Sed festivals that would permit
the king to continue renewing himself after death. Beginning with the Fourth
Dynasty, royal burial complexes consisted of large pyramid-shaped tombs, with
adjacent cult temples reached by covered ramps from valley temples located
alongside canals. This change represented a growing emphasis on the king’s
relation to the sun god. In the Old Kingdom, other members of the royal family
and high-ranking ofﬁcials constructed smaller, rectangular stone tombs above
burial chambers cut into the rock (Edwards 1985; Hawass 1995; Lehner 1997).
Egyptianpalacesweresurroundedbyrectangularmud-brickenclosurewalls
and contained staterooms, the king’s private apartments, separate residences
for the royal women and children, and gardens, as well as food storage facilities
and administrative ofﬁces. One such palace, The Lotus Blossom of King Isesi,
built for a Fifth Dynasty king, appears to have measured 640 by 231 metres
(Lehner 1997: 231). The original Inb h
• d (White Wall), which came to sym-
bolize the unity of Egypt, was undoubtedly a combined palace and national
administrative centre that King Menes was reputed to have built near the bor-
der between Upper and Lower Egypt. The city of Memphis, which grew up
around this palace, was relocated as the course of the Nile shifted eastward,
but successive versions of the palace and the adjacent temple of Ptah remained
the nucleus of Memphis for the rest of that city’s history (Baines and Malek
1980: 136; Davies and Friedman 1998: 38–44; O’Connor 1989). In addition
to using this administrative palace, Old Kingdom rulers appear to have built
important residential palaces near the construction sites of their pyramids.
During the Fourth Dynasty, one or more such palaces appear to have been
located adjacent to the Giza plateau. Residential palaces no longer used by
the king might have continued for a time to be employed as administrative
ofﬁces.
Egyptian temples were considerably smaller and simpler during the Old
and Middle Kingdoms than they became later. They appear to have developed
from shrines or royal funerary chapels, surrounded by rectangular mud-brick
enclosures, that were constructed in the Early Dynastic period (R. Wilkinson
2000: 16–19). Most temples were built, like palaces and ordinary houses, of

Elite Art and Architecture
579
mud-brick, although during the Middle Kingdom it became increasingly com-
mon for the inner parts of temples to be made of stone. The best-preserved
temples of the Old Kingdom are two solar temples at Abu Sir, near Memphis.
Used for royal funerary cults, they were ﬁrst constructed of mud-brick and
then rebuilt in stone. Each contained an open court in the centre of which
stood a large obelisk that was a symbol of the sun god. Most Old and Middle
Kingdom temples were roofed, houselike structures whose architecture and
decoration turned them into models of the cosmos. The shrine containing the
cult statue of the principal deity, which was lodged in the innermost, most ele-
vated, and most secluded portion of the temple, symbolized the creator deity
standing on the mound of creation.
Although the central government appears to have played a major role in
building and maintaining the main temples at Memphis and nearby Heliopolis,
there seems to have been no standardized temple architecture in provincial
capitals prior to the Middle Kingdom (Kemp 1989: 65–83; O’Connor 1992;
Seidlmayer 1996). Whereas the Inka emphasized their authority by imposing a
uniform architectural style on administrative centres throughout the kingdom,
the Egyptian rulers stressed theirs by enhancing the distinctiveness of their
capital. One reason for this difference may have been the much smaller size of
the Egyptian kingdom. Because it was likely that, in the course of corv´ee labour
or military service, most male Egyptians would visit the capital region from
time to time, focusing attention on its architecture was a symbolically effective
way to express the unity of the state.
The Shang kings and nobility erected large building complexes on stamped-
earth platforms, sometimes within rectangular enclosures surrounded by mas-
sive stamped-earth walls. These buildings had doors and windows facing south,
away from the cold winter winds. The main palace structure excavated at
Anyang was entered through a south gate ﬂanked by two large towers. This
gate opened onto a courtyard containing a great hall at the far end and two
side halls. Beyond, along the main axis of the building, was another large hall
and still farther north another courtyard with an ancestral temple at the north
end. Nearby were servants’ houses. The general layout of palaces appears to
have been established no later than early Shang times (G. Barnes 1993: 126–
28; Thorp 1991). The residences of regional ofﬁcials were probably of similar
design but built on a smaller scale and with greater emphasis on fortiﬁcations
in districts that were exposed to uprisings or attack. Ancestral shrines were an
integral part of all upper-class residential complexes, while earth altars were
associated with administrative centres.
Shang royal tombs were dug deep into the earth and had burial chambers
constructed of carved and lacquered wooden panels. Many people were killed

580
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and buried alongside kings in these graves, together with horses, chariots,
bronze vessels, and other luxury goods. Only royal graves appear to have had
stepped entrance passages approaching them from four sides, a design that
had cosmological signiﬁcance. Burial complexes of other members of the royal
family and of nobles were smaller, of simpler design, and contained fewer
grave goods. Although no superstructures survive, a stamped-earth platform
and shrine appear to have been built over each royal grave (Li Boqian 1999;
Wu 1988; Yang 1986).
The largest buildings erected in Old Kingdom Egypt were royal tombs,
some of which were the largest single structures created by any preindustrial
society. In Shang China the largest buildings seem to have been palaces, which
containedtemplesforancestorworship.TheInkaassignedequalimportanceto
royal palaces and temples for state deities, and the two types of buildings were
similar in design. Inka palaces became tombs and centres of mortuary cults for
dead kings. The largest single Inka building complex was Saqsawaman, which
was both a fortress and a royal ritual centre. Enclosure walls were constructed
around royal residences (Egypt, Inka, China), regional administrative centres
(Egypt, China), temples (Egypt), and royal tombs (Egypt). The chief aim of
monumental architecture in territorial states was to facilitate and glorify royal
authority.
William Sanders (1974: 109) has argued that in states corv´ee labour was em-
ployed mainly to erect palaces, which served as administrative centres, while
in chiefdoms it was used to build temples and tombs, which served commu-
nal (including religious) functions. Yet, while it is true that the largest temple
platform in the Valley of Mexico in the Late Aztec period was smaller than the
much earlier Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan (Willey and Phillips 1958: 184,
193–94), and that the largest pyramid-temple complexes at Tikal were smaller
than the two largest Preclassic complexes at El Mirador, Danta and El Tigre,
broader evidence does not support this conclusion. Egypt was not a chiefdom
when the Great Pyramid was built and, while palaces constituted the largest
Yoruba architectural complexes, there is no evidence that Yoruba polities were
more statelike than Mesopotamian or Valley of Mexico ones, where temples
rather than palaces dominated city centres and symbolized urban corporate
identity. Yoruba data also call into question the notion that palaces as secular
entities can be distinguished from temples as religious ones. Likewise, Classic
Maya ‘palaces’ may have served various ritual functions, while temples were as-
sociated with cosmic deities that were not only related to the city as a whole but
also identiﬁed with individual deceased rulers. In the Valley of Mexico during
the Late Aztec period, as well as in Mesopotamia and among the Classic Maya,
increasing palace size and opulence appear to have been the consequences of

Elite Art and Architecture
581
expanding royal power, which was accompanied in hegemonic states by the
increasing size of temples. In the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia this sit-
uation reﬂected either a balance of power between rulers and other powerful
institutions or, more likely, growing royal patronage of religious institutions
that continued to symbolize the community. Among the Maya, the increasing
size of both ‘temples’ and ‘palaces’ may have reﬂected greater royal control
over the economy. This evidence further calls into question the suggestion that
general stages of development can be differentiated among early civilizations.
In territorial states, temples, tombs, and palaces served in various ways and
combinations as symbols of royal power.
The energy expended on monumental architecture was considerable in all
early civilizations but appears to have varied signiﬁcantly from one to another.
While it is impossible, given the limited data that have survived, to calculate
precise energy expenditures on monumental architecture, rough approxima-
tions based on current population estimates and the largest surviving struc-
tures are possible. Among territorial states constructing the stone pyramids
and upper-class tombs of Old Kingdom Egypt appears to have required a
greater expenditure of energy in relation to total population than the impres-
sive monumental stone architecture of the Inka. The Egyptian pyramids of
the Fourth Dynasty were the most ambitious short-term building projects un-
dertaken by any early civilization. While the construction of massive stamped-
earth walls and platforms in Shang China necessitated considerable expendi-
tures of energy, the work time estimated to have built the main enclosure at
Zhengzhou (ten thousand persons working for four years [Hsu and Linduff
1988: 20]) falls far short of the labour required to build the largest Egyptian
pyramid.
Among city-state civilizations, the Maya’s ubiquitous construction of stone
temples, palaces, and elite residences probably represented the highest per
capita expenditure of energy on monumental architecture. The various city-
states in the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia, with their stone and brick
temples and palaces, seem to have occupied a middle position. While the
stone, rubble, and mortar construction of the Valley of Mexico was probably
more labour-intensive than the brick construction of Mesopotamia, the total
per capita labour input required to build its temples and palaces was probably
less than that required to construct Mesopotamia’s many temples, palaces, and
city walls. The Yoruba’s stamped-earth buildings and less elaborate earth walls
seem to have been the least labour-intensive of all the early civilizations we
have examined.
Energyexpendituresonmonumentalarchitectureinterritorialstatesappear
to have exceeded those in city-states, and this suggests that the major factors

582
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
promoting the construction of monumental architecture were the power and
resources of different governments. Among city-states, the elaboration of ar-
chitecture varied directly with the hegemonic status and prosperity of individ-
ual rulers. While, in Mesopotamia, kings and temple corporations may have
begun erecting larger and more splendid buildings as symbols of their conﬂict-
ing political claims within city-states, the increasing power of kings eventually
enabled rulers to sponsor all forms of monumental construction.
cultural traditions
The elite art and architecture of each early civilization were stylistically distinct
from those of every other, and within city-state systems urban centres exhibited
varyingdegreesofstylisticdiversity.Artandarchitecturalstyleschangedslowly,
usually as the result of innovations within ongoing local traditions. Some Early
Classic Maya copied aspects of the building styles and motifs of Teotihuacan
in emulation of that far-off but powerful foreign state, but in general their
art and architecture remained distinctively Maya (Culbert 1991c; Henderson
1981: 137–38). Inka state architecture grew out of local forms of rural con-
struction, although Inka stoneworking techniques may have been inspired by
monuments created much earlier by states in the Lake Titicaca region. Palaces
and major public buildings dating from the reigns of successive Inka kings can
be distinguished stylistically, and these differences may have served to identify
the accomplishments of individual rulers in a non-literate society (Niles 1993:
155–64; 1999). Egyptologists can likewise differentiate the art styles of succes-
sive reigns, although the monarchs who sponsored these works also identiﬁed
themselves by having their names engraved on them. This suggests that
artists and architects, as well as their patrons, in early civilizations approved of
and may have encouraged limited innovation within well-established artistic
canons.
In Egypt, the collapse of the central government at the end of the Old King-
dom massively disrupted the work of skilled artisans and temporarily ended
high-quality artistic production. Yet basic styles survived, and, as political unity
was restored, the artistic achievements of the past were successfully emulated.
In China the expansion of the Zhou kingdom was accompanied by an effort
to emulate the artistic and architectural achievements of the Shang rulers.
At the same time, however, the Zhou developed their own distinctive styles
(Hsu and Linduff 1988: 311–18). The introduction of many forms of highland
Mexican art and architecture into the Maya lowlands during the Postclassic
period is believed to have been associated with signiﬁcant ethnic movements
(Henderson 1981: 206–16). In general, however, the art and architecture of

Elite Art and Architecture
583
early civilizations appear to have been characterized by continuities in cultur-
ally speciﬁc styles.
More cross-cultural uniformity is evident in functional aspects of art and ar-
chitecture. The materials that were locally available played a signiﬁcant though
not determining role in the choice of building materials. At the same time, ex-
otic materials were often favoured for manufacturing elite luxury goods. A
limited range of engineering options restricted the structure and hence the
shape of buildings. No large domed buildings were erected in any early civi-
lization, and tall buildings consisted mainly of solid platforms. In the Valley of
Mexico and Mesopotamia and among the Maya imposing truncated pyramid-
temples evolved from simple house platforms originally intended to raise ordi-
nary dwellings above ﬂood waters or damp soil. Shang ancestral temples were
built on the same low stamped-earth platforms as upper-class residences, and
all Egyptian, Inka, and Yoruba houses and temples were built at ground level.
In Egypt, grave mounds provided the inspiration for pyramids and mastabas,
which were largely of solid construction.
Monumental buildings belonged to a limited range of types: palaces, tem-
ples, tombs, fortiﬁcations, and various combinations thereof. The ﬁrst three
were thought of as different kinds of houses. Large buildings were not de-
signed to be public amenities – the closest approximation to such a structure
being the Inka kallanka. This limited range of functional types reﬂected the
evolutionary proximity of early civilizations to small-scale societies, in most of
which houses were the only signiﬁcant structures.
Most of the two-dimensional state-sponsored art in early civilizations, when
it was representational, portrayed the activities of rulers. Kings were shown
worshipping the gods and, often single-handedly, conquering enemy peoples.
The requirements of Egyptian upper-class tombs encouraged the development
of elaborate art portraying the production of food and other goods and the pre-
sentation of these goods to dead tomb owners and their families. Not all early
civilizations were, however, committed to the production of representational
art. Shang two-dimensional art concentrated on abstract and highly symbolic
portrayals of animals and comparable Inka art on elaborate geometrical pat-
terns. One cannot predict either the style or content of the art that will be found
in any particular early civilization. Yet, while stylistically art and architecture
vary entirely idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another, structurally
and thematically they display not idiosyncrasy but weak-to-moderate degrees
of cross-cultural regularity.

25 Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
L
ifestyle and culture sharply distinguished the upper classes from com-
moners in early civilizations. The upper classes lived in larger, more
imposing, and often cleaner houses, were waited on by servants who attended
to their comforts, ate more nutritious food, wore costlier and showier cloth-
ing and jewellery, were more fastidious about their personal appearance and
hygiene, and cultivated more reﬁned manners. Behavioural stereotypes were
dramatically displayed in the upper-class tomb art of Old Kingdom Egypt,
where the calm, dignity, and physical perfection of the upper classes were
contrasted with the quarrelsomeness, rustic manners, dishevelled appearance,
and occasionally malnutrition and physical deformities of the lower classes.
The upper classes often spoke either a more reﬁned version of the na-
tional language or a completely different language from most of their subjects.
The Aztecs contrasted macehuallatolli, the form of Nahuatl spoken by com-
moners, with tecpillatolli, the form spoken by the nobility and at the royal
palace (Davies 1980: 216; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 140; Marcus 1992a: 528). While
the Classic Maya spoke Cholan Mayan in the southern lowlands and Yucatec
Mayan farther north, their writing recorded a prestige version of Cholan that
developed in the Peten and appears to have been adopted by the upper classes
throughout the Maya region (Henderson 1981: 50–52; Houston, Robertson,
and Stuart 2000). It is now agreed that emesal was a reﬁned, not a women’s,
dialect of Sumerian (Oppenheim 1964: 371). Egyptians studying to be scribes
had to learn the written version of their language, which was based on Old
Kingdom and later Middle Kingdom forms that over time diverged increas-
ingly from everyday speech. Written Egyptian was also presumably based on a
reﬁned version of the language spoken at the royal court and intended to tran-
scend regional dialects among ofﬁcials and administrators. Knowing written
Egyptian presumably inﬂuenced the language that was spoken by the educated
classes in much the same way that knowing modern literary Arabic modiﬁes
584

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
585
colloquial speech (J. Allen 2000: 1–2). The royal version of Quechua spoken
by the Inka upper class differed from the Quechua that served throughout
their kingdom as a language of administration. Quechua had spread as a lingua
franca from the central coast of Peru and been used for trading and intereth-
nic communication in the central highlands long before the Inka adopted
it as their ofﬁcial language of administration. The Inka elite appear origi-
nally to have spoken a language of their own. The royal version of Quechua
that replaced this language coexisted with the Quechua used throughout the
Andean area and the parent Quechua languages that were spoken in central
coastal Peru (Gose 1993: 505; Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 807–9; Salomon
1986: 189).
A major source of the identity, self-esteem, and power of the upper classes
was possession of specialized knowledge, some of which increased their abil-
ity to organize themselves and administer society. One of the most interesting
technological innovations of early civilizations was the development of complex
systems for storing information. The structural properties of writing provide
detailed insights into the factors that produced cross-cultural similarities and
differences in a particular aspect of culture. More esoteric forms of knowl-
edge were believed to enhance the ability of upper-class people to manipulate
supernatural forces for their own beneﬁt as well as to promote the general
well-being of society. Especially elaborate knowledge of this sort included
calendrics, medicine, divination, and magic. Both administrative and esoteric
knowledge increased not only the self-conﬁdence of the upper classes but also
the respect and awe with which ordinary people regarded them.
recording systems
In the eighteenth century, writing was identiﬁed as the key feature deﬁning
civilization (Childe 1950; Gelb 1963: 221; Morgan 1907 [1877]: 12; Sjoberg
1960: 32–34, 38). Jack Goody (1986; Goody and Watt 1963) has argued, in
conformity with that view, that writing has made literate societies totally dif-
ferentfromnon-literateones,facilitatingelaboraterecord-keepingandmaking
possible the systematic development of scientiﬁc knowledge, philosophy, and
literature. Goody maintains that writing encouraged forms of thinking that are
increasingly decontextualized, more universal, and more concerned with logi-
cal coherence. He also argues that writing promoted discovery, invention, and
technological progress and facilitated the growing independence of institu-
tions from state control as well as the development of private property. Yet the
extent to which recording systems were developed or used varied considerably
from one early civilization to another. Writing as Goody deﬁnes it occurred in

586
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
only four of the early civilizations in our sample. The recording systems used
in other early civilizations varied in nature and in what they were intended to
accomplish.
The oldest and most generally accepted deﬁnition of ‘writing’ is that it is
a system which records sequences of words in durable signs. Thus a com-
petent reader who has never before encountered a particular text can read
from it the same sequence of words that its author wrote down. No writ-
ing system records every feature of actual speech (the loudness and speed
of utterances are rarely indicated), and many early forms of writing failed to
supply grammatical and phonetic elements that could easily and unambigu-
ously be inferred by the native speakers of a language. Whether or not every
morpheme (minimal meaningful semantic unit) is represented, writing, as de-
ﬁned above, is distinguished from protowriting or, more properly (since not
all ‘protowriting’ evolved into writing systems), semasiography. Semasiography
uses pictograms and ideograms to represent ideas. A pictogram is a sign that
has a speciﬁc meaning but one that may be expressed verbally in different
ways. Thus a pictogram in a list of North American Plains Indian year names
that represents the year 1876 by depicting the death of a long-haired United
States cavalry ofﬁcer could have been ‘read’ in any Plains Indian language
as ‘the year Long-Hair was killed by the Sioux’, ‘the year we defeated Gen-
eral Custer’, or ‘the year we won the Battle of the Little Bighorn’ (Nabokov
1996: 39–41). In such a recording system pictograms represent speciﬁc ob-
jects or events metonymically, by depicting some well-known aspect of them.
Ideograms are signs that arbitrarily represent speciﬁc concepts which, like pic-
tograms, can be read in any language. Examples are the Arabic numerals 1, 2,
and 3.
In semasiography more abstract concepts are sometimes represented by
rebuses, or phonetic extensions, which display an object that represents a word
that sounds similar to what is intended. Unlike pictograms and ideograms,
rebuses can normally be read only in a speciﬁc language. Examples in English
are representing the pronoun ‘I’ by drawing an eye or the preﬁx ‘be-’ by drawing
a bee. The most rudimentary applications of rebuses are to record personal or
place names that have literal meanings, such as ‘Red Cloud’ and ‘Big Bear’.
Semasiography can be used to record limited and isolated sets of concepts
such as personal names, toponyms, types of goods, or calendar dates and to
suggest sequences of events in mnemonic form. It cannot, however, record
consecutive speech, only certain general concepts and words belonging to
certain speciﬁc semantic categories. As such limited recording systems evolve
in the direction of representing speech, they typically ﬁrst indicate sequences
of nouns and verbs, then begin to specify adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions,

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
587
and prepositions, and ﬁnally note tense markers and other strictly grammatical
morphemes (Hanks 1989: 18; Sampson 1985: 49–50).
In recent years some Mesoamericanists have sought to have complex high-
land Mexican forms of semasiography, including those found in the Valley of
Mexico, accepted as writing systems. They argue that the term ‘writing’ should
be extended to cover any form of recording that represents some speciﬁc words
as well as ideas (Boone and Mignolo 1994; Marcus 1992a; M. Smith 1973).
In two early civilizations, Egypt and Mesopotamia, it is now possible to trace
the transformation of semasiography into writing. Yet, while acknowledging
that there can be a continuum between complex semasiography and writing
which makes the boundary separating them arbitrary, conﬂating the two prac-
tices fails to recognize their fundamental and irreducible differences. Writing
and semasiography can more proﬁtably be treated as two different types of
recording systems rather than as different types of writing.
Early recording systems served at least three different functions. One func-
tion was commemorating kings and their deeds. This sort of recording ﬂour-
ished in Egypt in the late Predynastic period, most notably on elaborate stone
maces and palettes. These objects, produced for the royal court and decorated
with scenes of royal activity, bore signs that speciﬁed the names of rulers, top-
onyms, and the names and titles of ofﬁcials. They marked the beginning of a
long tradition of labelled representations of Egyptian monarchs and ofﬁcials
(Davis 1992). Labelled representations of kings also provide a large part of the
surviving corpus of Maya inscriptions.
The second major function was administrative. This is attested in
Mesopotamian temple complexes beginning as early as the second half of the
fourth millennium. Over time such records developed into an elaborate corpus
of temple, palace, and eventually personal records associated with the receipt
and ownership of goods, the sale of land, houses, slaves, and other property,
loans and other commercial agreements, royal decrees and regulations relat-
ing to commerce, and legal proceedings concerning economic matters. At a
very early period sign lists were compiled for training Mesopotamian recorders
that helped to standardize and ensure mutual comprehensibility of the records
produced by different scribes (Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993; Postgate
1992: 66–68). Early Egyptian records on papyrus have been lost, but surviving
wood, bone, and ivory labels from the Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods
identify the owners, contents, and places of origin of jars, boxes, and bolts of
cloth (T. Wilkinson 1999: 41–42).
Finally, early recording systems were used for religious purposes. In China
theoldestsurvivingtextsaretheoracle-boneinscriptions,whichwererelatedto
divination. The Shang also appear to have regarded burning messages written

588
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
on strips of bamboo as an effective way to communicate with their ancestors
andthegods(Creel1937:161–62;1938:38).InMesopotamia,toensurethatno
mistakes were made in rituals, prayers were recorded in written form already
by the Early Dynastic period, while in Egypt written petitions for ensuring the
provisioning of the dead appeared early in the Old Kingdom. The enduring
role played by lector priests in Egypt suggests that literacy was as important
for ensuring the correct performance of rituals in that country as it was in
Mesopotamia (Postgate, Wang, and Wilkinson 1995).
Papyrus scrolls, which existed in Egypt as early as the First Dynasty, and
bamboo strips, which are known to have been used in Shang China, endured
less well than Mesopotamian clay tablets. Mesoamerican inscriptions on stone
and pottery have survived better than have Mesoamerican parchment and
bark-cloth books. Yet, despite the problems posed by the unequal survival
of evidence, what has endured appears to reﬂect real differences in the uses
that were made of recording systems by the various early civilizations. No
one function, such as administration, seems to have been everywhere more
important than any other in spurring the initial development of recording
systems. Writing developed in different institutional milieus, such as temples
and palaces, and for the most part continued to be employed for different
purposes in such milieus. Only in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and China does writing
appear gradually to have come to be used for private purposes by literate
individuals or those who could afford to employ professional scribes to read
and write for them.
Use of semasiography began in Mesopotamia about 3400 b.c., during the
Uruk IV period. The oldest known clay tablets have been found in temple
contexts at Uruk (Fig. 25.1). These early recording devices may have re-
placed or developed out of a still earlier recording system that used clay to-
kens (Schmandt-Besserat 1992), although the relationship between these two
systems is problematical (Yoffee 1995: 285–86). Much later, Mesopotamian
scribes claimed that writing had been invented (presumably in a fully devel-
oped state) by Enmerkar, a priest-king of early Uruk, so that messages could
be transmitted more accurately (Kramer 1981: 22–23; Postgate 1992: 56). Yet
early texts made no attempt to record speech. They itemized different types of
goods, noting quantities and possibly owners’ marks in no standardized order.
It was not until around 2900 b.c. that homophony began to play a signiﬁ-
cant role in expanding the range of concepts that could be recorded (Bott´ero
1992: 80). Only later, in the Early Dynastic period, were efforts made to
record speech. Yet, while the signs in these earliest examples of true writ-
ing were ordered in accordance with Sumerian grammar, their main purpose
seems to have remained mnemonic. Grammatical elements that were deemed

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
589
a
b
25.1. Early recording in Mesopotamia and Egypt: (a) a clay ledger tablet from Uruk, Uruk IV
period – the obverse uses signs to record names and numbers, the reverse records a total of
54 cattle; (b) small labels from Tomb U-j at Abydos, Egypt, dated 3250 b.c. – the round holes
were bored for attachment to goods; these labels record place names as well as quantities and
appear to employ signs as phonograms as well as logograms. Sources: (a) after Gelb 1963: 64;
(b)afterK.A.Bard(ed.),EncyclopediaoftheArchaeologyofAncientEgypt(London,1999),111.
unnecessary or that native speakers of Sumerian could have supplied unam-
biguously from context were omitted. These included many preﬁxes and suf-
ﬁxes that indicated tense, person, case, number, and mood. A fully developed
writing of the Sumerian language, which was not provided until the Ur III
period, was probably devised to satisfy the needs of Akkadian-speakers at a
time when Sumerian was ceasing to be a spoken language (Bott´ero 1992: 83–
85; Huot 1989: 52–55; Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993; Postgate 1992:
54–66). From the beginning, Mesopotamian writing was done primarily on
clay tablets, which only occasionally were baked to harden them for long-term

590
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Word
Meaning
Original
Form
Rotated 90˚ 
ca 3000 B.C.
Early
Dynastic
2500 B.C.
First
Millennium
B.C.
SAG
KU(A)
KA
mouth
head
fish
GUD
ox
SE
v
grain
orchard
APIN
plough
DU
foot, leg
SAR
v
25.2. Development of Mesopotamian signs from the Uruk IV period to the ﬁrst millennium
b.c., showing how signs were altered to improve them for writing on clay tablets and enhance
their clarity. Sources: after Gelb 1963: 70, and Cooper 1996: 39.
preservation. At ﬁrst, signs were drawn on clay; later they were composed
entirely of wedge-shaped marks impressed with a stylus. The directions and
lengths of these marks were increasingly standardized, making the signs ever
more abstract (Fig. 25.2).
The semasiographic recording of goods, place-names, and personal names is
ﬁrst evidenced in southern Egypt in connection with the growing royal power
that accompanied the gradual uniﬁcation of Egypt. Small tags from Tomb
U-j at Abydos, which is dated about 3250 b.c., appear to be inscribed with
phonetic signs as well as word signs (Davies and Friedman 1998: 35–38). Thus,
when it is ﬁrst attested, Egyptian semasiography was probably more advanced
in its techniques for representing spoken words than was its Mesopotamian
counterpart. Semasiography continued to be used by royal ofﬁcials during
Early Dynastic times to record personal names, toponyms, dates, the contents
of containers, and, in an increasingly complex mnemonic fashion, the events
of particular years. Continuous speech began to be recorded only in the late

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
591
Second or early Third Dynasties (Baines 1983). Around that time the signs
being used were also standardized and their number greatly reduced. Even
then, because Egyptian writing did not specify vowels, precise grammatical
forms and the pronunciation of words had to be inferred by the reader. This
arrangement persisted throughout Egyptian history.
Beginning in the Old Kingdom the Egyptians used a pictorial, or hiero-
glyphic, form of writing for religious texts and monumental display. Texts in
this script were carved on stone and wood or drawn with a brush on papyrus.
Hieratic, a cursive version of hieroglyphic, was used for administrative pur-
poses and normally written on papyrus (Fig. 25.3). Although, because it is not
pictorial, modern scholars ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to master, hieratic was used by
many scribes who never learned to write hieroglyphs. While royal and religious
texts appear to have been more frequent in relation to administrative texts in
Egypt than in Mesopotamia, the bulk of the texts produced in both civilizations
was probably administrative. The administrative records produced by state-
controlled institutions were already highly developed in Egypt during the Old
Kingdom. Writing appears to have been restricted to the ruling and adminis-
trative classes during the Old and Middle Kingdoms (Baines 1983; Gardiner
1950: 6–10).
Despite a tendency to ascribe great antiquity and sometimes divine origin
to speciﬁc texts in order to enhance their importance, literary, religious, and
professional writings appeared later than administrative, royal, and cultic texts.
In Egypt, a corpus of didactic wisdom, which itemized the sorts of behaviour
required to be a successful ofﬁcial, and the Pyramid Texts and some other ritual
compositions are all the ‘literary’ works that survive from as late as the Fifth
Dynasty. Some short narrative passages occur in royal and funerary inscriptions
from the Fourth Dynasty, but even terse autobiographies only start to appear in
funerary contexts in the late Old Kingdom (Lichtheim 1973). Literary works,
political manifestos of rulers, and medical papyri were ﬁrst composed in Egypt
during the First Intermediate Period and the Middle Kingdom. Many of these
writings were used for centuries as school texts and for this reason survive in
multiple copies. No Egyptian composition was longer than a modern short
story (Lichtheim 1973; 1976; Williams 1964).
Mesopotamian scribes recorded numerous stories, epic poems, myths,
hymns, proverbs, disputations, and laments in late Sumerian times, but the
stories and epic poems were not worked into larger literary compositions
such as the Enuma Elish until the second millennium b.c. Beginning in Early
Dynastic times, Mesopotamian royal inscriptions, including proclamations and
records of military and administrative actions, were recorded on stone stelae.
In both Egypt and Mesopotamia administrative accounts, because of their

592
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
593
ledger-like organization, retained many of the characteristics of semasiogra-
phy long after the spoken word was routinely being recorded in other genres
(Kramer 1963: 168–226).
In China inscribed oracle bones from Shang and Zhou royal sites provide the
only signiﬁcant corpus of texts surviving from prior to 1100 b.c. Inscriptions
are attested only after 1200 b.c., when Anyang became a Shang royal centre.
There is no archaeological record of the early development of Chinese writing
orofsemasiographyintheimmediatelyprecedingErligangandErlitouperiods
(Boltz 1999). Graphs etched on pottery of the Dawenkou culture of Shandong,
which dates approximately 2500 to 2000 b.c., may mark an early stage in
the development of the Chinese recording system. While limited evidence of
writingfordivinatorypurposeshasbeenfoundatothersites(Chˆeng1960:180),
it is not known to what extent writing was limited to royal court circles during
the Shang period. The Chinese later claimed that, before the development
of writing, they had kept records on knotted cords (Creel 1938: 33), as did
the Inka and some African societies (Lagercrantz 1968). The late Shang also
made ‘books’ (che) of bamboo strips bound together with strings, but none of
these have survived. The Zhou writing system, which is ﬁrst attested in the
late Shang period, is obviously of Shang origin. Oracle texts found at the two
courts differ mainly in the size of characters and their dating systems (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 46–47).
In the earliest known examples of the Chinese script, sentences were al-
ready being written in the same subject-verb-object order used in modern
spoken Chinese. Pronouns and prepositions were also being indicated. The
longest known Shang oracle-bone inscriptions contain about 160 characters,
but texts on bronze vessels, which identify individuals and clans, rarely con-
sist of more than a few characters (Boltz 1986; 1994). Songs, speeches, and
25.3. Formal characteristics of writing systems in early civilizations: (a) portion of offering
formula carved in hieroglyphs on limestone block from an Old Kingdom tomb; (b) Egyptian
literary hieratic of Dynasty XII; (c) Akkadian inscription carved on stone; (d) hand copy of Ur III
bookkeeping entries on a small clay tablet; (e) Western Zhou inscription cast on a bronze vessel;
(f) Shang oracle-bone inscription carved on the shoulder blade of an ox; (g) Maya hieroglyphs
carved on Stela A from Copan; (h) painted Maya glyphs from the Dresden Codex. Sources:
(a) from H. Junker, Giza (Vienna, 1922–1955); (b) from A. Gardiner 1950, pl. 2; (c) from
J. Friedrich, Extinct Languages (New York, 1957), 36; (d) from C. E. Keiser, Neo-Sumerian
Account Texts from Drehem: Babylonian Inscriptions in the Collection of James B. Nies (New
Haven, 1971), document 448; (e) after K. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 2nd ed.
(New Haven, 1968), 188; (f) from Lo Chen-yu, Yin-hsu, Shu-ch’i Ching-hua (Peking, 1914);
(g) from S. G. Morley, An Introduction to the Study of Maya Hieroglyphs (Washington, D.C.,
1915), p. 166; (h) from E. W. F¨orstemann, Die Maya-Handschrift der K¨oniglichen Bibliothek
zu Dresden (Berlin, 1962), p. 58.

594
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
historical records preserved in the traditional Chinese literary canon that are
ascribed to the Shang period have been demonstrated on linguistic grounds
to have been composed during the Western Zhou period. They were either
written by Zhou propagandists or created by the Song principality, which was
ruled by descendants of the Shang kings (Creel 1938: 50).
It is not clear what non-oracular uses were made of writing in Shang
times. Oracle-bone inscriptions incorporate detailed calendars for sacriﬁces
and annal-like accounts of military expeditions and other events, but there is
no direct evidence for the use of writing except by royal ofﬁcials for divinatory
and display purposes. Early Western Zhou bronze vessels were inscribed with
much longer texts that were often of a historical or ritual nature. Yet even these
texts do not appear to have precisely represented the spoken language of that
period. Inscriptions are extremely terse and lack the connectives expected in
spoken Chinese (Creel 1938: 24).
Chinese writing was done with brush and ink on bamboo slips, bone, and
cloth, but on oracle bones texts were also engraved. Characters retained their
pictographic quality, and many can easily be recognized as representations
of the objects with which they were associated either semantically or pho-
netically. Most characters became less representational and the brush strokes
which composed them more standardized over time. Characters cast on Shang
bronzes tended to be less schematized and simpliﬁed than were those engraved
on oracle bones (Chˆeng 1960: 177–94; Creel 1938: 24–47; Hsu and Linduff
1988: 46–49).
The Classic Maya were also able to record speech. Few texts survive except
ones carved on stone monuments, which are mainly records of kings and
dynastic histories, together with short labels painted on fancy pottery. The
Classic Maya also produced books, written on bark cloth or parchment. No
book survives, however, from the Classic period in legible condition, and the
few later ones that have been preserved deal exclusively with divination. It
is unknown whether the Classic Maya used writing to record administrative
data, historical chronicles, or religious texts.
The Maya script, which is abundantly attested only after a.d. 250, appears to
have evolved from the same Olmecoid recording system (1100–400 b.c.) that
gave rise to complex semasiography in highland Mexico (Justeson 1986). Maya
inscriptions consisting of block glyphs with minimal syntactical transparency
and syllabic content appear in the archaeological record between a.d. 1 and
a.d. 150. Shortly after, the addition of pronouns makes it clear that the Mayan
language was being represented. Syllabograms were used by the beginning
of the Early Classic period, around a.d. 250. Phoneticism, the representa-
tion of grammatical particles, and the optional substitution of syllabograms for

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
595
logograms increased after that time. After a.d. 650 witnessed the creation of
more syllabic signs that produced still greater phonetic clarity (Hanks 1989: 18;
Houston 2001; Justeson 1989: 29; Justeson, Norman, and Hammond 1988).
Maya glyphs were highly calligraphic, suggesting a painterly origin. Individual
signs were elaborate. They were arranged in square blocks consisting of princi-
pal glyphs accompanied by phonetic complements and associated grammatical
particles. The same forms of signs were carved on stone as were drawn with a
brush on pottery and books. There is no evidence that the forms of signs were
simpliﬁed over time (Coe 1992; Coe and Kerr 1998; Houston 2001).
The other early civilizations did not develop writing, and their recording
systems were highly idiosyncratic. The Yoruba had no indigenous recording
systems. In neighbouring Dahomey, however, numerical records were kept
by storing pebbles in boxes and bags (Dalton 1975: 100). These served as
simple mnemonic devices, with those in charge having to remember to what
the various quantities referred. The Inka kept accounts on sets of knotted
cords (khipu). Different colours and thicknesses of strings denoted different
goods, while various-sized knots represented different quantities in decimal
order. Accountants (khipukamayuq) kept detailed records of goods entering
and leaving government storehouses and could report precisely what these
storehouses contained at any time. Sometimes two or more accountants were
responsible for keeping track of the same information so that higher ofﬁcials
could compare their accounts. It is unclear to what extent particular colours
and types of cords were used to record speciﬁc types of information or each
record-keeper had to remember individually what the various strings on his
khipus represented. Experts therefore disagree whether khipus were purely
mnemonic devices or to some extent ideographic. It has been suggested that
information relevant to the long-term management of storehouses could have
been recorded on khipus, but it has not been demonstrated that this was done.
Such recording would have required ways of indicating to what periods various
information applied. No one suggests that memory did not play an important
role in providing semantic interpretations of khipus. Calculations relating to
the numerical information stored on khipus were done by manipulating sets
of stones (Ascher and Ascher 1981; Quilter and Urton 2001; Urton 1998).
King Pachakutiq is said to have had painted boards representing his ofﬁcial
version of Inka history placed in the Qorikancha (Kendall 1973: 45). These
were presumably mnemonic devices of a pictographic or even purely pictorial
nature. There is no evidence that the Inka used rebuses as phonetic indicators
to suggest personal names and toponyms.
In the Valley of Mexico a complex form of semasiography was employed.
Books (amatl) were made of deerskin parchment or, more often, of paper

596
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
manufactured from the native wild ﬁg tree or from maguey ﬁbre, sized with a
thin coating of white lime. The pages of these books were folded accordion-
wise. In these books or on single sheets of paper were recorded ritual, di-
vinatory, calendrical, astronomical, historical, and genealogical information,
maps showing state boundaries, records of landholding, laws, tribute lists,
and itineraries for travellers. Such writings were stored in amoxcalli (book
houses) in palaces and temple complexes. The art of recording such informa-
tion was said to have been introduced into the Valley of Mexico by Mixtec
scribes (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 58; Marcus 1992a: 53).
Accounts and tribute lists consisted mainly of drawings of different sorts of
goods, characterized by both shape and colour, accompanied by conventional
numbers. The rebus principle was used to suggest the names of people and
places. On the Tizoc Stone, dating from the 1480s, the town of Tochpan was
represented by a rabbit (tochtli) and Matlatzinco by a mat (matatl). There
were, however, almost no secondary signs indicating locatives or diminutives.
It has been suggested that after 1480 more use was made of phonetics to
record proper names, but there is no evidence that phonetic signs were used
to record abstract concepts or speech prior to the arrival of the Spanish. His-
torical information was recorded in the form of standardized representations
of various kinds of events, such as migrations of peoples and families and the
births, marriages, military exploits, and deaths of important people. These rep-
resentations were accompanied by standardized date signs, while the names
of people and places were suggested by rebuses. History was referred to both
as ihtoloca (what is said about something) and xiuhamatl (written records)
(Le´on-Portilla 1992: 39).
In Egypt and Mesopotamia, where the development of writing is now rea-
sonably well documented, it took between six hundred and eight hundred
years for complex semasiography to evolve into a script that was well equipped
to record language. In early civilizations that had writing systems, only a tiny
fractionofthepopulationwasliterate,andmostofthesewererulersandadmin-
istrators. Shulgi, an Ur III king, boasted that he could write, which suggests
that in Mesopotamia not all rulers were literate (Postgate 1992: 69). While
literacy was overwhelmingly a male prerogative, there were female scribes
in Old Kingdom Egypt. In Mesopotamia a few women belonging to the up-
per classes could write, including Enheduana, a daughter of Sargon I, whose
temple hymns became part of the literary canon (Postgate 1992: 26).
In Mesopotamia, a basic literacy seems to have been more widespread than
in any other early civilization. There, at least by the Old Babylonian period,
many merchants were literate, and writing facilitated more elaborate forms of
economic transactions than elsewhere (Postgate 1992: 69). Literate Egyptians

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
597
used their ability to read and write to transact personal business, but literacy
appears to have been more closely tied to government and temple administra-
tion than it was in Mesopotamia. Those who could not read or write depended
on scribes to record and transmit information for them. In Shang China and
among the Classic Maya there is no evidence that writing extended beyond
royal courts and state administration, although this may reﬂect the limitations
of current sources of information. In Egypt, China, and among the Maya, be-
cause of the pictorial aspects of scripts, some non-literate people may have
recognized the symbols representing the names of their city, major gods, or
the reigning king. Such knowledge, however, did not constitute or even ap-
proximate literacy.
Historical records began as brief accounts of events incorporated into royal
annals, monumental royal inscriptions, and funerary texts. Such records often
contained important elements of political propaganda (Marcus 1992a). The
systematic destruction and self-serving revision of historical records were car-
ried out by the Aztec king Ahuitzotl as part of his political centralization of
the Aztec kingdom (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 100). Early Zhou rulers may have de-
stroyed the ofﬁcial records of their Shang predecessors (Creel 1938: 1–50).
Yet, while the accumulation of historical records eventually permitted a more
systematic understanding of the past in some early civilizations, no literature
developed in early civilizations that resembled the detailed studies of human
history, the works of abstract philosophy, or the systematic analyses of the natu-
ral world that characterized scholarship in the Classical civilizations of Greece
and Italy and in China beginning in the late Zhou period. Writing in the early
civilizations did not produce the intellectual transformation that Goody (1986)
associates with it.
There is also no evidence that the political integration of the Inka kingdom,
which lacked writing, was any less effective than that of ancient Egypt or
Shang China, despite the importance that these two kingdoms attached to
writing as an instrument of bureaucratic control. The political systems of the
Yoruba city-states, which lacked any form of writing or semasiography, were
in no way inferior to those of Late Aztec city-states, which had a complex
form of semasiography, or those of Mesopotamia, which had a fully developed
script. A well-developed script appears to have provided a signiﬁcant advantage
only for ﬁnancial transactions in Mesopotamia and perhaps for calendrical and
astronomical studies among the Maya. Writing continued to play signiﬁcantly
different roles in different early civilizations and was not a precondition for
early civilizations to evolve and function. It is no longer warranted to claim
that, because the Inka and the Yoruba were unable to record speech, their
cultures were less developed than was that of the Old Kingdom Egyptians.

598
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Nor can it be claimed that the Classic Maya, who had a fully developed script,
were more advanced than the Aztec, who did not.
The writing systems of early civilizations display extraordinary similarities in
their developmental patterns and basic structure. All of them were constructed
on the same general principles, although no two were structurally identical.
All the scripts associated with early civilizations were of a logophonic variety
and used from several hundred to several thousand signs.
No fully developed writing system can employ a different sign (logogram) to
representeachwordormorphemewithoutsomekindofciphering,whichtakes
the form of supplying phonetic elements that help to link the script to the spo-
ken language. Therefore all the scripts associated with early civilizations were a
mixture of logograms (word or morpheme signs), sound signs, and sometimes
taxograms (determinatives). Taxograms do not represent speech but clarify the
reading of logograms by assigning them to particular semantic classes. Such
scripts evolved by semantically extending the logograms for items that were
easy to depict to represent more abstract concepts. Thus the Egyptians used
a circle, which represented r (sun), to write hrw (day), while the Shang used
the sign for kou (mouth) to write ming (to call). In addition, logograms were
extended phonetically to represent homonyms or near homonyms. Thus the
Egyptian sign for ‘basket’ (nbt) was also used to represent nb (lord) and nb
(all), while the Shang used a single sign to write wang (king) and wang (to go
to town). Resulting ambiguities could be resolved by adding a phonetic com-
plement to indicate the pronunciation of a logogram or a taxogram to indicate
the semantic class to which a word sign belonged (Boltz 1994: 12–13).
The writing systems of early civilizations varied, however, in the manner
by which sounds were indicated. The Sumerian script was logosyllabic. Logo-
grams, many of which were derived from earlier pictograms, were used to
write the predominantly monosyllabic roots, or unbound morphemes, of the
language. Unbound morphemes included nouns, verbs, and adjectives. Syl-
labic signs, which were easily derived from monosyllabic root words, were
used to write preﬁxes and sufﬁxes and to provide phonetic complements that
clariﬁed the readings of logograms. Syllabic signs took the forms CV (conso-
nant + vowel), V, VC, and CVC (or CV + VC). By 2500 b.c., Sumerian was
written using several hundred logograms, one hundred to one hundred and
ﬁfty syllabograms, and a few taxograms. As a result of increasing systemati-
zation, the total number of signs being used declined from more than one
thousand in 3000 b.c. to approximately three hundred around 2400 b.c.
Old Akkadian began to be written at the time when Mesopotamian sema-
siography was being perfected to record the Sumerian language. Akkadian
was a Semitic language, which meant that roots composed of one to three

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
599
consonants expressed semantic meanings while grammatical relations were
indicated by changes in interconsonantal vowels and by preﬁxes and sufﬁxes.
The numerous sound changes that this produced within words favoured the de-
velopment of syllabic writing (Postgate 1992: 65). While Sumerian cuneiform
remained heavily logographic, in Akkadian almost any word could be written
phonographically or logographically according to the preferences of individ-
ual scribes. In discursive texts, logography rarely exceeded 15 percent. Be-
cause Sumerian signs were used to write Akkadian words, relations between
sounds and signs grew increasingly complex as Akkadian-derived sound values
were added to but did not systematically replace existing Sumerian readings
of phonograms. This made taxograms more important for specifying correct
readings. Yet, at most periods, scribes used only two hundred to three hundred
signs to write Akkadian, although a scholar had to be familiar with both the
syllabic and logographic values of approximately six hundred signs in order
to read a wider corpus of texts (Cooper 1996: 45–57; Nissen, Damerow, and
Englund 1993: 117–18; Sampson 1985: 47–56).
The Maya script, like the Mesopotamian ones, was logosyllabic. It had ap-
proximately 800 signs, but only about 200 to 300 were actively employed at any
one time. The Maya used a large number of logograms to write nouns, verbs,
and other unbound morphemes and a relatively compact syllabary of CV com-
binations to write afﬁxes, clarify the meaning of multivocalic logograms, and
sometimes replace logograms. The word pakal (shield), which was the name
(or part of the name) of a seventh-century king of Palenque, could be written
with a single logogram (a shield), a logogram with phonetic complements, or a
set of three syllabograms. The Maya script does not appear to have employed
any taxograms. About 150 of its signs had syllabic functions (Coe 1992: 262–63;
Justeson 1989).
Ancient Egyptian was an Afroasiatic language and therefore historically re-
lated to Akkadian. It too had roots, usually made up of two or three conso-
nants, which supplied semantic meanings, while grammatical relations were
indicated by preﬁxes, sufﬁxes, and intervocalic vowels, as well as by syntax.
Unlike the Akkadian script, however, Egyptian writing was based on the prin-
ciple that, whenever it was possible for a native speaker to infer the correct
vowels and other grammatical elements, only the basic consonants were writ-
ten. Hence ancient Egyptian writing developed not as a logosyllabary but
as a logoconsonantary composed of logograms, consonant signs, and taxo-
grams. There were twenty-ﬁve uniliteral signs representing single consonants,
about eighty biliteral signs representing two successive consonants, and some
seventy triliteral signs representing three successive consonants, all without the
intervening vowels. Many of these phonograms were derived from logograms

600
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
for words containing one to three consonants. Egyptian scribes made extensive
use of consonant signs to supply, where necessary, phonetic complements that
designated the precise word to which a logogram referred. Taxograms were
employed to distinguish the meaning of homonyms or to identify categories
of words, including personal names (distinguished by gender). Taxograms
were also used to separate words. Throughout most of Egyptian history about
seven hundred signs were used at any one time (J. Allen 2000: 1–31; Ritner
1996).
The Chinese script is often described as purely logographic because it
provides a separate sign or character for each word (morpheme). In the Late
Shang period, when the script is ﬁrst attested, the vast majority of known signs,
which total about one thousand, were unit characters representing single mor-
phemes, often in pictorial form. Because most words in Early Chinese were
monosyllabic, there were no characters without semantic meaning. Even then,
however, as characters underwent either phonetic or semantic extension in an
effort to write words that had more abstract meanings, it became necessary to
supply clues to either their pronunciation or their meaning in order to maintain
intelligibility. This was done by combining two unit signs to create compound
characters, one segment of which provided a clue to the pronunciation while
the other suggested the meaning.
Later, in the Han Dynasty, a tendency to use alternative homophonic signs
(ignoring tone) to write the same word – a movement in the direction of syl-
labic writing – was arrested by imposing semantic classiﬁers on all characters
to ensure that they remained logographic. Gradually the semantic classify-
ing element (or radical) came to be written on the left side of the character
and the phonetic indicator on the right. This procedure ensured that every
homonym was represented by a different sign. Despite this triumph of logo-
graphy, 66 percent of the characters used to write modern Mandarin are de-
scribed as ‘functionally syllabograms’ and 99 percent offer some phonetic spec-
iﬁcation for their readings. Thus from Shang times on, Chinese writing has
been a logosyllabic script disguised as a logographic one. Although ninety-ﬁve
hundred characters were included in a Chinese language lexicon by a.d. 100
and ﬁfty thousand characters are listed in modern dictionaries, twenty-four
hundred characters sufﬁce to write 99 percent of the words used (Boltz 1986;
1994; 1999; Sampson 1985: 145–81; Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 52).
There is general agreement, based on their idiosyncratic formal and struc-
tural properties, that the writing systems of Mesopotamia, China, and the Maya
originated independently of one another. Although it has been argued that the
development of complex semasiography in Upper Egypt was stimulated by
knowledge of the recording system used in Mesopotamia (Diringer 1962: 47;

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
601
A. Spencer 1993: 61–62), not only the signs but also the general principles
developed for representing sounds in the two scripts were completely dif-
ferent. Moreover, when it is ﬁrst attested, Egyptian semasiography appears to
have been more advanced in its techniques for representing sounds than its
Mesopotamian counterpart (Davies and Friedman 1998: 35–38). Each of the
four writing systems, then, appears to have developed independently of the
other three. These are the only ‘pristine’ writing systems associated with early
civilizations that are well documented and reasonably well understood.
That all four scripts were logographic in nature suggests that in the devel-
opment of early writing systems the representation of words everywhere had
cognitive priority over the representation of sounds. Yet it also appears that a
script based on the representation of words alone would have been too cum-
bersome to be workable; users would not have been able to remember so many
different signs. Hence all these developing scripts had to combine word signs
(logograms) and sound signs (phonograms) to represent sequences of spoken
words (DeFrancis 1989: 58; Hill 1967; Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 53). Yet
early scripts created sound signs in different ways. The Mesopotamian and
Maya scripts both utilized syllabograms, although the Maya had a much more
regular syllabary than the Mesopotamians (Trigger 1998b). Ancient Egyptian
was consonantal, and Chinese was logographic in the sense that each sign re-
tained its own semantic value, although indications of sound values were built
into many characters. All four writing systems had a large number of signs by
comparison with later writing systems based solely on the representation of
syllables (both syllabaries and South Asian–style alphasyllabaries [abugidas])
or phonemes (both alphabets and Semitic consonantaries [abjads]) (Daniels
1996a: 4; Trigger 1998b). The Sumerian and Maya scripts actively used
three hundred to eight hundred signs, ancient Egyptian about seven hundred,
and Shang Chinese over one thousand. While the number of signs diminished
as the Sumerian and Egyptian scripts became more standardized, the number
of Chinese characters continued to increase.
The signs that composed the Mesopotamian and Chinese writing systems
acquired increasingly abstract forms over time. In Mesopotamia this was re-
lated to signs’ ceasing to be drawn on clay and instead being impressed with
a stylus, a change that increased the speed of writing. Abstraction was also in-
creased when sign columns on clay tablets were rotated ninety degrees so they
could be written horizontally from left to right rather than vertically. This shift,
which made writing physically easier, occurred about the middle of the third
millennium, although on stone stelae vertical columns continued to be carved
until much later (Postgate 1992: 63–64). Chinese signs were conventionalized
to accord with an increasingly standardized set of brush strokes.

602
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Mesopotamian and the Maya scripts each had a single form. The
Chinese employed a single script, which had two or more calligraphic ver-
sions of varying degrees of formality. The Egyptians quickly developed a highly
abstract, hieratic version of their script for everyday use but maintained the
elaborate pictorial or hieroglyphic version for display and religious purposes.
In all early civilizations aesthetic considerations played a signiﬁcant role in the
development of scripts.
Once established, logophonic scripts persisted over long periods (Gelb 1963:
165). There is no example of such a script’s ever evolving directly into a pre-
dominantly phonographic one. On the contrary, the number of signs used for
Egyptian hieroglyphic writing increased from about seven hundred to more
than ﬁve thousand in the Greco-Roman period (332 b.c.–a.d. 400), prior to
the script’s being replaced by a slightly modiﬁed version of the Greek alphabet
(Ritner 1996: 74). This elaboration reﬂected the increasingly esoteric nature
of traditional Egyptian religion. Reversing early trends toward phonography,
the use of logographs also increased in Babylonian cuneiform during the late
second and ﬁrst millennia b.c. until logograms were being used to write over
85 percent of words in divinatory, astrological, and other technical records
(Cooper 1996: 53). In the seventh and sixth centuries b.c., the Babylonian
language, with its cuneiform script, was superseded as the lingua franca of the
Middle East by the Aramaic language, with its twenty-two-letter consonantary,
although a few conservative priests and scholars continued to use Babylonian
cuneiform into the ﬁrst century a.d.
The major shifts towards more phonographic writing occurred when scripts
were adopted by foreign peoples, who were not constrained by ﬁrmly es-
tablished cultural traditions of literacy and by pedagogical and professional
interests that were tied to an existing script (Gelb 1963: 165). Increased pho-
neticization occurred when the early Sumerian writing system was adapted to
write Akkadian. In this case, however, the cultural milieu remained the same,
and the beneﬁts of increased phoneticism were largely offset by the increasing
multivalencyofsyllabogramsasAkkadiansoundvalueswereaddedtosignsthat
already expressed Sumerian sound values. While the Semitic consonantaries
fromwhichallalphabetsandSouthAsianalphasyllabariesarederivedmayhave
been inspired by Egyptian uniliteral signs, these scripts were not invented in
Egypt, nor is there any evidence that Egyptians played a role in their creation
(Millard 1986). It is generally agreed that the principles that guided the writ-
ing of ancient Egyptian would have made it difﬁcult for Egyptian scribes to
realize that they could have written their language using only uniliterals. Even
if any Egyptian scribes had realized that this was technically possible, they
almost certainly would have resisted abandoning their more complex writing

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
603
system, into which many cultural values had been pictorially encoded (Kroeber
1948: 517).
It is often assumed that, because logophonic scripts were complex and dif-
ﬁcult to learn, they were inherently inferior to phonographic and especially
alphabetic scripts. Yet in modern China and Japan heavily logographic scripts
have not impeded the development of mass literacy, the high consumption
of published material, and the functioning of modern industrial economies.
These developments suggest that the practical advantages of phonemic scripts
are less than is usually believed (Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 54–55). They also
call into question the widespread assumption that in early civilizations scripts
were deliberately kept complex to ensure that they stayed the exclusive posses-
sion of a small administrative or upper class. Literacy remained restricted for
numerous economic, social, and cultural reasons. In Egypt hieroglyphs were
called mdw ntr (the words of the god), and their invention was attributed to
Thoth, the god of wisdom; learning to write in this fashion or to write at all
was viewed as a sacred art not meant to be widely shared. In East Asia, sim-
pliﬁed, more phonemic versions of scripts have been regarded as appropriate
for use only by women, children, and the lower classes (Daniels 1996b; King
1996: 218, 226; J. Smith 1996: 212). It appears that, once a logophonic script
developed, the prestige that was associated with using it reduced its chances of
being replaced by a structurally simpler script so long as there was no serious
disruption of elite cultural patterns (Trigger 1998b).
oral literature
Along with the uses that were made of writing in early civilizations, strong
emphasis continued to be placed on the oral transmission of knowledge. In
non-literate early civilizations and among the non-literate lower classes in
early civilizations that had writing, oral transmission was the only means of
preserving knowledge. Even the upper classes in civilizations that had writing
systems accorded high status to the oral communication and presentation of
knowledge. Eloquence was greatly valued, and material that was intended to
be remembered was often composed in metrical or poetic form.
The Yoruba preserved the histories of individual patrilineages in the form
of itan, oral prose narratives recited by male elders. Itan recounted the migra-
tions and extolled the achievements of a patrilineage and its most renowned
members, traditions that were often at odds with the ofﬁcial histories of towns
and their dynastic rulers. Elders, both male and female, also preserved their
lineages’ distinctivelullabies,folktales,andriddles.Thoseresponsibleforsacri-
ﬁcing to the gods had to remember their families’ special prayers, incantations,

604
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and blessings (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 8). Oriki (praise songs), poet-
ical compositions performed in honour of deities, communities, households,
individual persons, both living and dead, and even special trees and animals,
played a signiﬁcant role in struggles among individuals and groups to enhance
their social and political status. While they were recited by many people,
the most elaborate ones were composed and performed at public festivals
by professional praise-singers, most of whom were women (K. Barber 1991;
Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 7–10). The ofﬁcial historians of the state of
Oyo (arokin), the ruler’s bards, drummers, and cymbalists, were responsible
for remembering and reciting the ofﬁcial myths, histories, and praise songs of
the royal lineage. These works afﬁrmed the priority of the king of Oyo in rela-
tion to other Yoruba rulers. Royal reciters, it was claimed, could be executed
if they made a single error in their performances (Apter 1992: 14; Mercier
1962: 46).
IntheAndeanhighlands,localpoliticalleadershadtheirpredecessors’deeds
remembered in poems that had rigid phonetic structures but rarely rhymed.
Local religious ofﬁcials also had to remember and transmit to their successors
the prayers and hymns that related to the cults for which they were responsible.
The Inka royal court and the various Inka royal descent groups cultivated their
own origin myths and historical traditions. Each set of traditions sought to
promote the political interests of a particular branch of the royal family.
Pachakutiq’s revised version of Inka history, which was composed following
his usurpation of royal power in the ﬁfteenth century, appears to have been
sustained by subsequent Inka rulers. Royal promotion of stories supernatu-
rally associating the origins of the Inka royal family with the Lake Titicaca
region may have been intended to facilitate the integration of that impor-
tant region into the Inka state. Learned men (amautakuna) at the Inka royal
court composed narratives, songs, and dramas about the royal ancestors that
were performed on feast days, as well as prayers, hymns, and love songs. These
compositions were memorized, and the most esteemed were transmitted from
one generation to the next (Kendall 1973: 46–49).
In the Valley of Mexico, elderly commoners addressed elaborate, formulaic
speeches (huehuetlatolli) to newborn infants, young people, and newly married
couples, exhorting them to work hard, behave soberly, and diligently discharge
theirresponsibilitiestotheirfamiliesandsociety.Composingandrecitingmore
elaborate and original works were pastimes of the nobility and ways in which
talented commoners could win royal favour and lasting fame. Rhythmic songs,
ceremonial addresses, and accompanying music were called toltecayotl. Sung
poetry was referred to as xochicuicatl (ﬂower songs), and beautiful speech
was compared to precious jade and quetzal feathers. Song was believed to

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
605
have existed before the universe, and it was said to bring humans into closer
contact with the forces of creation as represented by Ometeotl and ﬁll their
hearts with the creative power that had brought the universe into existence.
Songs celebrated the deeds of great warriors and explored such themes as
friendship and death. They also expressed hopes, fears, and doubts that ran
counter to the martial beliefs that were being accentuated by the Aztec state.
Palaces employed salaried professional singers to compose and perform works
that praised the achievements, wealth, and greatness of reigning kings and
their predecessors, celebrated their victories and conquests, and traced royal
genealogies. These works were sung at palace celebrations and public religious
ceremonies. Temples also employed professional singers to compose chants
and hymns that celebrated the deeds and greatness of their gods. Both sorts
of singers were called cuicapicque (Berdan 1982: 155–58; Clendinnen 1991:
219–22; Dur´an 1971: 299; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 180–81; 1992: 71).
Samuel Kramer (1963: 170) has maintained that the nar (poet-singer or
minstrel) is the key to understanding Mesopotamian literature. Some poet-
singerswereemployedbytemplestotrainsingersandconductliturgies.Others
worked for kings, for whom they trained court singers and composed and re-
cited myths and epic poems. Prior to the extensive use of writing, poet-singers
must have played an essential role in preserving and promoting knowledge of
the past as did the ‘bards’ at the Inka and Aztec royal courts. These poet-singers
probably began to compose elements of the Gilgamesh epic around 2100 b.c.,
presumably for the Ur III rulers, who claimed Gilgamesh as their ancestor. The
epic was not drawn together, however, before 1600 b.c., and its ﬁnal version
was edited six hundred years later. The known corpus of Mesopotamian liter-
ary works, including myths, epics, hymns, laments, disputes, and proverbs, has
been estimated to amount to about twenty-eight thousand lines. Most of these
works are characterized by systematic repetition, parallelism, epithets, simi-
les, and other characteristics of poetry. Hence much Mesopotamian recorded
literature appears to have been grounded in or stimulated by an oral literary
tradition (Jacobsen 1976: 195; Kramer 1981: 289–90).
There is no signiﬁcant record of or about purely oral literature in ancient
Egypt, but Egyptian written texts appear to reﬂect the pervasive inﬂuence of
orality. Many hymns, spells, and religious petitions that were carved on the
walls of tombs and temples and on amulets were intended to be read aloud.
Didactic literature was presented as a written record of verbal advice that
an elderly ofﬁcial had given to his son or pupil. While surviving ‘Songs of the
Harper’, a genre that expressed scepticism about traditional beliefs concerning
life after death, were engraved on the walls of tombs, they were represented
as songs that were sung by male professional musicians. Short stories, such as

606
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
‘The Story of Sinuhe’, ‘The Tale of the Eloquent Peasant’, ‘King Khufu and the
Magician’, and ‘The Shipwrecked Sailor’, seem modelled on the sort of tale
that a public storyteller might have presented. They were all relatively short
and had simple, dramatic story lines. Some were largely naturalistic stories set
in earlier times; others were ﬁlled with supernatural elements. The style of
writing indicates that these stories were composed in written form, and it has
been suggested that some of them were intended as propaganda to support
the kings who were re-establishing centralized royal power in the early Middle
Kingdom (Williams 1964). It is unclear, however, whether these politically
engaged stories were composed as models for public storytellers, who might
have worked as agents for the central government, or were intended only for
the administrative classes, whom they reached in written form. Most of these
stories have survived because they were used as school texts (Lichtheim 1973:
169–84, 211–35).
Among the Egyptian writings more obviously intended only for a literary
audience were compositions extolling the beneﬁts of being a scribe and the
political testaments ascribed to rulers of the First Intermediate Period and
the early Middle Kingdom. In general, the composition of works of political
propaganda that sought to justify the new political order ceased as the Twelfth
Dynastybecamemoresecurelyestablished.Thesecompositionswerereplaced
by hymns or songs celebrating the power of reigning kings (Lichtheim 1973:
134–63, 198–201). Yet, while the milieu of literate Egyptian bureaucrats was
socially and culturally remote from that of farming villages, their literary com-
positions were not very different from storytelling among the rural population.
The important role assigned to oral literature in shaping and transmitting
the values of the upper classes in early civilizations, whether or not these civ-
ilizations had fully developed writing systems, helps to explain why writing
was less crucial for them than was once thought. Writing was used to record
various types of information, but the qualitative difference between what was
written and what was spoken was not great, if a gap existed at all (Halverson
1992; Havelock 1986). Nothing appears to have been created in early civiliza-
tions that resembled the systematic philosophical treatises or studies of nature
produced by later Greek and Roman writers. Scholarship of that sort, while
strongly inﬂuenced by literacy, may have owed more to the desacralization
of the natural world than to a widespread ability to read. Writing invariably
facilitated a more detailed conservation of knowledge and its transmission
without the necessity of person-to-person contact. Even this advantage does
not appear, however, to have been widely recognized and systematically ex-
ploited until later. While the knowledge possessed by the upper classes of early
civilizations differed in content and elaboration from that of the lower classes,

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
607
the two sorts did not yet differ radically in their degree of generalization or
abstraction.
elite education
The ways in which specialized knowledge and skills were transmitted among
the upper and administrative classes varied considerably from one early civi-
lization to another.
Inka rulers paid careful attention to the education of male members of the
nobility and of chosen women. Chosen women were trained to weave ﬁne
clothing and cook and brew for the state; those of higher social rank were also
instructed in religious matters. About the age of ten, the sons of Inka nobles,
Inka-by-privilege, and some high-ranking provincial nobles were required to
attend yachawasi, special schools run by learned men (amautakuna) who were
members of the nobility. While at school, sons of provincial nobles and Inka
governors constituted de facto hostages for their fathers’ loyalty. Students are
reported to have remained at these schools for four years, studying the court
version of the Quechua language, Inka rituals and calendrics, khipu record-
keeping, and Inka history and learning about the law, how to govern, how to
lead armies, and how to behave in a manner appropriate to their social class.
Living in the Inka capital and often serving as pages at the royal court helped
to prepare such young men to become government ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 65,
77–78; Rowe 1944: 282–83).
In Egypt the only ofﬁcial school for training scribes and administrators
during the Old Kingdom appears to have been attached to the royal court.
There the sons of major ofﬁcials were educated together with the king’s sons.
Boys also appear to have been educated to be scribes and administrators by
their fathers or by being sent to live with important ofﬁcials. In the Mid-
dle Kingdom the main school continued to be located at the royal residence
and may have been divided into separate sections for princes and the sons
of lesser ofﬁcials. There were also, however, smaller schools in communities
such as Kahun, where the individuals who took turns tending the funerary
cult of Senwosret II lived. These schools probably were sustained on a fee-
paying basis. Children attended such schools between the ages of ﬁve and ten.
They then continued for a decade or longer to learn how to be bureaucrats
by working in a subordinate capacity in a government ofﬁce or on the staff
of a government ofﬁcial. At school students ﬁrst learned to write words in
the hieratic script and went on to memorize and learn to record simple sto-
ries, formulae, and sentences from an elementary textbook and then study
classical Middle Kingdom texts. Learning to read and write was accompanied

608
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
by the acquisition of elementary arithmetical and bookkeeping skills and a
growing understanding of the behaviour and values of the ruling and admin-
istrative classes. In the New Kingdom still more schools were established in
temples to supply a growing need for administrators (David 1986: 120; Janssen
and Janssen 1990: 69–83; Williams 1972). The main centres where knowl-
edge accumulated and could be consulted in Egypt were the ‘Houses of Life’
(pr nh˘ ), or scriptoria, attached to major temples. The writings preserved in
these institutions concerned not only theology, temple ritual, and architecture
but also astronomy, medicine, history, and all other forms of knowledge related
to the gods and their creation (R. Wilkinson 2000: 74).
In Shang China there appears to have been a palace school where the king’s
sons, children of collateral royal lineages, and sons of non-royal administrators
were educated (Chao 1972: 25–26). These boys were instructed in martial arts
as well as administrative skills, which in some cases may have included learning
how to write. Alternatively, writing may have been the prerogative of a small
group of specialists who learned it from their patrilineal kinsmen as a form of
highly respected craft knowledge.
Among the Yoruba all transmission of knowledge seems to have been accom-
plished by apprenticeship. Sons of ofﬁcials and members of palace and town
associations acquired their administrative skills and knowledge of specialized
rituals by assisting ofﬁce-holders. Often knowledge was acquired through ini-
tiation into ritual societies and organizations and rising slowly through their
ranks. The most demanding apprenticeship was that required to become a di-
viner (babalawo). Divination was required to gain the approval of the god Ifa to
be instructed in the secret knowledge of his cult. Three years of intensive study
were needed to qualify for the lowest rank of the Ifa priesthood. Such experts
generally divined for their extended families. Many more years of instruction
were required to rise to the second and third ranks, the third being that of a
high priest (Abimbola 1973; Bascom 1969: 70–71; Eades 1980: 125–26).
The Aztec required all boys to attend one of two sorts of schools. Sons
of nobles and a few commoners attended schools attached to major temples
where they were trained to become priests, high-level administrators, and
scribes. This required intensive instruction in astrology, calendrics, dream in-
terpretation, record-keeping, oratory, and the martial arts, as well as in the
cultivated speech and manners of the nobility (Berdan 1982: 88–90, 143; Le´on-
Portilla 1963: 134–39). Probably associated with these schools were the tlama-
tinime (learned men), who are described as composers and teachers of songs
that encoded scientiﬁc and historical knowledge and advisers to rulers. The
Texcocan kings were renowned for promoting such scholarship (Berdan 1982:
143; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 16, 69–74).

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
609
In Mesopotamia record-keeping was ﬁrst associated with temples. Standard-
ized word lists suggest that record-keepers were being formally trained already
in the Uruk period. At least as early as 2500 b.c., schools called ´edubba (tablet
houses) were located next to temples and palaces, where scribes (dubˇsar) were
trained to manage the affairs of these institutions. These schools were the ma-
jor centres in which Mesopotamian culture was conserved and elaborated. By
the Ur III period there were also private schools for children from families
that could afford tuition. Every school was under the authority of an adda
´edubba (school father), who was assisted by one or more senior students or
assistant teachers, called ‘big [or older] brothers’ (ˇseˇsgal). The students were
dumu ´edubba (school’s sons). Boys (only very rarely girls) began attending
these schools when they were between ﬁve and seven years old. They were
taught writing, elementary mathematics, and the forms of legal and admin-
istrative documents. They ﬁrst learned to write syllabograms and logograms,
then multisign words, and then short and long texts, which they copied or
memorized. Semitic-speaking children also had to learn Sumerian, which, al-
though it continued to be of literary and sometimes administrative importance,
was ceasing to be a spoken language. Bilingual lists of words, accompanied by
phonetic renderings of the Sumerian ones, were compiled to facilitate this
study. The establishment of private schools was associated with the spread of
literacy beyond the conﬁnes of temple and palace administrations, in partic-
ular among merchants and some craft workers, but hymns were included in
the libraries of private schools that had no direct connection with temples.
Schools as an institution aspired to be centres of learning where old texts were
copied and preserved and new ones composed (Kramer 1963: 229–45; 1981:
3–16; Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993: 104–10; Postgate 1972: 814; 1992:
67–70, 153).
Thus, in the two best-documented territorial states, Inka Peru and ancient
Egypt, the royal court was the main centre of formal education and the
place where sons of the most important administrators were trained. A
similar arrangement probably existed in Shang China. In Egypt the growing
need for scribes to handle administrative matters led to the creation of
schools that were community-based and privately supported. Specialized
education was more variable in city-states. Among the heterarchical Yoruba,
all education was by apprenticing or initiation into a society or cult. In
Mesopotamia, where class membership was not formally hereditary, the
increasing use of writing encouraged the development of private schools in
addition to temple and palace ones. In the Valley of Mexico, where class
divisions were hereditary, upper-class education was controlled by the state
and managed through temples and priests. Formal schools seem to have

610
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
been the most developed and varied in states where writing or complex
semasiography became essential for bureaucratic management and private
business.
specialized knowledge
Societies that did not distinguish the natural and supernatural realms could
not differentiate as we do between natural science and religion. Miguel Le´on-
Portilla (1963: xxi) maintains that the Aztec did not distinguish philosophy,
religion, and science. The sixteenth-century Yucatec Mayan term miats cov-
ered what the Spanish differentiated as philosophy, science, art, culture, and
wisdom (Tate 1992: 30). Modern distinctions do not accord with the cosmo-
logical understandings of early civilizations.
Notably absent in the surviving records of literate early civilizations are
documents relating to their extraordinary architectural and other technologi-
cal achievements. While Egyptian school texts contain formulae for calculating
the approximate volumes of pyramids, no manuals describe how a real pyramid
was planned and built. Nor are there early Chinese texts dealing with bronze-
casting. Either these operations were carried out by non-literate craftsmen or
such records and instruction guides as existed were insufﬁciently numerous
or appreciated to have survived. There is therefore no way to know whether
Chinese bronze-casting was treated as a straightforward technological pro-
cess or whether magic and ritual played an integral role in casting ceremonial
vessels, as it did in at least some metal-casting in Benin. Much more docu-
mentation is available concerning calendrics, medicine, divination, and magic,
which routinely combined what we would interpret as rational practices with
magical and religious ones.
Anthony Aveni (1989), in his comparative study of calendar systems, con-
cludes that all governments of early civilizations bureaucratically organized
time. Calendars took account of the periodicities of astronomical bodies and
of seasonal and biological cycles and related them to human activities. Day and
night, monthly lunar cycles (which affected how much light was available for
activities after sunset), and annual rounds of changing weather were important
features of the natural world to which government activities and planning had
to adapt. Yet arbitrary choices were necessarily involved in determining the
relative importance accorded to speciﬁc factors and how different cycles were
integrated with one another. There was still greater variation in the extent
to which, and how, different early civilizations recorded time over long dura-
tions. This paralleled the greater variation among cosmogonies than among
more observation-based cosmologies.

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
611
The Egyptian diurnal cycle began at dawn. Egyptian ofﬁcials divided each
daylight period (hrw) and each night (grh
• ) into twelve equal hours (wnwt),
which altered in length as the duration of day and night varied throughout
the year. The Egyptians also recognized an ecological year that began with the
rising of the Nile ﬂood, as presaged by the ﬁrst observed rising (prt) of the
star Sirius (spdt) just before dawn in mid-July. Egyptian ofﬁcials utilized a civil
year (rnpt) of 365 full days (sw). This year was divided into three seasons (tr):
inundation (3h˘ t), the growing season (prt), and summer (ˇsmw). Each season
consisted of four months (3bd) of 30 days each, followed by 5 additional days
(h
• ryw rnpt). Each month was divided into three 10-day weeks, called ‘ﬁrst’,
‘middle’, and ‘last’. Although it was originally timed to begin with the heliacal
rising of the star Sirius, the civil year fell one day behind the solar year every
four years, with the result that the calendrical ‘inundation’ season eventually
occurred during the actual growing season and then during the dry season. It
took approximately 1,460 years for the civil calendar to correspond once more
with the solar year. This suggests that the civil year may have been created
about 2773 b.c., probably in the Third Dynasty.
A twelve-month lunar calendar was used to organize everyday life. To keep
this calendar in accord with the solar year, an extra lunar month was added
whenever the ﬁrst day of the lunar year preceded the heliacal rising of Sirius in
mid-July. This month had to be added approximately once every three years.
The Egyptians also used this lunisolar calendar to determine the dates for
religiousfestivals.Priestsdividedtheecliptic,orpathofthesunthroughthesky,
into thirty-six decans, each marked by a star constellation. At night the rising
of each new decan in the east indicated that two-thirds of an hour had passed.
The rising of different decans at a particular time of night also divided the solar
year into thirty-six units of approximately ten days (one Egyptian week) each.
Initially, each year was named after one or more distinctive events, either
in anticipation of these events or after they had occurred. During the Fifth
and Sixth Dynasties, years were numbered according to the biennial cattle
counts of each monarch’s reign. Finally, beginning in the Middle Kingdom,
they were numbered consecutively according to the years of a king’s reign.
In the Middle Kingdom, the second year of a king’s reign began on the ﬁrst
day of the ‘inundation’ season following his accession. In the New Kingdom,
each regnal year began on the actual day of the king’s accession; thus each civil
year consisted of parts of two regnal years (J. Allen 2000: 104–6; L. Bell 1997:
157–59; Gardiner 1950: 203–6).
In Mesopotamia each daily cycle commenced at sunset. The Sumerians
divided each night and each day into three watches, while the Babylonians
divided the time from one sunset to the next into twelve equal parts. The year

612
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
was divided into two seasons, with summer (emeˇs) beginning in February or
March and winter (enten) in September or October. The Mesopotamian cal-
endar was a lunisolar one, based on real lunar months of twenty-nine and thirty
days. These months were named differently in different cities. The ﬁnancial
year began two months after the spring grain harvest, but for other purposes
the year began with the harvest. An extra lunar month was inserted into the
calendar approximately every three years to keep it in line with the seasons.
This was done at different times in different cities. By 2400 b.c., a schematic
year composed of twelve thirty-day months was introduced for accounting
purposes. Years were named after auspicious events such as military victories
or the building of a temple. In the Old Babylonian period, they began to be
numbered, as in Egypt, according to regnal years (Kramer 1963: 91, 140).
The Shang daily cycle began during the night or at dawn. Daytime (ri) was
divided into at least eight periods deﬁned by the position of the sun and by
daily human activities; the night (xi) was not subdivided. The Shang observed a
ten-day week (xun) and had a lunisolar calendar in which ‘big moons’ (da yue)
thirty days long usually alternated with ‘little moons’ (xiao yue) of twenty-nine
days. A normal year began with the ﬁrst new moon after the winter solstice and
lasted twelve lunar months. The lunar calendar was kept in time with the sea-
sons by intercalating seven extra thirty-day months every nineteen years. The
conservative ritualists added these months at the end of years, the progressive
ritualists whenever the need for an adjustment was perceived. Each day was
assigned what at least since Han times has been called a ganzhi name. Ten
so-called celestial stem (tiangan) names and twelve terrestrial branch (dizhi)
names were permuted to produce a series of sixty day-names that were used in
divination and sacriﬁce. Towards the end of the Shang dynasty, six successive
ganzhi cycles made up an ancestral cult cycle (si) that nearly corresponded
with a solar year but was not synchronized with it. These cult cycles were
numbered according to how many had occurred during a king’s reign. Only
much later in Chinese history were the ganzhi combinations also utilized to
label successive years. King’s names were sometimes mentioned in connection
with dates, but this, together with a combination of ganzhi and lunar dates that
formed a thirty-one-year cycle, was inadequate to order years sequentially
over long periods. Later king lists and other chronological information that
have been conﬁrmed by Shang oracle-bone texts suggest that the Shang must
have preserved information about the length of each king’s reign as the ba-
sis for constructing a long-term chronology (Chˆeng 1960: 228–33; Keightley
1999b: 249–51; 2000).
The Aztec and their neighbours, in accordance with their ideas about the
construction of the universe, divided days into thirteen hours (equivalent to the

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
613
number of sky worlds) and nights into nine hours (equivalent to the num-
ber of underworlds). The tonalpohualli (counting of days) permuted thirteen
numerals and twenty day-names to identify 260 consecutive days and was used
for divination and guiding personal affairs. The xihuitl or solar calendar con-
sisted of 18 meztli, each with its own name and made up of 20 numbered days
plus 5 and perhaps in some years 6 extra days (nemontemi) to produce a 365-day
year. Despite its short duration, the term meztli literally meant ‘moon’. The two
calendars ran concurrently to produce a recurring ﬁfty-two-year calendar
round known as a xiuhmolpilli (bundling of years). Although two such calendar
rounds were recognized as corresponding with thirteen 584-day cycles of the
planet Venus, the 52-year round was the longest calendrical unit explicitly dif-
ferentiated by the Aztecs. Thus there is often uncertainty about the precise cal-
endar round in which a speciﬁcally dated event occurred. Different city-states
also used different day-names and appear to have begun their years with differ-
ent months. Historical records kept track of events that occurred over consec-
utive calendar rounds (Berdan 1982: 143–48; Bray 1968: 163–71; Caso 1971;
Le´on-Portilla 1992: 47; M. E. Smith 1996: 253–58; van Zantwijk 1985: 226).
ThebasicstructureoftheMayacalendarwasalsoaritualyearof260daysand
a solar year of 365 days that ran concurrently to form a ﬁfty-two-year calendar
round. In addition, however, the Maya used a long count of consecutively
numbered days. In this system, 20 days (kin) constituted one winal, 18 winals
one tun (roughly a year), 20 tuns one katun, and 20 katuns one baktun. Thus the
date 9.18.5.0.0 fell 9 baktuns, 18 katuns, and 5 tuns, or 1,427,400 days, after the
start of the current baktun on August 13, 3114 b.c. This date corresponds to
September 15, a.d. 795 of the modern calendar. By embedding baktuns in
progressivelylongercycles,theMaya,aloneamongtheearlycivilizations,could
extend their long count forward or backward indeﬁnitely. Inscriptions dealing
with the supernatural record dates that are up to nineteen positions above
the baktun and hence extend over many billions of years. The greatest span
of time known to be indicated is 142 nonillion (142 followed by 36 zeros)
years. According to Maya calculations, all the cycles above the baktun currently
stood at the thirteenth position (Aveni 1989: 190–254; A. Miller 1986: 17–29;
Schele and Miller 1986: 316–22; Tate 1992: 13–15).
The long count did not conceptualize time as linear. Instead, it viewed time
as composed of short cycles of days embedded in successively longer rounds.
The Maya used their long count to correlate calendar-round dates over long
periods. Dates were cited in terms of the long count followed by the day in
the 260-day cycle, the phase of the moon in a 29- or 30-day cycle, which of
nine ruling lords of the night was presiding, and ﬁnally the solar date. Long-
count dates were ﬁrst recorded in the late third century a.d. This suggests

614
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that the long count was introduced at a time when dynastic kingship was
becoming more important. Yet, if the principal goal of the long count was to
record dynastic continuity, the Maya calendar dramatically overshot its mark.
It became a vehicle for speculating about continuities and transformations in
the cosmic order on a temporal scale unmatched in any other early civilization.
The importance that the Maya accorded to astrology as a means of divination
appears linked to the extraordinary development of their calendar.
The Inka used a calendar of twelve lunar months named for qualities, ac-
tivities, and rituals associated with particular seasons. The solstices and the
time for planting were ascertained by establishing the positions of the rising
and setting sun in relation to stone towers (sukanka) constructed on the sky-
line to the east and west of Cuzco. An extra lunar month was probably added
approximately every three years to adjust the lunar calendar to the solar cy-
cle. It is unclear whether the year began with the month of Qhapaq Raymi,
which corresponded with the southern summer solstice, or the month of Inti
Raymi, which occurred at the time of the winter solstice. The solar year was
also divided into twelve months, each made up of three ten-day weeks. It is
not understood how the solar and lunar months were correlated, and there is
no evidence on the way in which successive years were identiﬁed. These dif-
ﬁculties, combined with a lack of written records prior to European contact,
greatly complicate understanding Inka dynastic history (Bauer and Dearborn
1995; Julien 2000; MacCormack 1991: 166; Rowe 1944: 308; Sadowski 1989:
212; Ziolkowski and Sadowski 1989b: 167–69).
The Yoruba observed a lunar year made up of thirteen ‘months’, each com-
posedofsevenfour-day‘weeks’.These‘weeks’wereassociatedwiththeholding
of markets as well as with ritual observances. Each day of the week was named
for a local market held on that day. It is not clear how or whether the lunar
calendar of 364 days was correlated with the solar year. Years were identiﬁed
according to the regnal years of a particular king, memorable events, or the
cultivation of particular plots of land (Bascom 1969: 25; Ojo 1966a: 296–307).
The common use of a lunisolar calendar, which sought to correlate a set of
lunar months and a solar year, and the eventual adoption of a schematic year
for administrative purposes might have resulted from the various historical
links between Egypt and Mesopotamia. The employment of calendar rounds
for ritual purposes in early China and Mesoamerica also might be interpreted
as evidence of some sort of historical connection between these two regions.
Yet the development of lunisolar calendars in Peru as well as China and of a
schematic administrative calendar in Peru as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia
indicates that these sorts of reckonings may have been invented independently
in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The Chinese and Mesoamerican divinatory cycles

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
615
are also very different, suggesting that any historical connections were very
remote and general. The Maya long count was unique. To explain the similari-
ties and differences in the calendrical systems of early civilizations, more than
historical connections must be considered.
All early civilizations recognized units of time approximating a solar year di-
vided into ‘months’ approximating a lunar cycle and ‘weeks’ of four to ten days.
It has been suggested that days, months, and solar years may reﬂect human cir-
cadian rhythms that developed as long-term, selective adaptations to cycles in
the natural environment (Aveni 1989: 28). Yet, while some ‘months’ measured
actual lunar cycles, others were arbitrarily ﬁxed at twenty-eight, twenty-nine,
or thirty days. The Aztec and their neighbours even more arbitrarily divided
the solar year into eighteen ‘months’ of twenty days each. The calendars of
early civilizations appear to have been divided into ‘months’ in order to take
account of the changing seasons as these related to agricultural activities, state
projects such as waging war, and the rituals associated with these projects.
Four-to-ten-day ‘weeks’ facilitated the scheduling of repetitive, short-term
labour tasks in agricultural societies, and in early civilizations they were used
to regulate short-term administrative and ritual activities. As elaborated by the
governments of early civilizations, calendars also became complex devices for
correlating the terrestrial and cosmic realms and managing relations with the
supernatural. Annual calendars have numerous generic similarities that reﬂect
the similar purposes they served in all early civilizations, but their idiosyncratic
differences indicate the culturally speciﬁc ways in which these goals were
realized.
The Yoruba, Mesopotamian, Valley of Mexico, Shang, Egyptian, and Inka
upper classes carefully recorded the names of successive rulers, but their cal-
endars were not equipped to order events chronologically over long periods.
The ﬁfty-two-year calendar round used in the Valley of Mexico was the most
extensive of these systems. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, careful records were
kept for administrative purposes ﬁrst of the names used to identify succes-
sive years and later of counts of each king’s regnal years in order to track the
passage of time over long periods. Yet episodes of political disruption and
associated breaks in record-keeping created problems for maintaining such
chronologies, particularly when it was no longer remembered which rulers
had reigned sequentially and which concurrently. Only the Classic Maya long
count, by embedding short cycles in exponentially longer ones, created a de-
vice for recording all possible events in a comprehensive chronological order.
While, in general, early civilizations that possessed writing or complex sema-
siographies were better equipped to order events chronologically over long
periods than were ones that did not, the vast qualitative difference between

616
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the general principles governing the Maya long count and all other systems for
recording time over long periods provides striking evidence of the culturally
speciﬁc factors shaping such phenomena.
Medicine in early civilizations was a combination of what we would regard
as natural methods, such as applying herbal remedies that were known em-
pirically to have speciﬁc beneﬁcial effects, and supernatural methods. This
combination did not distinguish medicine from other forms of technological
practice.
That people in early civilizations distinguished between illnesses that could
be cured by natural means and other diseases that required supernatural inter-
vention is often interpreted as signifying that they believed that at least some
illnesses had natural causes. It does not follow, however, that diseases that
could be cured by natural methods were believed to be naturally caused. In
cultures in which the natural and supernatural were not clearly separated no
such distinction was possible. A wound that could be treated naturally might
have been caused by a god’s failure to protect someone in battle, and super-
natural help would be sought for any infection that did not respond quickly
to regular herbal treatment. Ultimately, therefore, all medical problems were
caused and could be cured supernaturally.
The Yoruba attributed diseases to deities who used them to punish social
misconduct and offences committed against the supernatural. Oya, Sango’s
favourite wife and the goddess of the Niger River, afﬂicted worshippers who
displeased her with sometimes fatal throat diseases; Yemoja, Sango’s mother
and the goddess of the Ogun River, caused stomach-aches and drowned her
enemies; Sopona, Sango’s brother, spread smallpox far and wide. Numerous
illnesses were also attributed to witches and sorcerers. The Yoruba sought
to cure illnesses by atoning for their sins and wrongdoings and by having
specialists or ritual societies perform ceremonies that would counteract or
placate the malevolent beings who were seeking to harm them. While there is
noevidenceamongtheYorubaforherbalistsorritualspecialistswhocuredonly
the upper classes, wealthy and powerful individuals could afford treatments
that ordinary people could not (Bascom 1969: 87–95).
In the Valley of Mexico it was believed that illness was inﬂicted by the gods
as punishment for human wrongdoing or as a result of divine malevolence, as
well as by sorcerers who manipulated supernatural forces to harm others. The
god Tlaloc released cold winds that caused gout, palsy, swellings, the withering
or stiffening of limbs, ulcers, leprosy, and dropsy. The spirits of women who had
died in childbirth paralysed young people, while Xipe Totec caused skin and
eye diseases. Excessive sexual activity, which displeased the gods, produced
melancholy and tuberculosis in families, and failure to obey ritual prohibitions

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
617
was punished by venereal diseases, haemorrhoids, and skin ailments. Sorcerers
produced illnesses by injecting powerful charms into people’s bodies.
The Aztec and their neighbours sought to avoid the gods’ anger and to elicit
their help to overcome diseases by means of rituals and amulets. There were
two types of doctors. The more specialized were the ticitl, who were consid-
ered tlamatinime (wise men) and had been trained in the calmecacs. Ticitl
were also priests. Of lower status were female curers and midwives. Doctors
sought, by means of divination, to discover what god or sorcerer had caused
an illness. This involved casting lots, staring into a bowl of water, or ingesting
hallucinogenic substances and, on the basis of what was revealed, prescrib-
ing cures. Treatments for illnesses that were determined to be curable using
natural remedies included purgatives, teeth-cleaning, bone-setting, lancing of
boils, suturing, bleeding, and steam baths. Over twelve hundred herbal reme-
dies were also used. If an illness was determined to have been caused by
witchcraft, efforts were made to locate the charms – worms, pieces of paper,
pebbles, or stone chips – that were responsible for it and extract them from the
sick person’s body. Special offerings were made to deities who were reputed
to be able to cure particular illnesses. (These deities were not always the same
ones that caused the disease.) Midwives and curing women prescribed food
taboos for nursing mothers.
The standing of doctors in Aztec society appears to have been related not to
the kinds of diagnosis and curing they attempted but to the wealth and status
of their clients. Both ticitl and curing women sought to heal diseases that
were believed to require supernatural as well as natural treatment, and both
supernaturally diagnosed the causes of illnesses. Ticitl were more thoroughly
trained and therefore considered better able to diagnose and cure illnesses;
they were also feared because they were thought to have the power to cause
as well as cure illnesses (Berdan 1982: 148–50; Bray 1968: 182–85; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990; Ruiz de Alarc´on 1984: 156–208; M. E. Smith 1996: 260–63;
Soustelle 1961: 191–200).
Mesopotamian society also supported two kinds of specialists in curing dis-
eases. The asˆu (doctor) was trained in the medical lore associated with the
city of Isin. He did not examine the body but noted symptoms and prescribed
medicines. The medicines (ˇsammu) consisted of herbs, animal products (fat,
blood, milk, bone), and certain minerals. These substances, none of which
was rare or expensive, were mixed with beer, vinegar, honey, or tallow to be
swallowed or administered as enemas, suppositories, lotions, and salves. Other
remedies included laxatives, diuretics, and cough syrups. Asˆus consulted clay
tablets that listed symptoms, cures, and sometimes a sick person’s chances of
recovery.

618
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The second type of healer, the aˇsipu (diviner physician), was said to have
been trained in the lore of the city of Eridu. He carefully observed the sick
person’s body, treating its temperature, colour, and pulse as omens that would
reveal the cause of the disease and allow him to propose a cure. Cures consisted
of a combination of the traditional pharmacopoeia and conjuration. An aˇsipu
sought to persuade the gods to reverse their sentence by employing exorcistic
rituals (namburb¯u) that transferred the illness to someone else or to an image
(salmu). Animal sacriﬁces might be offered to Erishkegal, the ruler of the
underworld, as a substitute (p¯uhu) for the sick person. Doctors and diviner
physicians shared the view that disease was mainly caused by supernatural
powers, including divine intervention and witchcraft (Bott´ero 1992: 142–43;
Oppenheim 1964: 288–305).
Doctors had the same social status as innkeepers and bakers, and they and
the midwives plied their trade on a freelance basis. Diviner physicians were
superior to them but also generally self-employed. The most successful were
appointed as palace staff. Surgical interventions were rare and discouraged by
laws that inﬂicted draconian punishments on medical practitioners if an op-
eration caused the death of a patient (Pritchard 1955: 175–76, laws 215–23).
Leo Oppenheim (1964: 298–301) noted that very little development occurred
in Mesopotamian medical practice after the Old Babylonian period. He at-
tributed this to the stultifying effect of reducing any practice to writing (a view
contrary to Goody’s) and to Mesopotamian fatalism.
According to John Rowe (1944: 312), the highland Peruvians believed that
all diseases (o˜nqoy) had supernatural causes: the actions of evil spirits, the
annoyance of deities over sinful behaviour (including neglect of their cults),
sorcery, or loss of the soul as a consequence of fright. Most people were treated
by so˜nqoyoq or kamasqa, old men and women who had acquired knowledge
of the medicinal properties of plants or had themselves recovered from severe
illness. The nobility were treated by hampikamayuq (medical specialists). Both
sorts of curers sought to divine the causes of ailments and apply appropriate
natural or supernatural treatments. Collawayna people, who were reputed
to possess great knowledge of the curative powers of plants, were obliged to
serve the king as doctors. Doctors also recommended purges and bleeding and
set broken bones. They sought to counteract witchcraft by removing magical
charms that had secretly been injected into people’s bodies. Hampikamayuq
put some high-ranking sick persons to sleep, presumably using drugs, and
claimed to open their bodies and cleanse them of the toads and other charms
that sorcerers had injected into them. Ordinary people regarded washing in
ﬂowing rivers as a way to cleanse their bodies of diseases. It is unclear if the
trepanning – cutting holes in skulls of living people – that was practised in the

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
619
Cuzco area was intended to treat injuries to the brain or to remove supernatural
charms.
Sacriﬁces played an important role in Inka healing. The treatment of broken
bones involved not only setting them but also sacriﬁcing to appease the spirit
who had caused the injury. A high-ranking noble who contracted a very serious
illness might sacriﬁce one of his own children in the hope that the supernatural
powers who were attacking him would accept the child’s life in place of his own.
Midwives got their power from bearing twins and besides delivering babies
turned foetuses and induced abortions (Cobo 1990: 164–67; Kendall 1973:
91–94; Rowe 1944: 312–15).
In Egypt the upper classes and perhaps corv´ee labourers were treated by
professional physicans who belonged to the scribal class. Physicians employed
by the state were enmeshed in a bureaucratic hierarchy of at least ﬁve lev-
els: ordinary (swnw), chief (wr swnw), inspector (sh
• d swnw), overseer (ımy-r
swnw), and controller (h˘ rp swnw). The higher ranks may have been medical
administrators.Somedoctorsworkedforthekingandothersforthepalace,var-
ious members of the royal family, ofﬁcials, and apparently commoners (swnw
mrt). In the Old Kingdom female physicians, who were other than midwives,
attended high-ranking female members of the royal family. In the service of
the upper classes were specialists who treated the eyes, stomach, rectum,
teeth, and other parts of the body. Dentists (swnw ıbh
• ) were distinguished
from tooth-makers (ıry ıbh
• ), who were craft workers. Physicians who served
the king often played prominent roles at the royal court. Other royal doctors,
who also served as wb priests, attested the suitability of sacriﬁced animals,
and doctors may have certiﬁed the ﬁtness for human consumption of animals
slaughtered for the royal kitchens. The goddess Sakhmet, who was associated
with the awesome power of the eye of Re, was the patron deity of doctors.
Despite the great religious signiﬁcance of embalming, the practical work of
mummiﬁcation was performed by low-ranking craft workers. Doctors do not
appear to have taken advantage of the opportunities that embalming offered
to study human anatomy. Their medical manuals suggest that their anatomi-
cal knowledge was based largely on the examination of animals’ entrails. The
heart was thought to be the location of an individual’s life-force, reason, char-
acter, and emotions. It was also the source of all signiﬁcant bodily functions;
blood, tears, saliva, semen, urine, faeces, gases, and bodily poisons came from
the heart and were distributed to other parts of the body through veins and
other channels (mtw). It was believed that female reproductive organs opened
into the interior of the body and that the eye was connected to the ear. The
Egyptians did not know that blood returned to the heart. The brain’s only
function was thought to be as a source of mucous.

620
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Egyptians viewed illnesses as punishments by the gods, demonic afﬂic-
tions, and results of witchcraft. Disease was believed to be brought about by
the blockage of channels, which resulted in the accumulation within the body
of bad substances of both internal and external origin. Egyptian medical books
identiﬁed over two hundred different types of illnesses, none of which related
to the lungs, liver, gall-bladder, spleen, pancreas, or kidneys, and prescribed
treatments. Specialized works dealt with subjects such as gynaecology and the
treatment of physical injuries. Herbs were often used as medicines, but other
frequent ingredients included blood, animal faeces, and ﬁngernail dirt. The
use of these substances reﬂected the belief that the best way to purge noxious
substances was to accumulate more of them in the body. The frequent use
of enemas, vaginal douches, and emetics reﬂected a similar concern to purge
the body of disease-causing impurities. Doctors tended to treat illnesses by
natural means unless they proved resistant; then they resorted to supernatural
cures. While some medical treatises claimed great antiquity, their writing style
indicates otherwise; most major surviving texts appear to have been compiled
in the Middle Kingdom. Thereafter, the same medical treatises continued to
be copied and consulted for many hundreds of years without any serious at-
tempt to expand, rethink, or replace them (Andreu 1997: 56–57; David 1986:
123–30; Ebeid 1999; Ghalioungui and el Dawakhly 1983; Jonckheere 1958;
Nunn 1996; Strouhal 1992: 243–49).
Both of the territorial states for which we have information, Egypt and Inka
Peru, had specialists to treat the upper classes. In city-states, the same types
of medical practitioners seem to have been available to all classes on a fee-
paying basis. The Aztec distinguished medical specialists from folk doctors,
but the methods they used were based on the same general principles. In
Mesopotamia diviner physicians worked for kings, but the difference between
them and ordinary curers was not simply a class one; their basic approaches to
healing were quite different.
All early civilizations believed that some or all diseases were caused by
witchcraft or the anger and malevolence of the gods. It is not clear that people
thought of any illnesses or misfortunes as being purely natural or fortuitous.
When it was known how to treat diseases effectively by natural means, this was
done. Illnesses that were known not to respond to natural treatment or failed
to respond to such treatment were handled supernaturally. Such behaviour
accords with a general view in which the world was understood to exhibit
cause-and-effect relations in much of its daily working but was also believed
to be animated and therefore ultimately controlled by supernatural powers.
None of the early civilizations gave rise to anything resembling the highly
distinctive,moreelaborate,andfarmoresystematizedbodiesofmedicaltheory

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
621
that characterized the later preindustrial civilizations of China, India, Greece,
and Rome (Bates 1995). Physicians in early civilizations nevertheless enter-
tained many ideas that were similar to those of these later systems.
A concern with the supernatural dominated other major intellectual cre-
ations of the early civilizations. While the production of new medical knowl-
edge appears to have reached a virtual standstill in late Middle Kingdom Egypt,
the collection and editing of spells intended to ensure the well-being of in-
dividuals after death remained a vital focus of that civilization’s intellectual
activity. In the Old Kingdom the Pyramid Texts, which were inscribed in royal
tombs, performed this function ﬁrst for kings alone and then for a few queens
as well (Faulkner 1969). In the First Intermediate Period the Pyramid Texts
evolved into the Cofﬁn Texts, which were available to all who could afford to
have them inscribed on their cofﬁns. In the New Kingdom spells, some based
on Cofﬁn Texts, were inscribed on papyrus scrolls which were sold to indi-
viduals to be buried with them. Almost two hundred chapters of spells were
assigned to ‘The Spells of Coming Forth by Day’ (rw nw prt m hrw), better
known in English as ‘The Book of the Dead’. Some of these chapters, such
as ‘The Declaration of Innocence’ and ‘The Judgement of the Dead’, were
deemed essential elements of this work, but no surviving copy contains every
chapter. At the same time, special funerary texts were being inscribed in royal
tombs. The composing of new texts to assist the souls of the dead ceased only
at the end of the New Kingdom (Sørensen 1989). All these works were based
on the belief that magic (h.k3) played a major role in maintaining the cosmic
order. Another form of organized supernatural knowledge was lists of lucky
and unlucky days (or parts of days) accompanied by advice for coping with the
unlucky ones (D’Auria 1988; Englund 1989b: 24; Faulkner 1985).
In Mesopotamia the main focus of upper-class study was divination. Omen
texts appear late in the Old Babylonian period, but allusions to divination
abound in historical and religious texts in Early Dynastic times. In later peri-
ods neighbouring peoples regarded divination as the Mesopotamians’ major
intellectual achievement. Mesopotamians believed that the gods communi-
cated their wishes and warnings to humans through dreams, bird ﬂights, the
movement of smoke, patterns formed by oil ﬂoating on water, earthquakes,
thunder, rain, hail, and the births of multiple or malformed children and ani-
mals. The most common form of divination was based on the size, shape, and
colouring of the livers and other entrails of sacriﬁced animals. Astronomical
observations did not become the major focus of divination until after 1500 b.c.
The interpretation of each class of natural phenomena required its own diviner
priests. Their goal was to extract the correct messages from omens, so that rit-
uals could be performed to ensure that bad prognostications did not come to

622
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
pass. While diviners worked for private individuals as well as kings, anxiety for
both their own welfare and that of the state made kings the chief patrons of
the art of divination.
To try to improve the accuracy of their predictions, diviners kept records of
speciﬁc divinations and their outcomes. They also amassed detailed informa-
tion concerning events in the natural world. They sought to transform these
observations into generalized statements about what natural occurrences re-
vealed concerning the will of the gods and what might happen in the future if
ritual actions were not taken to alter the situation. While these activities have
been interpreted as leading to the development of the scientiﬁc method, their
goal was to assist relations with a universe that was believed to be controlled by
powerful and quixotic supernatural forces (Bott´ero 1992: 105–42; Crawford
1991: 24; Oppenheim 1964: 206–24).
The Aztec also devoted much attention to divination. Divinatory methods
were taught in the religious schools, recorded in almanacs and other manuals,
and cultivated by specialist priests. Deities and humans alike were believed to
be subject to shifting cosmic forces that vitally affected their personal destinies.
Mexicans sought to divine the future so that they could take action to avoid
personal and collective misfortune. Aztec diviners determined the fate of a
newborn child by casting lots to ascertain how the gods associated with the day
of its birth might inﬂuence its destiny. Likewise, a merchant setting out on a
trading expedition would have his chances of success or failure divined. If the
prognostications were not good, sacriﬁces would be offered to try to improve
the situation. There were pictographic guides for interpreting dreams, which
were viewed as messages from the supernatural realm. Ball games constituted
a form of divination used by rulers. Divinations for the king and members
of the nobility were usually performed by expert priests, who were better
trained and more highly regarded than those who divined for commoners
(Le´on-Portilla 1963: 116–20; Ruiz de Alarc´on 1984: 141–55; M. E. Smith 1996:
240–41, 256).
The Maya were deeply interested in the future. The divinations for their
upper class appear to have been based largely on astronomical observations.
Maya rulers supported detailed studies of the movements of the sun, moon,
and planets over long periods in the hope of being able to foretell the future of
individuals, kingdoms, and the cosmos. The Maya believed that events of the
past repeated themselves in accordance with the motions of heavenly bodies.
Cycles of planetary movements were correlated with each other and linked to
cycles of the Maya long count, and these observations used to forecast super-
natural and historical events. Because of the detailed astronomical data base
which their calendar allowed them to create, expert Maya diviners were able

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
623
to extend their calculations of planetary and stellar conjunctions far beyond
anything commoners could attempt (Aveni 1992).
The Inka elite also elaborated special forms of divination. Fire divination,
practised by specialists called yakarka who came from Waro, near Cuzco,
was used to uncover treason. A special form of lung divination (kalpa), which
involved inﬂating the lungs of sacriﬁced llamas, was employed to determine
issues of major importance to the king, such as the outcome of military cam-
paigns or the choice of an heir to the throne. More routine issues were divined
using the lungs of birds or guinea pigs. Other forms of divination included ob-
serving the forms taken by smoke rising from sacriﬁces, casting pebbles, beans,
or maize kernels, and observing the movements of spiders or snakes. These
simpler forms were used for deciding whether to plant crops, travel, or marry
and how to cure common illnesses. Guidance was also sought from the dead
speaking through spirit mediums, through spirit possession involving the thun-
der god Illapa and other nature deities, and by having mediums prophesy while
they were intoxicated or inﬂuenced by drugs. Both divination and oracular
communication were practised by commoners as well as by the upper classes,
but the forms employed by the latter were more elaborate and more carefully
controlled by the state (MacCormack 1991: 303–6; Rowe 1944: 302–4).
At the Shang court, divination received lavish royal attention and patronage.
Scapulimantic diviners kept records of the successes and failures of their di-
vinations, apparently in an effort to improve their methods. They also kept
recordsofsolarandlunareclipses,includingonesthatwereobservedonlyinre-
mote provinces, and information about the weather and the movements of the
planets, which were believed to affect the fortunes of the kingdom and its rulers
(Chˆeng 1960: 226–27; Keightley 1978a; 1999b; 1999c).
A Yoruba diviner had to memorize and learn the various meanings of more
than one thousand verses that facilitated the interpretation of divinatory pro-
cedures and guided him in prescribing sacriﬁces that were appropriate for
gaining a desired blessing or averting misfortune.
The most important upper-class intellectual activities in early civilizations
were concerned with improving relations with the supernatural powers that
animated the cosmos. These activities were focused on divining the will of
the gods, deﬂecting their anger, maintaining the cosmic order, averting illness,
helping individuals after death, and averting social calamities. Analogous con-
cerns were shared by the lower classes, but the upper classes were able to
sponsor specialists to develop divinatory techniques that they hoped would
beneﬁt themselves and their kingdoms. Such efforts often encouraged the de-
tailed observation of natural phenomena, but their primary goal was to regulate
relations with the supernatural and natural orders.

624
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
knowledge and its uses
Scholars such as Gordon Childe (1965 [1936]) and Benjamin Farrington (1936)
maintained that theoretical as opposed to practical knowledge was ﬁrst pro-
duced by the scribes of early civilizations, but they believed that the initial
objective of systematic observation of the natural world was not the enhance-
ment of technical knowledge but the cultivation of techniques for sociopolitical
control and the manipulation of the supernatural. Technological knowledge,
when its development was not actively discouraged, was regarded as the pre-
serve of craft workers and farmers. Thus the distinction between a managerial
class that was exempt from manual labour and lower-class artisans and farmers
was reﬂected in a dichotomy between thinking about nature and acting on
it. This distinction, Childe and Farrington claimed, in some early civilizations
eventually created hitherto unknown dichotomies between mind and matter,
subject and object, and society and nature. They argued that the rulers of early
civilizations rejected the pursuit of scientiﬁc knowledge in favour of magic and
superstition because they regarded the latter as powerful techniques for social
control and therefore supportive of their own despotic power. Childe, as a
Marxist, identiﬁed technological change as a threat to the established social
order that early ruling classes instinctively feared. As a result of upper-class
patronage of magic and superstition, he suggested, far more magical lore than
craft knowledge was preserved in written form, and craft knowledge itself was
probably riddled with ritual and magic designed to restrict highly developed
crafts to small groups of practitioners.
This sort of functional explanation may be misleading. Early civilizations had
inherited a general view of the cosmos in which no signiﬁcant distinction was
drawn between the natural and supernatural realms and these realms differed
from society only in degree. Perception of the social order as a terrestrial copy
of the cosmic order precluded the concept of cultural progress that Childe
and Farrington saw the rulers of early civilizations resisting. However much
early civilizations changed, the most powerful models for human behaviour
and social order were believed to have been revealed to humans by supernat-
ural forces when the world was created. Cause and effect were understood to
be operative in everyday life but regarded as contingent aspects of a cosmic
order that reﬂected the potentially changeable will of the divine powers that
animated the natural world. In some early civilizations the ultimate causality
was an unalterable fate built into the structure of the universe, but more of-
ten and more proximally it was a personal process by which individual deities
created and managed the cosmos by issuing orders. The aim of rulers was
to sustain the divine model of social organization that had long ago been

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
625
established or revealed to humans by the gods. Within this framework, no
one was likely to have regarded a lack of signiﬁcant development in medicine
or technology as abnormal or technological change as something that had to
be resisted. The long-term attention paid to the elaboration of divination and
magic in Egypt and Mesopotamia is evidence of the importance that the rulers
of early civilizations accorded to understanding the supernatural and ﬁnding
ways to placate or control it.
While supernatural concerns sometimes encouraged careful observations of
the natural world that in later, neighbouring civilizations would play a role in
the development of scientiﬁc knowledge, these observations were made within
a framework in which science and magic were not distinguished from one
another because nature and the supernatural were not differentiated. Rulers
sought supernatural power to control the natural forces on which the welfare of
society and ultimately their own political and personal power depended. The
same view of the cosmos encouraged farmers and craft workers to combine
their detailed knowledge of cause and effect and of ritual to produce food and
goods. Rulers seeking to control relations with the supernatural with respect
to matters about which there were no routine understandings of cause and
effect were forced to rely on divination and magic.
A concern with manipulating and gaining the support of supernatural pow-
ers was ubiquitous in early civilizations. Amulets, incantations, and divina-
tion were employed to ward off evil and win the protection of benevolent
deities, and scribes and priests were encouraged to develop ever more effective
techniques. The worldview of early civilizations encouraged the conviction that
the natural world could be most effectively controlled by supernatural means.
The main aim of research was to obtain a better understanding not of the nature
of things but of how to shape more favourable relations with the supernatural.
In this endeavour, general similarities among the beliefs of early civilizations
appear to have been grounded in ideas that were already present in the various
societies that gave rise to them. This does not rule out the possibility that com-
mon psychological tendencies were important in shaping human behaviour in
these societies. It does suggest, however, that these psychological factors must
be understood in a broader historical context.

26 Values and Personal Aspirations
B
eliefs varied greatly from one early civilization to another concerning
the nature of an ideal human life and what characterized a successful
individual. Despite many similarities in social and economic institutions, life
as experienced by an Aztec must have differed greatly from life as it was
experienced by a Mesopotamian or a Yoruba. Inspired by the views of the
eighteenth-century German philosopher Johann Herder, cultural relativists
have interpreted these experiential variations as vindicating the humanist claim
that every culture is a unique expression of the human spirit that is worthy
of study for its own sake (Vernant 1995).
The source materials available for studying these variations largely concern
the understandings and aspirations of high-ranking males, but these ideals
were probably shared or at least admired to some extent by most people in
the society. Consensus could have been either a product of status emulation
or a reﬂection of long-established, culturally speciﬁc views that were retained
and adapted to new situations as societies developed more complex class hier-
archies. The lack of comparable data concerning the values and aspirations of
women in early civilizations invites the suggestion that greater cross-cultural
similarities in their roles as wives, mothers, and homemakers made their views
about themselves more similar than those of men, but this conclusion may
simply impose androcentric prejudices on early civilizations. Opportunities
for women to participate in the political and economic activities of their soci-
eties varied greatly from one early civilization to another. Women must have
used the varied social ideologies of their societies to construct culturally dis-
tinctive roles for themselves within their families and communities. It would
seem that, along with male commoners, they participated to varying degrees
in a set of social values and aspirations that were realized most fully in the
lifestyles of upper-class males and are documented most fully in relation to
such individuals. Women must often have exploited these ideals in pursuit of
626

Values and Personal Aspirations
627
their own objectives. At the same time, they would have had reasons to view
male ideals and aspirations ambivalently and even critically.
ideal lifestyles
Ideal behaviour for the ancient Egyptian male was expounded in great detail
in Egyptian books of wisdom or instruction (sb3yt) – in fact, career manuals –
which began to be composed in the late Old Kingdom. The model was the
successful government ofﬁcial. The ideal ofﬁcial sought always to appear calm,
polite, self-effacing, and cautious as well as transparently honest and efﬁcient.
He was described as a ‘silent’ or ‘reserved’ man (gr) and as a ‘knowing’ man
(rh˘
), which meant that, unlike a ‘fool’ (wh˘
3), he was able to control his anger
and conceal both his resentments and his ambitions. He knew how to behave
so as not to offend his superiors or annoy equals with whom he had to cooperate
as well as compete. He treated those under his command politely and with
consideration but made sure that they respected and obeyed him. He was
generous as a way of cultivating friends and recruiting supporters.
The ideal ofﬁcial was expected to remain composed even when subjected to
severe provocation. Every aspect of his conduct was guided by rules of digniﬁed
behaviour that he had learned in the course of his education. Self-control,
combined with administrative talent, was viewed as the best way to avoid
being disgraced by enemies and rivals and to attract the notice, support, and
preferment of senior ofﬁcials. Responsible behaviour was viewed as according
with the cosmic order upon which the survival and satisfactory functioning
of both Egypt and the universe depended. In the terrestrial realm, the chief
force sustaining that order was the Egyptian monarch, and being a good team
worker was a manifestation of loyalty to the king.
Moderation under all circumstances was advocated. To be successful a man
had to avoid boasting, drinking too much wine, losing his temper, getting into
brawls, or associating with men who had a reputation for behaving badly or who
might be suspected of subversive behaviour. Adulterous affairs and relations
with prostitutes were to be avoided not for moral reasons but so as not to be
drawn into dangerous disputes and entanglements with their male kinsmen.
Early marriage with a suitable woman was advocated as the best means to
ensure a man’s respectability. A prudent bureaucrat would never eat too much,
especially when invited to dine with his superiors, since gluttony suggested a
general lack of self-control. He had to avoid engaging in idle gossip or saying
things that might embarrass or annoy his superiors. A superior’s mistakes were
to be drawn to his attention privately and very discreetly, if at all. The wisest
course was often to let a superior get himself into trouble rather than oppose

628
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
his policies and risk angering him. Functionaries who carefully followed these
instructions could take comfort in the thought that superiors or rivals who were
boastful, greedy, dishonest, or quarrelsome would eventually be demoted or
barred from holding ofﬁce.
The ultimate ambition of an Egyptian ofﬁcial was to be sufﬁcently successful
that he could live a quiet family life free from the cares and conﬂicts of public
ofﬁce. The favourite setting for such a life was a rural estate, where an ofﬁcial
could relax, ﬁsh, and perhaps hunt for his amusement, enjoy the visits of his
friends, and oversee farming operations. These ideals, which were explicitly
formulated and expounded by administrators and scribes and inculcated in
members of the upper and administrative classes in the schools, provided a
model of male conduct for the whole of society. While the lower classes were
caricatured as quarrelsome and violent, status emulation encouraged them to
copy the manners and attitudes exempliﬁed by their social superiors (J. Allen
2000: 258–59; Morenz 1973: 117–23).
Men and women living in the Valley of Mexico were urged to cultivate mod-
eration, responsibility, and restraint in their communal life. Politeness was a
key virtue and boasting a manifestation of extreme bad taste. The more high-
rankingpeoplewere,themoreselﬂesslytheywereexpectedtobehave.Individ-
uals were expected to be serious and calm – to speak, eat, and walk slowly, avoid
interrupting others, obey superiors and elders, and help the needy. Honesty,
hard work, and service to family and city were extolled as virtues, and compet-
itiveness and aggressiveness were supposed to be curbed by a deep concern
for the welfare of fellow citizens. Humour was not valued. Individuals were
encouraged to feel that they were constantly being observed and evaluated
by those around them. Although violence in the form of war and human sac-
riﬁce was common, its occurrence was carefully controlled by the state. Yet,
despite these ideals, Aztec men were competitive, and eager to enhance their
positions in society. Commoners were described by the upper classes as being
quarrelsome and litigious. Gambling, ritual ball games, and especially warfare
were sources of considerable prestige for men who were successful in these
endeavours, but soldiers could lose their lives and gamblers end up as debt
slaves. These activities were viewed as ones in which individual prowess, skill,
bravery, and supernatural favour counted for more than effective teamwork.
The supreme male ideal was to be a successful warrior. All men were ex-
pected to be prepared to sacriﬁce their lives defending their city-state or trying
to enhance its power. The public oration that accompanied the birth of every
Aztec boy asserted that his main purpose in life was to be a soldier. Schools for
commoners concentrated principally on military training, while young men
of the upper class received military instruction as part of a more extensive

Values and Personal Aspirations
629
education.Women’sreproductivefunctionsweremilitarizedbyequatingchild-
bearing with a man’s risking his life in battle. Young noblemen were required
to validate their hereditary privileges by distinguishing themselves in military
operations and risking debilitating wounds and capture or death in battle. For
commoners the only legitimate way to advance was by capturing enemy war-
riors in battle. Valour was rewarded by kings’ publicly conferring on individual
warriors the right to wear elaborate, minutely graded costumes and insignia,
memberships in military orders, and extensive social and economic privileges
according to the number of enemy warriors they had captured. Men who
never captured an enemy in battle were subjected for the rest of their lives
to various public humiliations. The sacriﬁces it required of men made waging
war the key activity deﬁning their worth. Long-distance traders were despised
because they did not ﬁght for their city-states, but even they carried arms and
were prepared to defend themselves valiantly if attacked (Bray 1968: 35–38;
Clendinnen 1991: 46, 141–45; Soustelle 1961: 217–24).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian elite art and literature gloriﬁed male political
competition and heroic struggle (Pollock 1991: 383). Rulers sought to increase
their power and wealth by dominating one another and extending their control
over adjacent city-states, while individual scribes and craft workers competed
to be recognized as outstanding in their professions (Kramer 1981: 11). The
hero-rulers of ancient times dared to taunt and oppose deities, although they
never succeeded in overcoming them (R. McC. Adams 1966: 151). Yet, in their
everyday lives, Mesopotamians were enmeshed in activities related to farming
and commerce. For men the most important source of prestige was owning
enough farm land and urban property to live comfortably on the income de-
rived from their investments rather than having to engage personally in manual
labour or long-distance trade. Such a life was modelled on that of the gods,
the divine landowners for whom all human beings worked as paid labourers or
tenant farmers. Men who owned much property had the leisure to participate
in the business of city councils and law courts, and these activities enhanced
theirprestigeandpoliticalpower.Successfulmerchantsinvestedtheirproﬁtsin
land and property in the hope that eventually they could abandon long-distance
trading and shift from the traders’ area into the city proper to participate in its
esteemed lifestyle (Oppenheim 1969; Van De Mieroop 1999: 212–13).
Western Zhou society, according to Mark Lewis (1990: 7), was dominated by
a militaristic upper class set apart from the rest of the population by its devo-
tion to elaborate ancestral cults. These cults involved blood sacriﬁces that the
nobility supplied in part through warfare and hunting. The ritually encoded
acts of violence that characterized the lives of the Zhou ruling class were
therefore linked to their most venerable religious practices. Such relations

630
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
appear to have characterized the value system of the Shang upper class to an
even greater degree. David Keightley (1978b: 222–23) has argued that the rit-
uals which governed relations between the Shang upper class and its ancestors
were characterized by a love of order that effectively bureaucratized these
relations. He maintains that ofﬁce-holding was regarded as superior to any
other occupation and that in due course gaining administrative ofﬁce became
a man’s chief goal in life. Holding high administrative ofﬁce was, however,
intimately associated with warfare, violence, and human sacriﬁce. Keightley
(1987) also argues that a marked concern for modularity and the imposition
of unusual forms and uses on material objects in late prehistoric times an-
ticipated a later preoccupation with ritual and decorum among the Chinese
upper class. These differences may have been linked to the segmentary, rather
than bureaucratic, nature of the regional political administration in northern
China, looser political organization having encouraged more use of ritual and
symbolism to promote political unity.
The Yoruba emphasized competition as the quintessential afﬁrmation of
the individual, but, they also valued a combination of forcefulness (ase), com-
posure (itutu), and character (iwa) – which resulted in the use of power to
beneﬁt rather than harm other people (R. Thompson 1976: P/1). Competition
not only occurred overtly in the economic and political arenas but was symbol-
ically encoded in community and religious rituals. Political contests occurred
between leaders on the same level of government or different ones and often
involved efforts by untitled but ambitious men to increase their reputations
and followings.
Andean males from earliest childhood cultivated the ability to ignore pain
(Classen 1993: 75). Coming-of-age rituals involved personal endurance tests
and military contests. These rituals were especially elaborate in the case of the
Inka male nobility, whose collective coming-of-age ceremony was held under
the auspices of the royal court in and around Cuzco each December as part
of the summer solstice feast of Inti Raymi. In the course of this ceremony,
which involved beatings and armed combat to test their bravery, young nobles
were transformed into adult warriors and instructed that their principal duty
was to risk their lives to defend and enlarge the Inka state. Bernab´e Cobo
(1990: 126–33, 215) reports that military activities were considered the most
important and noble ones in which an Inka man could engage.
counter-ideals
There were also counter-ideals. In New Kingdom school texts Egyptian scribes
scolded young men who thought of abandoning their formal education to join

Values and Personal Aspirations
631
the army (Lichtheim 1976: 171–72), contrasting the superﬁcial attractions
of a military career with the brutal realities of army life and the long-term
beneﬁts of becoming scribes. The existence of this literature suggests that the
adventure associated with military life appealed strongly to many young men.
Throughout Egyptian history, military ofﬁcers were never portrayed wearing
military uniforms; instead they were represented as scribes and government
ofﬁcials (Martin 1991: 47–88). It was impossible for a man to become a high-
ranking military ofﬁcer without ﬁrst becoming literate and a member of the
administrative class. This demonstrates both the strength of the idea of the
ofﬁcial as the model to which all men should conform and the extent to which
bureaucratic ideals intruded into even the least paciﬁc spheres of Egyptian
society.
In the Valley of Mexico, long-distance traders celebrated their adherence to
their own ideals of commercial rivalry with competitive feasting, which estab-
lished relative social status among them. They also sacriﬁced prisoners, whom
they had purchased rather than captured, in an attempt to win public esteem.
This was especially important for aspirants to leadership roles in the merchant
community that involved interaction with the king and royal ofﬁcials. Yet to of-
fer human sacriﬁces merchants had to secure the support of leading warriors,
and therefore these sacriﬁces also symbolized the subordination of merchants
and their distinctive values to the hegemonic values that were associated with
the larger society and especially with its military leaders (Clendinnen 1991:
136–38).
A more radical counter-ideal was embodied in the religious movement in
the Valley of Mexico that opposed the idea of blood sacriﬁces to sustain the
cosmic order. This movement, promoted by certain learned men, appears
to have received some support from Nezahualcoyotl, the king of Texcoco.
He was angered by the Aztec upper class’s manipulation of Mesoamerican
religious-military beliefs to justify not only their control of a vast tributary
network but also their increasing political domination of their allies within
the Triple Alliance. These alternative concepts claimed historical and religious
roots in the Quetzalcoatl who had ruled the ancient city of Tollan, but they do
not appear to have been sufﬁciently inﬂuential to produce any fundamental
questioning of the aspirations and understandings that shaped individual val-
ues throughout the region (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 163–67, 190; Townsend 1979:
35–36).
The Yoruba subscribed to two antithetical lifestyles: that of the successful
warrior-politician, who mobilized supporters and acquired wealth and power
within a community, and that of the contemplative sage or wise man, who was
expected to use his divinatory skills to promote harmony and well-being and

632
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
hold families and communities together. The warrior-politician and the sage
exempliﬁed the complementary qualities of compulsion and harmony that the
Yoruba regarded as fundamental components of the supernatural realm. These
qualities were linked to an equally fundamental dichotomy between disorder
and order that was associated with the trickster god Esu and Ifa, the god of
wisdom, and with the cities of Oyo and Ife (Apter 1992: 29). Yet, among both vi-
olent and contemplative individuals, struggles for personal preeminence were
consistent with the competitiveness that constituted the universally shared
value of Yoruba culture. What distinguished the Yoruba from the Egyptians,
Aztec, and Mesopotamians, with their single-minded focus on bureaucratic
skill, warfare, or landowning as a cultural ideal, was the Yorubas’ acceptance
that two radically different goals could be equally important. Nevertheless,
many more Yoruba men sought to excel as warriors and politicians than as
sages.
the impact of cultural traditions
Early civilizations exhibited a broad range of behavioural ideals. Some of this
variation may have been inﬂuenced by social and ecological factors. For one
thing, there appears to have been greater emphasis on individual competi-
tiveness in city-state systems and on personal subordination to bureaucratic
routines or state goals in territorial states. Again, the strong emphasis on mili-
tarism in the Valley of Mexico may have been encouraged by the exceptionally
dense population of that region in late pre-Hispanic times, increasing compe-
tition over land and other resources. The high value placed on land ownership
in southern Mesopotamia could have been related to the importance of con-
trolling crop surpluses in that alluvial region as a basis for procuring essential
raw materials by means of long-distance trade. The Egyptians’ idealization of
the quiet, self-controlled ofﬁcial could perhaps only have developed in a soci-
ety that had no signiﬁcant external enemies. The similar values of the Chinese
mandarinate did not acquire ascendancy until after the Chinese state came to
control so much of East Asia that it no longer had any serious rivals; in Shang
and Zhou times military prowess was valued much more highly than it was
later. It has also, however, been suggested that privileging learning instead of
violence evolved within the framework of formalist values that already had a
long history in Chinese culture (Keightley 1978b).
Yet short-term functional explanations of this sort do not explain the devel-
opment of enduring cultural traditions. While the Yoruba appear to have been
as warlike as the Aztec or the Inka, instead of glorifying military prowess as the
supreme male ideal they embraced a life of action and a life of contemplation

Values and Personal Aspirations
633
as equally acceptable alternatives. Moreover, while Chinese history demon-
strates that concepts of the self can change signiﬁcantly with political and
economic conditions, ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian ideals endured for
millennia despite signiﬁcant political and ecological transformations. Aztec
values, which were grounded in a belief that war and bloodshed were re-
quired to sustain the cosmic order, appear to have been of great antiquity in
Mesoamerica. The values that inﬂuenced personal aspirations in early civiliza-
tions often seem to have taken the form of long-enduring cultural traditions.
While particular social or ecological factors may at some early period have sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuenced these traditions, the values themselves acquired sufﬁcient
autonomy to survive considerable alteration in material circumstances.
The impact of these idiosyncratic values on life in the various early civi-
lizations was far from trivial. Men who were temperamentally predisposed to
feel comfortable in Egyptian society probably would have felt psychologically
stressed and ill at ease had they found themselves living among the Aztec,
while individuals temperamentally suited to pursue Aztec goals would have
found life dull and repressed had they lived in ancient Egypt. Yoruba civiliza-
tion offered a choice of ideal lifestyles within a general framework that stressed
individual competitiveness. While the plasticity of human nature probably led
most people to accept as normal the goals set by the society into which they
were born, it is clear that the core values of different early civilizations made
life in each early civilization unique.
In an examination of later preindustrial civilizations, John Hall (1986: 33–83)
has argued that, from the Han Dynasty to the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, the Confucian mandarinate succeeded in inhibiting the development of
dynamic, semi-autonomous economic and military sectors in Chinese society.
They did this in part to protect the interests of their own governing class but
also to safeguard the large but fragile Chinese state from changes that might
have encouraged institutional or regional autonomy. Hall also attributed the
weakness of the political order in India to the withdrawal of the Brahmins
from the political sphere, although they continued to play an important role
in regulating Hindu daily life, and asserted that the way in which these two
preindustrial civilizations were organized precluded developments analogous
to the industrial revolution.
Christopher Hallpike (1986: 288–371) suggests that inﬂexible ‘core princi-
ples’ – patterns of behaviour and belief that are not directly related to modes
of subsistence – supply sets of general propositions that guide the elaboration
of the knowledge and values of historically related societies. He maintains that
these sets of values originate as a result of historical accidents analogous to the
operation of random variation or the founder’s effect in biological evolution

634
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
but, once formulated, inﬂuence cultural development for long periods. Their
role is therefore a constraining one. Hallpike identiﬁes the core principles that
have shaped Chinese society since at least the late ﬁrst millennium b.c. as in-
cluding rejection of a series of activities that were highly valued in some other
cultures: war, militarism, interpersonal conﬂict, public debate, litigation, and
the public humiliation of high-ranking individuals. All these activities were
believed to violate a cosmic order in which forces that were antithetical and
unequal to one another but essential for the operation of the cosmos consti-
tuted a harmonious, self-regulating, organic unity. Thus the use of military
force or the resort to legal action to regulate relations between individuals was
viewed as threatening to undermine the cosmic and therefore the social order
(312–29).
The core principles shared by the Indo-European-speaking peoples, accord-
ing to Hallpike, included approval of competitive individualism as manifested
in athletic competitions and verbal exchanges, admiration of warfare com-
bined with personal loyalty to military leaders, uninhibited use of civil law to
regulate interpersonal disputes, the individual pursuit of wealth, and the idea
of representative government as embodied in an assembly. Both legal systems
and assemblies were viewed as terrestrial versions of arrangements that oper-
ated on the cosmic level. While the Chinese regarded large patrilineal descent
groups as constituting the basis of social order, the Indo-Europeans, although
also favouring patrilineal forms of social organization, avoided large descent
groups. Free Indo-Europeans were divided into three orders – priests, war-
riors, and farmers – which provided the basis for a later dichotomy between
church and state (1986: 329–49). By contrast, the Chinese, from the late Zhou
period on, divided society into a descending hierarchy of ofﬁcials, farmers, ar-
tisans, and traders, attaching little importance to priests and equating religion
(zhao) with moral teaching (315).
That the cultural traditions deﬁned by core principles can persist over
long periods despite major changes in technology, environmental settings,
and demography is evident, Hallpike claims, in the many features shared by
Indo-European societies, despite these societies’ being dispersed over a re-
gion stretching from Western Europe to India. This, he says, means that it is
possible to predict more about a culture by knowing the linguistic family to
which it belongs than by knowing its environmental setting. He also argues that
capitalism is not a universal stage of human development but a speciﬁc man-
ifestation of Indo-European values (370–71), a position that generally agrees
with Hall’s. If Hallpike is right, enduring cultural traditions that were at least
semi-autonomous with respect to ecological adaptation helped to shape the
value systems and functioning of early civilizations.

Values and Personal Aspirations
635
The fact that early civilizations that had broadly similar class structures,
analogous arrangements that permitted the upper classes to appropriate most
surplus production, a limited range of political organization, and formally sim-
ilar religious beliefs should have developed such distinctive and persistent
beliefs concerning what constituted a good life indicates the power of cultur-
ally constructed understandings to shape some aspects of human behaviour
independently of materially adaptive factors. Unlike art styles, which displayed
idiosyncratic variation but had no practical impact on everyday life, these val-
ues exerted enormous inﬂuence on how people behaved in early civilizations,
how they thought about themselves, and how their civilizations functioned.
The religiously based military ethos of highland Mesoamerica encouraged
armed conﬂict and socially and politically devalued long-distance trade. The
importance accorded to military prowess made it impossible for merchants to
compete for political power. The Egyptian idealization of bureaucratic values
may explain why, despite their large population, they were never as formidable
militarily as their numbers might suggest. The extension of civilian adminis-
trative values to the military sphere seems to have inhibited the development
of a distinctive military ethos even in the New Kingdom, when the army had
become institutionally more differentiated from the rest of society than ever
before. Personal value systems played a key role in shaping behaviour in every
early civilization. Contrary to what materialist anthropologists have claimed,
these value systems were neither epiphenomenal nor socially irrelevant.
Yet cross-cultural regularities indicate that the power of such ideals to shape
behaviour was subject to important limitations. This is particularly so with re-
spect to material self-interest. Whether the highest ideal posited by a society
was for a man to be an outstanding warrior, a rich landowner, or a successful
bureaucrat, those who were successful all believed that it was essential for
them to sustain their power, privileges, and luxurious lifestyles at the expense
of farmers and other manual workers. The Egyptian bureaucrat who strove
to embody the ideals of the ‘quiet man’ was no less prepared to use coercion
and violence to suppress opposition among the lower classes than the Aztec
warrior-ofﬁcial. Doing this involved exercising similar kinds of social controls,
including military and police repression, upper-class manipulation of legal sys-
tems, continued recruitment of corv´ee labour, protection of institutional and
private forms of land ownership, and maintenance of ideologies that sought
to justify the upper classes’ domination over the labouring classes. Those con-
trols, rather than some innate obsession with cruelty and violence (D. Carrasco
1990; Sagan 1985), encouraged the development of similar attitudes towards
power and upper-class rights in all early civilizations. While most Aztec, as well
as the Imperial Chinese ruling class, may have despised and socially penalized

636
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the commercial acquisition of wealth (Hallpike 1986: 325), all members of the
upper classes appreciated the need to control wealth in order to retain power
and continue to enjoy an enhanced standard of living. Economic and political
interests thus tended to be viewed similarly, and these uniformities imposed
signiﬁcant cross-cultural limitations on the operations of idiosyncratic cultural
traditions. Thus the role of such traditions in shaping behaviour, while impor-
tant, may have been more restricted than some extreme cultural determinists
have maintained.
values and self-interest
Idiosyncratic cultural traditions which assigned speciﬁc values to particular
sorts of individual behaviour had the power to privilege certain kinds of ac-
tions at the expense of others. Such traditions not only established differ-
ing social agendas that distinguished one early civilization from another but,
more important, constrained their development in idiosyncratically speciﬁc
ways over long periods. Scholars who study differing perceptions and values
have no difﬁculty in demonstrating that each early civilization was a unique
expression of human creativity. Yet, while all human behaviour is culturally
mediated, culturally idiosyncratic solutions guided human behaviour only in
those spheres where similar ecological constraints or universal considerations
of self-interest did not directly constrain such behaviour. In these underde-
termined spheres, cultural choices provided the cognitive and psychological
structuring that was required for a society to function properly. Without ade-
quate agreement about what constituted appropriate behaviour, disruptions,
conﬂict, and personal disorientation would render a society dysfunctional. As
Ernest Gellner (1982) argued, what is purely cultural must impose some kind
of order or structure on itself in order to be comprehensible. This does not
mean that cultural prescriptions had to be inﬂexible or that everyone had to
accept and follow them precisely, but an individual cannot rebel against rules
unless rules exist.
Despite these great variations in lifestyle, in matters that relate to eco-
nomic and political self-interest we ﬁnd that the ruling classes of early civi-
lizations conceptualized their power and privileges and the way in which they
should deal with the lower classes in much the same manner. Their behaviour
was therefore grounded in something other than idiosyncratic or free cultural
choice. Evolutionary ecologists, who focus on the clearly adaptive aspects of
human behaviour, have tended to interpret all such cross-cultural uniformities
as a justiﬁcation for an ecologically based, unilinear view of cultural evolu-
tion, but this approach ignores vast differences in the environmental settings,

Values and Personal Aspirations
637
demography, and productive arrangements of early civilizations. Many of the
important cross-cultural similarities that relate to political power and the con-
trol of wealth in early civilizations appear by default to be grounded in little-
understood species-speciﬁc tendencies to handle these issues in similar ways.
This again raises important psychological questions.

27 Cultural Constants and Variables
T
he collective identity of each early civilization was expressed by a dis-
tinctive and highly elaborated upper-class culture that formally symbol-
ized that civilization’s unity and differentiated it from neighbouring societies.
The patronage of these elite traditions helped to distinguish the upper from the
lower classes while identifying the upper classes with the civilization as a whole.
Each early civilization possessed its own religious beliefs, myths, and festivals
and its own distinctive style(s) of art, architecture, music, and dance. The most
ambitious forms of conspicuous consumption in early civilizations were the
sponsorship by rulers and the upper classes of the production of monumental
architecture and high-quality works of art. The deployment of large amounts
of lower-class labour to erect buildings that became symbols of upper-class
dominance constituted further evidence of the power of the upper classes.
In territorial states, the culture of rural dwellers was regionally variable,
while that of the upper classes was statewide and unitary. In city-state systems,
local variants of the elite culture frequently distinguished one polity and its
leaders from another, while pancivilizational similarities signalled the shared
membership of the upper classes in a broader upper-class interaction network.
There were, however, differences in the extent to which upper-class traditions
were distinguished from those of commoners. In city-state systems, especially
those that lacked a hereditary nobility, high-quality art tended to be a techni-
cally superior and aesthetically more sophisticated version of commoner art,
while in territorial states it developed radically different canons and was pro-
duced by artists working full-time for the state rather than simultaneously for
upper-class patrons and the marketplace. In territorial states, stringent upper-
class controls and guidelines tended to unify production stylistically, while in
city-states different groups of craft workers developed and perpetuated their
own styles. There was also considerable variation among early civilizations
in the materials that were preferred for making works of art. Imported raw
638

Cultural Constants and Variables
639
materials were often used to produce luxury goods for upper-class clients. Al-
though elite art works were created, as material expressions of secular and
supernatural power, for the ruling classes in all early civilizations, the styles
of these works varied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another.
There was iconographic as well as stylistic cross-cultural variation, although
iconographic differences were not totally idiosyncratic. The particular styles
and iconography of upper-class art and architecture tended to be established
at an early stage in the development of a civilization. While such art changed
slowly thereafter, innovations occurred within the context of an established
cultural tradition.
In all early civilizations, monumental architecture was consistently distin-
guished from ordinary structures. In addition to having a distinctive and uniﬁed
style, monumental architecture was used symbolically in various other ways
to integrate societies. In city-states, large buildings – temples or palaces or
both – invariably marked the centres of cities. While monumental architec-
ture manifested the political power and wealth of those who sponsored it, the
basic functional types remained strictly limited: tombs, temples, palaces, and
fortiﬁcations. All forms of monumental architecture developed from earlier
fortiﬁcations and from houses, which in early civilizations were differentiated
for the use of kings and other members of the upper classes, gods, and dead
members of the upper classes. In city-states, temples and palaces tended to
express community identity as well as royal and divine authority, while in ter-
ritorial states palaces, temples, walled administrative compounds, forts, and
rulers’ tombs signalled royal authority.
Each early civilization cultivated distinctive social values and personal as-
pirations. These were most explicitly deﬁned for high-status males and, once
formulated, endured for long periods. There may have been a tendency to
value individual competitiveness more highly in city-states and conformity
to bureaucratic and state goals more highly in territorial ones. Yet speciﬁc
value complexes, such as Aztec militarism, Egyptian self-control, and Yoruba
competitiveness, while too enduring to be explainable in narrowly functional
terms, inﬂuenced individual behaviour and thus each society’s capacity to pur-
sue speciﬁc goals. These values also made each early civilization unique. They
did not, however, impact the ability of the upper classes to control resources
and manpower and to protect their privileges using very similar techniques.
religion
In addition to a vast array of idiosyncratic concepts, religious beliefs displayed
signiﬁcant cross-cultural uniformity. The presence of religious beliefs in all

640
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
human societies seems associated with panhuman cognitive abilities that must
have been produced by natural selection in the course of biological evolu-
tion. These abilities include heightened individual self-awareness, the perva-
sive role of metaphor in thinking, and habitual anthropomorphization (Boyer
1994; 1996; Mithen 1996; Tilley 1999). As individual humans grew more con-
scious of the perils that confronted them in the natural and social realms,
they sought to alleviate psychic stress by postulating a universe controlled
by supernatural forces that were not indifferent to humans and might be
persuaded to protect them. Religious beliefs sought to account for the ori-
gin and nature of the cosmos and the forces that animated it, the origin and
nature of human beings, the fate of individual humans after death, and the
way in which humans might regulate relations with the supernatural to their
advantage. The beliefs that were associated with speciﬁc early civilizations
seem to have represented attempts by people of particular cultures to an-
swer essential questions about the nature of the universe and their relations
to it.
The rulers of all early civilizations expended vast amounts of wealth and en-
ergy on religious buildings, cult equipment, celebrations, and sacriﬁces. Each
early civilization venerated its own deities, conceptualized them in terms of dis-
tinctive beliefs, myths, and legends, and devised rituals to worship them. The
totality of religious beliefs and practices associated with each early civilization
was an original and unique creation.
At the same time, the people in every early civilization assumed that the
supernatural was immanent in the natural world as the power animating the
physical landscape, plants, animals, and human beings. While this power con-
sisted of primal energy, it was invariably personiﬁed and manifested itself not
as one but as many individual deities. Individual deities often took more than
one form, and their degree of physical anthropomorphization varied from one
early civilization to another. Deities were capable to varying degrees of merging
with one another or separating to form distinctive entities. They represented
powers of the natural world that were believed to possess human faculties and
personalities, including gender identity. Because they had these attributes, it
was possible for human beings to communicate and bargain with them. Yet,
because they also represented the forces of nature, they were far more pow-
erful and long-lived than individual human beings. They were also unequal in
power among themselves and often in conﬂict with one another. While deities
formed hierarchies that corresponded with their respective degrees of power,
these were often loose hierarchies resembling the arrangement of forces found
in the natural world. Apart from a few creator gods, hierarchies among deities
were not immutable.

Cultural Constants and Variables
641
The concept of nature’s being animated by supernatural forces that pos-
sessed human-like personalities meant that no clear distinction could be drawn
between what today we see as the natural, supernatural, and social realms. Be-
cause of this, the natural world was not viewed as something that could be
manipulated solely or even principally by means of systematic observation,
understanding, and practical action. People living in early civilizations under-
stood causal relations and regularly used such knowledge to exploit the natural
world, but their belief that the cosmos was animated by supernatural powers
inspired the conviction that ultimately humans could most effectively manipu-
late the natural world for their own purposes by establishing friendly relations
with the deities that controlled it or gaining power over these deities. This
conviction precluded the recognition of any need to develop a scientiﬁc view
of the cosmos.
People in all early civilizations believed that a supernaturally animated na-
ture sustained human life and that the gods depended on human offerings
to replenish their powers. This mutual dependence generated a cosmic cycle
in which energy was circulated from the supernatural realm into the human
world and back again. The degree of self-sufﬁciency attributed to the gods
varied from the Mesopotamians’ belief that without humans the lesser gods
would have to cultivate ﬁelds and build temples to the Aztecs’ conviction that,
without an endless supply of human blood, the supernatural forces that sus-
tained the universe would quickly cease to operate. Offerings were intended
to nourish the gods literally rather than metaphorically and normally consisted
of food and drink or the lives of animals and human beings. Because of their
dependence on offerings, deities in the early civilizations were not transcen-
dental as they were in most later preindustrial civilizations. It was only once
the gods were no longer believed to depend on human support that offering
them sacriﬁces became a purely metaphorical or symbolic act.
Within this system of belief, farmers created the resources that sustained
themselves, the upper classes, the gods, and the cosmic order. Every family
made offerings to deities, who often included their dead ancestors, but the
upper classes and in particular the king were especially important intermedi-
aries in conveying energy from the human to the supernatural realm. Their
ability to accumulate surplus resources on a larger scale than anyone else made
it possible for them to sustain the gods more lavishly than commoners. They
also possessed specialized ritual knowledge about how to relate to the gods.
The ritual activities of the king were viewed as crucial for maintaining the
universe. Kings, not priests, were responsible for offering major sacriﬁces.
When priests sacriﬁced on behalf of the king, they did so as his substitutes or
agents. Major sacriﬁces were usually made in ritually exclusive settings, such as

642
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the interiors of temples and on elevated temple platforms – places accessible
only to rulers, priests, and members of the upper classes. Public participation
in state-sponsored rituals involved mass dancing, singing, and participation
in religious dramas that celebrated the natural changes and human activities
associated with the annual seasonal cycle. These rituals sought to renew the
world and reinforce the social order by strengthening relations with the gods
and revitalizing the universe.
While beliefs concerning what was appropriate for sacriﬁce and how sacri-
ﬁcial rituals should be performed varied from one early civilization to another,
the basic concepts concerning sacriﬁce were the same. Since these ideas dif-
fered signiﬁcantly from concepts of sacriﬁce in less complex societies and could
not have diffused from a single point of origin among all the early civilizations,
they must have been formulated separately in individual early civilizations.
There appears, however, to have been a high degree of cross-cultural unifor-
mity in the general patterns of religious beliefs among the societies out of
which early civilizations had developed. Not clearly distinguishing the natural,
supernatural, and social realms seems to have been typical of all societies prior
to the desacralization of nature that took place in most Eurasian civilizations
in the middle of the ﬁrst millennium b.c. In simpler societies, where all social
relations tended to be modelled on kinship ties, relations between the human
and the natural/supernatural spheres were formulated in terms of requests for
parental benevolence from the supernatural or the need for humans to sustain
and obey the spirits of deceased ancestors who controlled the fertility of the
land. In early civilizations, views of the supernatural as real or metaphorical
kin gave way to a belief that the gods constituted a superior social stratum.
The understanding of the supernatural that developed in early civilizations
therefore seems to have resulted from the reworking of a relatively uniform
set of beliefs about the supernatural in earlier societies to reﬂect the more
hierarchical structure of societies that were no longer being held together at
the highest levels by kinship relations.
The conceptualization of sacriﬁce in the early civilizations must have de-
veloped from earlier beliefs concerning reciprocity and exchange between
human beings and the supernatural. These beliefs were, however, radically
reformulated as a consequence of the evolution of complex systems of taxa-
tion and tribute. Sacriﬁce in early civilizations represented a projection into
the supernatural realm of the observation that farmers materially supported
the upper classes, who in turn maintained the larger political and social or-
der that was essential for a complex agricultural economy to function and for
farmers to prosper. Such projections made sense to both farmers and rulers,
who viewed each other as components of inegalitarian societies for which no

Cultural Constants and Variables
643
viable alternative could be imagined. Rulers were accepted as necessary to
maintain political stability; hence, by extrapolation, the role of the gods was to
maintain the cosmic order, and to do this deities required material support. If
rulers became too exploitative or permitted the upper classes to appropriate
too many resources from farmers for their own use, they endangered not only
the production of food but also the continuation of the cosmic order. Thus re-
ligious beliefs helped to curb exploitation by the upper classes on the grounds
that restraint was necessary to nourish deities and keep both the political and
the cosmic systems working.
Cross-cultural uniformities in the religious beliefs of early civilizations re-
sulted from analogous reﬂections on the taxation systems that were generically
common to all these societies. Sacriﬁce projected the taxation system into the
cosmic realm. Essential roles were assigned to farmers as producers of food
for the upper classes and the gods, to the human upper classes for maintaining
the social and political order that made a productive economy possible, and
to the gods for maintaining the cosmic order on which all life depended. The
upper classes played a vital role in sustaining the gods but depended on farm
labour to produce the food that was needed to do this. Therefore they were
answerable to the gods for their treatment of farmers, just as farmers were an-
swerable to the gods if they did not regularly produce food surpluses. Sahlins
(1976: 211–12) has maintained that religious beliefs were the dominant fo-
cus of symbolic production in the early civilizations. They provided powerful
concepts that helped to regulate political relations among classes in societies
that had grown too large and too complex to be managed by notions of real or
metaphorical kinship.
The concept of sacriﬁce thus supplied the equivalent of political constitu-
tions for early civilizations. While farmers and other lower-class people were
explicitly excluded from decisions about how society was to be governed and
denied the right to criticize the actions of the upper classes overtly, their duty
to ensure the continuity of the political and cosmic orders by feeding the upper
classes and the gods was balanced by the need for the upper classes to make
sure that farmers had the social peace and resources they needed to produce
enough food to sustain the cosmic order. The failure of either farmers or the
upper classes to respect and sustain the other threatened the functioning of
the universe.
The common features of beliefs about sacriﬁce in the various early civi-
lizations therefore appear to have been more than passive, epiphenomenal
reﬂections of an effective ecological adaptation. They represented a shared
understanding of the nature of social relations in early civilizations and of the
limits to which one class could exploit another without endangering the whole

644
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
system. Ideas about sacriﬁce and cosmic order in early civilizations constituted
an implicit discourse on political power that mediated class relations and lim-
ited dangerous behaviour in the form of either lower-class rebelliousness or
the overexploitation of farmers by the upper classes.
Whatever beliefs about the cosmos or the gods may have been shared by
the societies that developed into early civilizations, major features of the re-
ligious beliefs of early civilizations were shaped by thinking about economic
and political institutions that did not exist prior to the development of these
societies. This process illustrates the capacity of widely separated groups of
human beings at a particular level of development to transform common ex-
periences into similar understandings of the supernatural. The development
of these concepts also provides an astonishing demonstration of the ability
of the human mind to construct analogous religious concepts under similar
economic and political conditions and to use these ideas to stabilize conver-
gent forms of social organization. This suggests that practical reason played a
more extensive and important role in formulating general patterns of religious
beliefs than cultural particularists allow.
the universe and humans
Individual early civilizations produced numerous accounts, often differing in
detail, concerning the structure and creation of the universe, the origin of hu-
mans, the nature of human souls, and the fate of humans after death. Some
of these versions were associated with various cults or with different kinship
or ethnic groups that had been drawn together in larger political structures as
early civilizations developed. Others were deliberately synthesized for politi-
cal reasons. Yet these accounts displayed numerous cross-culturally recurrent
patterns.
Cosmologies exhibited many similarities. The universe was conceptualized
as a series of superimposed levels: a single terrestrial plane, one or more sky
realms above, and one or more underworlds beneath. The sky and under-
world planes were the exclusive realms of the gods and the dead, while the
earth was shared by living people and the supernatural. These levels were in-
terconnected, most often at the centre and around the edges of the terrestrial
realm, through hills, trees, caves, and temples. The gods and supernatural en-
ergy were able to move through these gateways, conveying life-giving powers
from the purely supernatural realms to the human one and back again.
The earth was generally believed to be a ﬂat plane, round or square in out-
line, at most a few thousand kilometres across, and surrounded by a salt-water
ocean. Each early civilization and usually each city-state believed itself to be

Cultural Constants and Variables
645
located at the centre of the terrestrial plane, which had been created especially
for its beneﬁt. The terrestrial plane was often thought to be divided into quar-
ters either according to the cardinal directions or at the points that marked
the rising and setting points of the sun at the summer and winter solstices.
This model took account of the geographical knowledge of the world that was
possessed by well-informed people who lived in early civilizations. Such infor-
mation declined exponentially beyond the borders of each early civilization.
Knowledge of particular seas or oceans was extrapolated as signifying that the
world was surrounded by salt water.
Lacking the contribution of practical knowledge, beliefs about the celes-
tial and underworld levels showed much less cross-cultural uniformity. While
the Mesoamerican civilizations postulated thirteen sky realms and nine un-
derworlds associated with speciﬁc deities and the Chinese likewise imagined
multiple levels, the Egyptians and the Mesopotamians postulated only one
major supernatural realm in the sky and another beneath the earth.
The understanding of the earth and the cosmos may also have been inﬂu-
enced by views held in earlier, less complex societies. Mircea Eliade (1954)
maintains that all early cultures believed in a multitiered universe, a verti-
cal axis mundi both separating and joining the different levels, accessibility
between the natural and supernatural levels, and the importance of shamans
for communicating between them. Unfortunately, we would need more de-
tailed and systematic information about small-scale societies to evaluate these
claims. If Eliade is even partially correct, however, cross-culturally uniform
beliefs that had existed prior to the development of early civilizations would
help to account for many otherwise inexplicable cross-cultural uniformities in
the cosmologies of early civilizations.
Myths concerning the creation and transformations of the universe were
cross-culturally more varied than cosmologies. A crucial factor shaping these
myths was measurement of time. Early civilizations tended to group days
into short periods of from four to ten days, longer periods of twenty to thirty
days, and various approximations of the sidereal year. These units facilitated
adaptations to seasonal changes, as well as the organization of labour, markets,
and tax collection. While the improved record-keeping of early civilizations
encouraged greater awareness of longer time-scales, there was much variability
in conceptualizing longer periods of time. The Aztec, Maya, and Inka thought
of time as moving in cycles of days, years, and longer units associated with
disintegrations and renewals of the cosmic order. Other early civilizations,
such as Egypt, Mesopotamia, and that of the Yoruba, appear to have believed
that a stable or self-renewing cosmos had been created at some point in the
past and would last indeﬁnitely. It is clear that ideas concerning the origin

646
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and functioning of the universe were far more speculative and less subject to
empirical constraints than formulations dealing with the layout of the earth’s
surface. The overt importance accorded to cyclical processes in all three New
World civilizations probably arose from shared cultural traditions, which in the
case of the Maya and the Aztec are well documented.
It has been suggested that the Egyptians believed the cosmic order to be
more stable than the Mesopotamians did, because Egypt was ecologically more
stable than Mesopotamia (Frankfort et al. 1949: 137–39). Recent research on
the ecology of these civilizations has cast doubt on this interpretation, showing
signiﬁcant instability in Egypt as well; and the fact remains that the supernat-
ural punishments envisioned in Mesopotamia were rarely ecological disasters.
Alternatively, it has been proposed that, because of their greater political sta-
bility, territorial states encouraged belief in an ordered cosmos more than city-
states,whichwerefrequentlybattlingoneanotherforhegemony(Trigger1979:
40). The Maya, the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, and the Mesopotamians
viewed the rise and fall of individual city-states as events decreed by the gods or
inherent in the structure of the universe. Yet the Inka seem to have viewed the
universe as similarly unstable, although this may be because they and their sub-
jects in the central Andean highlands had only brieﬂy constituted a territorial
state.Moreover,theMaya,whothoughtthatthefortunesofcity-stateswereun-
stable because of ever-shifting relations among cosmic powers, believed that
the natural order was stable for periods lasting at least ﬁve thousand years,
and the Mesopotamians and the Yoruba, no less than the ancient Egyptians,
appear to have believed that the cosmic order would endure far longer. These
observations preclude any simple correlation between beliefs about cosmic in-
stability and city-state or territorial-state forms of political organization. Such
beliefs appear to have been shaped by various combinations of ecological and
political factors. Instability was attributed to supernatural punishment of spe-
ciﬁc human acts as well as to forces inherent in the supernatural order.
Accounts of human origins tended to be highly variable even within the
same early civilizations, but it was widely believed that all humans contained
some divine element. It was also claimed in many early civilizations that the
upper classes differed in origin from commoners. People in all early civiliza-
tions believed that human beings had two broad types of souls – impersonal
life-forces that animated bodies and souls associated with intelligence and per-
sonality. These souls were assembled at or near birth and tended to separate
at death, but one or both continued to exist. As did the gods, they required
sustenance from the human world to function properly both before and after
death. Yet the fortunes of the dead varied from one early civilization to an-
other. In Mesopotamia food offerings merely sustained the intellect soul of

Cultural Constants and Variables
647
the dead person, which was fated to live in misery in the underworld, whereas
elsewhere they empowered souls. In most early civilizations, the dead served
as intermediaries between their living descendants and the gods, the souls of
kings doing so on behalf of the entire society. Families feared that the souls of
dead members would punish them for misbehaviour or neglect.
It is tempting to interpret what happened to the souls of commoners after
death, as understood in different early civilizations, as a reﬂection of their social
status during life. This would suggest that commoners in city-states, especially
those that lacked a hereditary nobility, ought to have enjoyed a more favourable
existence after death than awaited commoners in territorial states. Yet, among
the Egyptians and Inka, the souls of commoners were believed to fare better
than the souls of commoners in city-states. As a result of status emulation,
the beliefs of the upper classes appear to have raised rather than lowered
commoners’ self-evaluation and expectations. In city-states, both upper- and
lower-class Yoruba, Mesopotamians, and Aztec expected less for themselves
after death. The fates of dead Maya rulers, although seemingly dependent
on the results of their individual efforts to outwit the gods of the underworld,
appear to have more resembled those of their counterparts in territorial states.
specialized knowledge
There was considerable cross-cultural uniformity in the sorts of specialized
knowledge that the upper classes chose to patronize in early civilizations. The
elaborate technological understanding developed by skilled craft workers gen-
erally went unrecorded, except indirectly in connection with supplying artisans
with raw materials and paying them for their work. The same is true for ar-
chitects; a few ceremonial plans and models of buildings have survived but
no detailed information about how major construction projects were planned
and carried out. Presumably, even in literate early civilizations, many of the
highly specialized skills required to perform this work were transmitted orally.
Genealogies and the deeds of former kings and great men were celebrated in
writing, oral traditions, or a combination of both. Bards and scribes helped to
preserve an understanding of the past.
In general, the knowledge that was of greatest practical concern to the upper
classes and regarded as most worthy of elaboration had as its goal improving re-
lations with the supernatural. Ascertaining the will of the gods through reading
omens and practising divination was highly elaborated in all the early civiliza-
tions. Concerns about health made medicine a subject of special interest to the
rich and powerful. Although some diseases were known to be curable using
natural remedies, no disease was believed to have only a natural cause, and

648
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
all diseases were considered susceptible to supernatural treatment. There was
also widespread fear of witchcraft or sorcery. Whereas in egalitarian societies
fear of becoming a victim of witchcraft or of being accused of having practised
it had encouraged generosity and redistribution, in early civilizations the abil-
ity of the upper classes to accuse commoners of witchcraft transformed such
accusations into a powerful means of intimidation. Witchcraft also continued,
however, to frighten the upper classes, who feared it as a covert form of resis-
tance to their authority. This encouraged the development of more effective
techniques for detecting witches and for counteracting witchcraft, demonic
powers, and even the ill will of the gods using magical spells, amulets, and
esoteric rituals.
Thus the forms of knowledge that were most assiduously cultivated under
upper-class sponsorship in early civilizations were linked to trying to ﬁnd ways
to deal with aspects of the natural/supernatural realm that could not be con-
trolled by natural means. This kind of specialized knowledge remained the
prerogative of the upper classes, highly trained priests, and administrative
specialists. The cultivation and preservation of specialized knowledge appears
to have been primarily associated with temples or religious groups in city-state
systems and with royal courts in territorial states. In some early civilizations
the upper classes were taught such knowledge, along with record-keeping and
other administrative skills, at special schools.
More complex understandings of cosmology, human origins, divination, and
medicine grew out of earlier beliefs that were elaborated by specialists em-
ployed in the higher echelons of early civilizations. Creating new and more
effective ways to control relations with the supernatural required understand-
ing the speciﬁc wishes of the gods. The purpose of such knowledge was to enlist
their political support and their assistance in counteracting human illness, mis-
fortune, and witchcraft and to use divine power to reinforce upper-class control
over the lower classes. These common concerns encouraged analogous elabo-
rations of ideas in all the early civilizations. Such elaborations manifested the
greatest degree of cross-cultural regularity in those domains of culture that
exhibited the greatest continuity from earlier periods and were most strongly
inﬂuenced by direct observation.
Early civilizations were the ﬁrst societies in which, for functional reasons,
speech, as opposed to ideas about speciﬁc topics, was recorded. Writing did
not, however, develop in all early civilizations, and the uses that were made
of it remained everywhere more restricted than in later preindustrial civiliza-
tions and modern industrial societies. Systems that were able to record speech
developed in only four of the early civilizations we are examining. Despite ev-
idence of an independent origin for at least three and possibly all four of these

Cultural Constants and Variables
649
scripts, they were all logophonic. The representation of sounds was achieved
differently, however, by each writing system. There was no precedent for the
principles of writing as it developed in these four early civilizations. Even
where it had been present, semasiography operated very differently. Yet these
earliest scripts indicate that, when people ﬁrst sought to record speech, they
habitually began with logography rather than by trying to represent phonemes
or syllables. Once a functioning logophonic writing system had been created,
there was no indication of any further evolution within individual early civiliza-
tions towards more phonetic scripts. The creation of phonetic scripts happened
(and then not always) only when logophonic scripts were used to write new lan-
guages in hitherto non-literate societies. The development of writing systems
provides dramatic evidence that precedents were not required for the occur-
rence of striking parallel or convergent developments in particular domains of
culture.
religious beliefs and practical reason
Much of the knowledge that characterized the elite cultures of early civiliza-
tions was derived from religious, cosmological, and therapeutic concepts of
earlier times, altered and elaborated to serve the needs of larger and more
complex class societies. Changes included the recognition of a larger terres-
trial world and longer periods of time, although, except with the Maya concept
of time, both space and time remained limited by comparison with modern
understandings. Cross-culturally similar beliefs in early civilizations often ap-
pear to have resulted from the adaptation of already similar earlier beliefs to
analogous new conditions. Class societies created elaborate art and architec-
ture that symbolized the unity of society at the same time as they reafﬁrmed
the dominance of the upper classes over commoners. Early civilizations also
exhibited idiosyncratic differences in aspirations and values which, because
they inﬂuenced human behaviour, affected the functioning of these societies
in signiﬁcant ways.
The most dramatic and far-reaching intellectual innovations that these class
societies produced were those related to religious beliefs. While the gods were
credited with supplying the cosmic energy that supported human life, humans
nourished the gods, and earthly rulers became the supreme intermediaries
in the process by which the cosmic cycle was maintained. This analysis pro-
jected into the supernatural realm the simultaneously complementary and
antagonistic relations that bound together the upper and lower classes in early
civilizations.Byassigningfarmers,rulers,andgodssigniﬁcantrolesinmaintain-
ing the cosmic order, this view imposed moral limitations on the exploitative

650
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
behaviour of the upper classes that enhanced the viability of society. Since
there had been no need for religious beliefs of this sort prior to the devel-
opment of larger, class-based societies, their cross-cultural uniformity in early
civilizations suggests that they were products of practical reason as it related to
some universal forms of self-interest. The same explanation can be offered for
the cross-cultural regularity of the measures that the upper classes employed
to protect their wealth and power. The logographic preference in the writing
systems of early civilizations seems to reﬂect as yet little understood cognitive
biases that all human beings share.
While scholars have long been fascinated with the cultural diversity of early
civilizations, there was much similarity in the basic religious concepts, cosmolo-
gies, beliefs concerning souls, and forms of knowledge that were thought worth
elaborating. Ironically, scholars seem less intrigued by truly unique forms of
knowledge, such as the Classic Maya view of time, than by diverse expres-
sions of similar themes. While we have encountered much speciﬁc diversity in
subsistence economies in early civilizations and at least two radically different
approaches to political organization, there appears to have been only one major
view of the operation of the supernatural. Far from being an epiphenomenal
reﬂection of culture as an adaptive system, this view appears to have been the
convergent outcome of profound reﬂections on how class societies served the
practical needs of their members. In early civilizations, religion was not only
the main locus of symbolic production but also the principal medium for vital
discussions and debates on political issues.

Discussion

28 Culture and Reason
A
nthropologists agree that all human perception is culturally and there-
foresymbolicallymediated.Eventhemostextremepositivistsacknowl-
edge that an understanding of the world is mediated by the categories and
associated meanings that individuals learn as members of societies and that,
human behaviour therefore represents an adaptation not to the world as it
really is but to the world as individuals imagine it to be. Yet anthropologists
disagree violently about the signiﬁcance of symbolic mediation and especially
about the degree to which culturally constructed images of the world approx-
imate reality. They also hold many different views concerning the forces that
shape culture (Trigger 1998c).
At one extreme are the ecological determinists, who seek to understand
human behaviour in terms of the same factors that govern the behaviour of all
other animal species. Culture for them is one component of an adaptive system
that modiﬁes human behaviour in response to changing demographic and nat-
ural conditions – a mechanism that helps a species to achieve adaptive ﬁtness.
While acknowledging the unusually prominent role of symbolic manipulation
in guiding human behaviour, they see culture as shaped by practical activity and
utilitarian interests. The human mind, in their view, is a device for formulating
rational adaptive stategies, and culture is a mnemonic for encoding and facili-
tatingtheimplementationofthese strategies.Formostpracticalpurposes,they
consider behaviour rather than culture the primary object of scientiﬁc study.
Supporters of this view argue that, even if the world that humans adapt to
is one of ideas, it has to bear a very close resemblance to the real world if
human groups are to survive. This discounting of the explanatory value of cog-
nition and an accompanying tendency to treat culture as a black box encourage
ecological determinists to emphasize the generically animal aspects of human
behaviour and to treat the speciﬁcally human aspects as epiphenomenal. Such
anapproachtendstominimizethesigniﬁcanceofculturaltraditionsinfavourof
653

654
Discussion
short-term, functionalist explanations of human behaviour and beliefs. There
is also a strong preference for Locke’s view of the mind as a tabula rasa on
which sensory impressions are inscribed for rational analysis (R. N. Adams
1988).
At the opposite extreme are those who attach supreme importance to cul-
tural meanings in the shaping of human perception and behaviour. For them
cultures are texts that are modiﬁed by endless individual decodings and en-
codings and no two individuals ever understand the same utterance or event
in precisely the same way. Advocates of this approach insist that principles of
classiﬁcation and understanding are culturally speciﬁc and historically derived
and therefore cannot be inferred from any objective qualities of the real world
(Sahlins 1976: 47). They also maintain that a vast array of alternative cultures
could be associated with any particular set of material conditions. They see no
clear order or direction to change, which they consider mainly a result of the
random variations (memory tricks) produced by ceaseless recodings of mes-
sages. George P. Murdock (1956) called this process ‘miscopying’ and likened
it to genetic mutation, and it is also the hallmark of a historical-particularist ap-
proach. Cultural relativists emphasize cross-cultural differences and treat cul-
turally mediated understandings as the most important factors shaping human
behaviour. Many of them also attribute the persistence of cultural traditions to
the inability of the people who are guided by a culture to formulate signiﬁcant
alternatives – a conclusion that is incompatible with the ethnographic obser-
vation that cultures characteristically provide multiple ready-made options for
dealing with ecological and social challenges (Salzman 2000). Carried to the
extreme of cultural determinism, a relativist approach becomes the idealist
counterpart of ecological determinism.
Between these two extremes lies a broad range of options. Structuralists
treat culture as a text but see it as controlled by hypothetical underlying struc-
tures that limit variation and change. Within structuralism there are harder
and softer options. Some theorists believe that the underlying structure in-
hibits change to the extent that French culture will remain identiﬁably French
regardless of how much economic or social change occurs. Others, in keeping
with the approach’s Saussurean origins, view structure as more analogous to
grammar,whichdoesnotprecludeanyparticularthoughtfrombeingexpressed
but determines how difﬁcult it may be to communicate a speciﬁc idea in
any particular language. Late Boasian anthropology believed that an innate
human need for psychological consistency required cultures to acquire pat-
terns that were reassuring to individuals. The need for such patterning was
claimed to be far more important than the speciﬁc nature of any pattern
(Benedict 1934).

Culture and Reason
655
On the materialist side, classical Marxism identiﬁed economic competition
rather than ecological adaptation as the primary source of social and cultural
change, at least in class societies. This approach, by assigning primary im-
portance to individual and group strategies as they relate to political power
and the control of resources, conceptualized human beings as active agents
shaping their collective destiny rather than as passive entities subject to eco-
logical or cultural forces. Still more permissive was the older Boasian belief
that, provided that a culture satisﬁed a basic set of functional prerequisites,
such as food and protection, cultural variation could be random (Aberle et al.
1950; R. E. Adams 2000: 2–6; Murdock 1945). This approach, which had
much in common with Bronislaw Malinowski’s belief that social institutions
were grounded in the biological needs of individuals, posited that functional
prerequisites could be satisﬁed in many different ways and that culture was
shaped by the idiosyncratic operation of diffusion as well as by the aggregate
outcomes of individual preferences.
Each of these theories has its supporters, and all of them have ﬂuctuated
in popularity over time. The cyclical rather than unilinear nature of these
ﬂuctuationssuggeststhatthesetheoriesaredeeplyembeddedinthecompeting
values of Western society, especially those associated with rationalism and
romanticism. For social scientists to proclaim that they are Marxists, cultural
ecologists, or cultural relativists is to assert that they are prepared to act as
if one of these explanations of how societies function and change constituted
the best approximation of the truth. Such a commitment is largely an act of
faith.
The evidence that has been examined concerning early civilizations does
not support the once widely accepted ecological-evolutionary position that,
because sociocultural phenomena are shaped most powerfully by ecologi-
cal or economic constraints, societies at the same level of development will
show the most cross-cultural regularity in their economic institutions, less
in their social and political organization, and still less in the cultural sphere.
The assumption here is that the features of most adaptive signiﬁcance will
be selected for most powerfully by material constraints, while less signiﬁcant
ones will display opportunistically determined random patterning (Friedman
and Rowlands 1978b). In every aspect of early civilizations we have en-
countered idiosyncratic practices and beliefs. In general, cross-cultural par-
allels have tended to be of a generic sort, while idiosyncratic features have
been more speciﬁc. The evidence does not, however, support the view that
cross-cultural regularities existed mainly at the level of economic and so-
cial behaviour as opposed to that of belief. This unexpected distribution of
cross-cultural patterning suggests the need for a more careful analysis of

656
Discussion
the factors that produced both idiosyncrasies and uniformities among early
civilizations.
culturally idiosyncratic patterns
Art styles, not surprisingly, varied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to
another, even among the neighbouring Maya and Aztec. Similar idiosyncratic
variation differentiated the monumental architecture produced for upper-class
patrons in each of the early civilizations. The elite styles of art and architecture
that characterized speciﬁc early civilizations evolved from local prototypes but
acquired their distinctive features at an early stage in the development of each
civilization. Because of their greater formality and elaboration, such styles
often bore little resemblance to their antecedents. Yet, despite stylistic differ-
ences, important features were shared. Lavish support by the upper classes
favoured the creation of more sophisticated and coherent styles. Conspicu-
ous consumption is evident in the large size of buildings, the vast amount of
labour required to erect them, and the specialized skills that were invested in
producing high-quality products. Luxury goods were frequently manufactured
from exotic and expensive raw materials. These forms of behaviour exhibited
in material form the wealth and power of the upper classes.
Distinctive art styles symbolized the political unity of particular territorial
states, the broader cultural afﬁliations of member polities of city-state sys-
tems, and the separate identities of individual city-states. Yet the extent to
which the art styles of the various elite crafts in individual early civilizations
were integrated varied. While innovations took place and to some extent were
valued in the art and architecture of all early civilizations, they occurred within
the constraints of well-deﬁned cultural traditions. Individual craft specialists
sought to produce works of art that were of exceptional quality, but their
aim was excellence within existing canons. The aesthetic principles underlying
the art of individual early civilizations changed over time and varied among
individual artists. Yet, the principles that deﬁned a single cultural tradition
constituted no less impressive a manifestation of patterning in human be-
haviour than the strongest cross-cultural regularity. The materials used and
the available technology imposed few functional limitations on stylistic varia-
tion. The continuing pressure for stylistic unity came mainly from the socio-
cultural sphere, with the upper class encouraging internal coherence and the
maintenance of distinctive cultural traditions. Yet the stylistic features of an
early civilization’s elite art and architecture constituted a self-contained mani-
festation of culture that exerted no speciﬁc functional constraints on every-
day life.

Culture and Reason
657
Propositions about goals for individual humans were also cross-culturally
variable. These propositions were not purely stylistic, however; they estab-
lished norms to which individuals had to conform in order to win public ap-
proval. Dominant cultural ideals represented values of the upper classes as
those of the entire society and thus encouraged society to function in accor-
dance with those classes’ interests. To some limited degree these values may
have accorded functionally with different forms of sociopolitical organization.
A heightened emphasis on competitiveness seems to have been associated with
city-state systems and obedience to authority with territorial states. Such cor-
relations were not, however, very speciﬁc. As did art styles, attitudes relating
to ideal individual behaviour tended to persist for long periods. The ancient
Mesopotamian belief that kings were not inherently different from their sub-
jects stubbornly survived strenuous efforts by some hegemons and later rulers
of Mesopotamian regional states to persuade their subjects to regard them as
gods.
Cultural ideals also focused the performance capabilities of whole societies.
The Aztec, like the early Indo-Europeans, gloriﬁed individual males as war-
riors; the Egyptians and increasingly the Chinese idealized the ordered and
harmonious conduct of public affairs; and the Mesopotamians and Yoruba,
each in their own way, positively valued interpersonal competition. The same
set of values tended to be shared by people living in all the states making up
a city-state system. The often very different values that prevailed in nearby
less complex societies exerted little inﬂuence on early civilizations and were
frequently dismissed as barbarous. Even when long-established civilizations
came to be coerced by societies whose ideals differed from their own, a set of
values that had become less than optimally adaptive could persist indeﬁnitely.
It is frequently asserted that aspects of culture that vary idiosyncratically
among historically unrelated cultures are ‘stylistic’ rather than ‘functional’ and
therefore selectively neutral (Dunnell 1978; Wenke 1997a). This argument is
problematical for several reasons. First, some features of human behaviour
that are idiosyncratically variable are highly adaptive. Because there was great
variation in the types of environments that the different early civilizations ex-
ploited and in the performance characteristics of their domestic plants and
animals, there was also great variation in the ways these resources were man-
aged. Diverse agricultural regimes made food production effective in different
environmental settings. Most of these practices were continuations of adap-
tive patterns that had evolved separately in each region long before the rise
of civilization. There was also considerable variation in agricultural technol-
ogy, which ranged from simple digging sticks in some early civilizations to
a broad range of metal hand tools in others. While some of this technology

658
Discussion
developed in early civilizations, most of it has been shown to have been a her-
itage from earlier times. Thus there was great idiosyncratic variation among
early civilizations in quintessentially adaptive features. Neoevolutionists such
as Julian Steward (1949), who maintained that early civilizations had simi-
lar subsistence economies, wrongly assumed that all these civilizations had
developed in similar environmental settings. They failed to recognize the
variability in the subsistence patterns of early civilizations as a prime exam-
ple of ecological adaptation. Unlike stylistic variation in art and architecture,
idiosyncraticvariationinagriculturalpracticeswasadaptivetovariedecological
settings.
Style has long been recognized as a symbolic way to assert ethnic, class, and
gender identity. Sahlins (1976: 203) noted that an unconscious dress code can
create a cohesive society out of perfect strangers. In early civilizations, elite art
and monumental architecture both expressed and reinforced the power of the
upper classes and the corporate identities of early civilizations and individual
states. Values and lifestyles deﬁned generally acceptable behavioural patterns
and thus provided individuals with needed guidance and reassurance. Patterns
for living were powerfully sanctiﬁed by tradition and religion as well as by fa-
miliarity. In addition to privileging certain general types of behaviour, each
society provided speciﬁc guidelines applicable to relations between parents
and children, men and women, old and young, and people of higher and lower
rank. While these values played mainly a neutral facilitating role in relation to
society as a whole when early civilizations existed in relative isolation from one
another, they acquired strong, if unpredictable, selective values when compe-
tition developed between societies with different values. The sort of warfare
practised in the Valley of Mexico, which was focused on gaining individual
prestige and maintaining the universe through prisoner sacriﬁce, fared badly
when the Aztec had to confront Spanish forces that fought for different reasons
and by different rules. Yoruba personal competitiveness, by contrast, proved
highly adaptive for coping with British colonial administration. It therefore
seems unlikely that an operational distinction can be drawn between style and
function.
The ubiquity of patterns of elite art, monumental architecture, and reﬁned,
upper-class lifestyles suggests that they fulﬁlled signiﬁcant functions that were
necessary for the operation of early civilizations, providing symbols that struc-
tured identity, promoted psychological stability, and gave meaning to life. From
a vast range of possibilities, they created coherent cultural patterns, goals, and
aspirations for people to follow. It is unclear whether the speciﬁc choices made
reﬂected some deep structure underlying cultural patterns, the operation of a
conscious set of core principles, or mere chance. Whatever their source, the

Culture and Reason
659
resulting conﬁgurations provided meaning to what people did in what would
otherwise have been a chaotic situation.
Idealists maintain that idiosyncratic cultural patterns represent the
quintessence of creativity of the human spirit, free from ecological constraints,
and celebrate each cultural pattern as a unique creation of the human spirit.
Yet at the same time they see cultural change as the result of a random suc-
cession of unique understandings that each human mind brings to culturally
transmitted experience, every decoding being another encoding. This theory
implies that cultures ought to change in a random fashion and exhibit random
cross-cultural patterning, and many historical particularists and postprocessual
archaeologists in fact assert that such randomness characterizes all of human
behaviour.
Postmodernist claims about cultural idiosyncrasy revive long-standing an-
thropological debates about the relation between cultural traditions and func-
tionality. Nineteenth-century anthropologists treated cultural traditions as a
dead weight constraining human behaviour and the means by which obso-
lete and often irrational ideas from the past survived into the present. Edward
B. Tylor (1871) deﬁned the main goal of evolutionary anthropology as exposing
the useless and even dangerous survivals of more primitive stages of human
development in modern society. This approach encouraged anthropologists to
view culture as an uncritically accepted and change-resistant set of customs
inherited from the past.
Later many social anthropologists argued in opposition to this idea that there
was no such thing as a ‘survival’; any concept that persisted from the past either
continued to perform its original function or had acquired a signiﬁcant new
one. They also argued that there was no reason that new functions needed
to resemble previous ones. Cultures had to be understood in terms of the
relations that their various parts bore to the whole at any given time. Social an-
thropologists who followed A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1958) stressed the primary
importance of social relations and viewed culture as acquiring its functional
signiﬁcance from the relations that individual beliefs, habits, and bodies of
knowledge bore to social behaviour.
Classical Marxism posited a more complex and reﬂexive relation between
tradition and function. According to Karl Marx, ‘human beings make their
own history . . . not under conditions chosen by themselves, but ones directly
encountered, given, and transmitted from the past’ (Marx and Engels 1962, 1:
247). In other words, each generation starts with a heritage of past beliefs and
practices that individuals and groups reshape to accord with their changing
needs and aspirations. Culture simultaneously guides human behaviour, pro-
vides ideas that can be used to bring about change, and encourages resistance

660
Discussion
to change. Old institutions can be either rejected or altered to serve new pur-
poses. Gordon Childe (1965 [1936]: 98) argued that no one could infer the
details of British parliamentary government in the nineteenth century from
a purely theoretical understanding of the capitalist mode of production. Al-
though there was a close connection between the economic dominance of
the entrepreneurial bourgeoisie in nineteenth-century Britain and the form of
power that was exercised in that country, the speciﬁc nature of the British con-
stitution had to be understood in relation to an evolving set of English political
institutions and practices that had originated during the medieval period.
A powerful tendency, derived from functionalism, nevertheless persists to
dismiss cultural traditions as non-explanations of human behaviour (Binford
1989: 14–16). Culture continues to be regarded as a passive residue of ideas
inherited from the past that is destined to be either discarded or reshaped to
serve present needs. This view has been seriously challenged by the ecologists
Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson (1985), who point out that the great selective
advantage of the symbolic capacity of human beings is the ability it confers
to beneﬁt from the experiences of others without having to share or even
witness them. The vast majority of the ideas that guide behaviour are learned
symbolically from others either in infancy or later in life. Individuals therefore
do not have to reinvent the wheel, nor do they have to alter established ways
of doing things unless they conclude that there is a compelling reason for
doing so.
Boyd and Richerson (1985: 95–116, 276) maintain that ideas inherited from
the past are generally superior to innovations, in part because repeated use
and modiﬁcation have enhanced their effectiveness as guides for individual
behaviour. While innovations are initially devised to serve personal ends, as
they are applied by large numbers of people over long periods they become
better adapted to serving the needs of society as a whole. Innovations may
become necessary as a result of ecological or economic changes, but because
they are untested they generally have higher initial social costs than traditional
solutions. If this is the case in modern industrial societies, it must have been
even more so in earlier societies, where, because of the slower rate of change,
the necessity to alter existing rules of human behaviour would usually have
been less pressing.
This argument calls into question the notion that it is practical reason that
accounts for cross-cultural uniformities and cultural reason that explains cross-
cultural particularities. Ecological patterns are adaptive precisely because they
are variable from one natural setting to another. Other idiosyncratic cultural
patterns persist not because stylistic traits are selectively neutral but because
they are selected for internal consistency in situations that relate to identity,

Culture and Reason
661
cooperation, and psychological well-being rather than to serve a cross-cultural
goal.
cross-cultural regularities
Early civilizations had many similarities. Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service
(1960) identiﬁed cross-cultural regularities as products of general evolution,
arguing that these were features that, for functional reasons, all societies that
reached a particular level of complexity had to develop. Neoevolutionists as-
sumed that the explanation for these similarities was primarily ecological.
In all the early civilizations, farmers produced modest agricultural surpluses,
of which a disproportionate amount was appropriated by the upper classes.
All of them had generally similar class hierarchies, one of two basic types
of political organization (city-states and territorial states), and three types of
administration (heterarchical, delegational, and bureaucratic). Their religious
beliefs did not distinguish the natural, the supernatural, and the social any
more than those of smaller-scale societies. Early civilizations had convergently
created a single model of how the cosmos functioned and of the relations
linking humans and the supernatural, and in each early civilization the upper
classes patronized the study of a natural world that was believed to be animated
by supernatural forces.
The rulers of each early civilization used various economic, political, and
religious incentives to induce farmers to produce agricultural surpluses and
surrenderalargeportionofthemtothestateandtheupperclasses.Whilethese
‘tributary’ relations had features in common with the support of elders and big
men in some small-scale agricultural societies, the bureaucratic and coercive
measures that were used to ensure the regular production and delivery of sur-
plusesweredifferent.Thesizeofsurplusescontinuedtoberestrictedbysimple
technologies, which made human labour a relatively inﬂexible variable, and by
the limited extent to which farmers could be persuaded or coerced to produce
beyond their families’ immediate needs. Farmers paid moderate rates of taxes
with little protest in return for the state’s organizing defence against foreign en-
emies, maintaining internal peace, and sometimes coordinating projects that
promoted economic development. Increasing taxation beyond these modest
limits would have required increasing use of force and hence greater man-
agerial organization and expense. Unlike some later preindustrial civilizations,
early civilizations opted for a low-force/low-yield solution. Probably only about
10 percent of total food production was surrendered to the state.
Higher population densities were associated with more intensive forms of
food production. While more intensive agriculture yielded more food per unit

662
Discussion
of arable land, it often required more human labour to produce the same
amount of food and under these circumstances was not undertaken without a
good reason. While all early civilizations appear to have been able to intensify
food production, this was accomplished in locally speciﬁc ways. Intensiﬁca-
tion was mainly based on knowledge that ordinary farmers already possessed.
Where population densities or opportunities to sell food were increasing, ini-
tiatives for more intensive food production usually came spontaneously from
farmers.
Early civilizations required extensive areas of fertile, easily worked soils and
moderately dense, sedentary human populations. Population density by itself
was not, however, necessarily the key variable, and neither was the circum-
scription of a region with great agricultural potential by a much poorer one.
More important was a growing need to protect agricultural land and other
forms of immovable property as increasing amounts of labour were invested
in them. As possession of such property was increasingly threatened by rival
polities, pastoral marauders, and poorer or landless elements within society,
farmers became willing to submit to authority and pay taxes in order to ensure
that their property was adequately protected (Linton 1933). The development
of larger states often produced conditions propitious for agricultural intensiﬁ-
cation and population expansion. Such expansion made landowners even more
dependent on government protection, but where denser populations necessi-
tated more labour to produce sufﬁcient food, overall surplus production may
occasionally have declined. In situations where denser populations could have
been supported without adopting more labour-intensive forms of agriculture,
rulers sometimes sought to increase food production and their own revenues
by attracting foreign immigrants or settling prisoners of war. Despite the close
correlation between population density and the intensity of agricultural pro-
duction, there appear to have been many different strategies for managing
both population growth and agricultural intensiﬁcation. Population density
cannot be treated as an independent variable in the development of early
civilizations.
There were three main types of land ownership in early civilizations: collec-
tive, institutional, and private. While it is unclear to what extent collectively
owned land was a primordial form in all early civilizations, institutional land was
independently created in several and private land in at least two (Mesopotamia
and Egypt). We are prevented from positing an evolutionary sequence of land-
holding from collective through institutional to private by the considerable
variation in combinations of these types of ownership from one early civiliza-
tion to another and the varying capacity of collective and institutional forms to
resist erosion.

Culture and Reason
663
All early civilizations required corv´ee labour from commoners, although the
amount and importance of this form of tax varied. While the Inka collected
taxes only in the form of labour, other civilizations required in addition the
regular payment of taxes either on land or on harvests and herds. In most early
civilizations they were collected in kind, but in Mesopotamia they were even-
tually paid in silver. Aztec and Yoruba leaders extracted considerable revenues
by means of a sales tax, while Yoruba authorities also imposed duties on the
local and regional transport of goods. In many early civilizations, governments,
temples, and ofﬁcials derived income from institutionally or privately owned
land by requiring landless farmers to work it in return for being allowed to
keep enough produce to feed themselves and their families or by hiring wage
labourers, renting land, or sharecropping it. While the means varied, the re-
sult was the same: a large portion of the crops produced on such lands was
appropriated by the government and the upper classes.
The development of systems of taxation and appropriation involved the
repeated invention of a limited number of techniques for extracting resources
from commoners and the use of different combinations of these techniques. An
increasing variety of techniques appears to have been employed in individual
early civilizations over time. By disguising the total amount of wealth that was
being appropriated from individuals by the state and the upper classes, this
elaboration probably facilitated the increasing economic exploitation of the
lower classes. Tribute from conquered states further increased the revenues
of kings and the upper classes.
Although early civilizations displayed a wide range of kinship organization,
these forms exhibited a stronger masculine bias than that associated with less
complex societies. The position of women varied considerably in early civiliza-
tions, perhaps partly because of the differing status of women in the societies
that gave rise to them, but in no early civilization were women equal to men.
Moreover, where the position of women can be monitored over time it dete-
riorated rather than improved.
Early civilizations were characterized by a degree of division of labour
and craft specialization unprecedented prior to their origin. These develop-
ments resulted mainly from growing demands for luxury goods, more effective
weapons, and higher-quality domestic goods. While some households con-
tinued to manufacture goods for their own use and part-time craft workers
supplied local markets, there was a great increase in the number of full-time
artisans.Throughacombinationofmarketsalesandcommissionedproduction,
the self-employed full-time craft workers that were characteristic of city-state
systems made goods of varying quality available to all levels of society. The
elite craft workers of territorial states produced luxury goods exclusively for

664
Discussion
the government and the upper classes while part-time rural craft specialists
manufactured goods for the lower classes. In Mesopotamia and the Valley
of Mexico and among the Yoruba, long-distance traders, operating indepen-
dently of government control, imported exotic raw materials and circulated
high-quality produce among neighbouring, and often warring, city-states. In
territorial states, the government controlled both the local procurement of
valuable raw materials and the conduct of foreign trade.
Early civilizations possessed many analogous political institutions. The most
important of these was kingship. Monarchs were conceptualized differently in
the various early civilizations. In some the king was proclaimed to be a universal
ruler; in others he was simply one head of state among many. Some kings ef-
fectively governed their kingdoms; others tended to be ﬁgureheads. Although
in most early civilizations kings led their armies into battle, the Yoruba re-
garded such behaviour as incompatible with a ruler’s holiness. Egyptian, Inka,
Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba kings were believed to be infused with the powers
of one or more major cosmic deities; Mesopotamian rulers were regarded as
ordinary humans who had to depend on the goodwill of the gods for their
success. Despite the varied ways in which they were conceptualized, kings
invariably represented the unity of a state. They were also regarded as at least
symbolically responsible for the welfare of their kingdoms: for their agricul-
tural prosperity, social harmony, defence, legal systems, and dealings with the
supernatural. It appears that in early civilizations it was impossible to conceive
of political unity except as it was embodied in a single person.
All the early civilizations had essentially similar class hierarchies based on a
dichotomy between rulers and workers. At the top, a king and a tiny upper class
monopolized most of the resources of a society and made all the important
policy decisions. The upper class was hierarchized, with a royal family at the
apex. In many early civilizations, membership in the upper class was formally
ascribed and hereditary. In others, upper-class status was attributed to indi-
viduals or families either on the basis of relative power and wealth or position
in a government hierarchy. Male members of the upper class governed and
were military leaders; they did not engage in manual labour.
Below the upper class were full-time specialists – administrators and minor
civil servants, full-time soldiers, and craft workers. The bulk of the population
were farmers, landowning or landless, and at the bottom of society, except
in the Andes and perhaps in China, were slaves – debtors, criminals, military
captives, purchased foreigners, and their descendants. In all the early civi-
lizations, the social hierarchy was also one of power and wealth. The number
of people belonging to each free class increased exponentially from the top
to the bottom of the class hierarchy. Vertical mobility, where it was allowed,

Culture and Reason
665
was controlled from above, and classes tended to be endogamous. Perhaps
the most important distinction in the organization of social hierarchies was
between early civilizations that had hereditary nobilities and those that lacked
them.
Early civilizations exhibited two types of political organization: city-states
and territorial states. These types differed not only in size but in political, eco-
nomic, and social organization. In city-states, large numbers of farmers lived in
urban centres and full-time craft workers produced for an extensive clientele,
including farmers, who bought their goods at urban markets and shops. In
territorial states, urban centres were inhabited only by rulers, administrators,
retainers, and skilled craft workers who produced goods for the state and the
upper classes. Farmers lived in rural settings, where they manufactured the
goods they needed on a part-time basis. This created a two-tiered economy
integrated only by a system of taxation that funnelled surplus resources from
the bottom to the top.
Charles Maisels (1999: 342–59) attributes the origin of territorial states to
the greater extent to which differences in strategies of ecological adaptation
permitted ruling classes to exploit commoners. He argues that the solidarity of
rural communities in Egypt and of clan organization in China facilitated their
more effective exploitation. Much idiosyncratic argument is required to make
the four Old World civilizations that Maisels studies conform to this gener-
alization, and even more difﬁculties are involved in extending it to cover the
early civilizations of the Western Hemisphere. Moreover, the valid correlations
that he establishes between city-states and reciprocal exchange and between
territorial states and exploitative economies may have been the result rather
than the cause of these differences in political organization.
It is clear, however, that early civilizations had either territorial states or
city-states but both sorts did not occur together in a single early civilization.
While many unilinear evolutionists believe that city-states were consolidated to
form territorial states and Joyce Marcus (1998) has argued that early territorial
states broke apart to form city-states, there is no evidence that one of these
types of state ever evolved into the other. Both, however, in some instances
evolved into preindustrial regional states, a type of polity that combined some
features of both earlier forms with other, completely new features.
Early civilizations displayed limited variation in their forms of administra-
tion. In a city-state, power was vested in the government located in the main
urban centre, which was often heterarchical in structure. Territorial states
required more formal, hierarchical administration, either delegational or bu-
reaucratic. The information theorists of the late 1960s and 1970s viewed these
forms as having developed through the necessary delegation of authority to

666
Discussion
make various administrative decisions to lower-level ofﬁcials and the organi-
zation of hierarchies to process information and monitor whether higher-level
orders were being carried out (see, e.g., D. Clarke 1968: 88–101). Problems
ﬁrst developed, they argued, when societies expanded beyond the point where
all adults could know each other individually. Above the threshold of about
four hundred people there was increasing need for brokers or intermediaries
to shape public opinion and produce consensus. As groups became still larger,
the ever-greater amounts of time required to reach agreement about pub-
lic policy rendered consensual decision-making increasingly ineffective. Once
communities expanded much beyond ﬁfteen hundred people, leaders had to
be authorized to make crucial decisions that were accepted as binding on their
followers (G. Foster 1960: 178; Heidenreich 1971: 129–34). People agreed to
obey ofﬁcials in order to avoid chaos. The alternatives for political management
in early complex societies were, according to these theorists, extremely lim-
ited. They proposed that the number of levels in an administrative hierarchy
had to increase as the state expanded and, more speciﬁcally, that whenever ap-
proximately seven additional units required coordination a new level of control
had to be established (G. Johnson 1973; 1978; G. Miller 1956; van der Leeuw
1981). William Rathje (1975) argued that, as the range and intensity of con-
trol increased, controls became more standardized and eventually lower-level
units were encouraged to become largely self-regulating to reduce their cost to
the central government. Information theorists did not attempt to explain why
societies grew more complex or why in particular societies a bureaucratic or
delegational form of administration was preferred (Flannery 1972), but they
did show how a limited variety of workable solutions may have limited the
types of administration that were possible.
The military forces in early civilizations depended on peasant corv´ees to
supply most of the soldiers needed to defend frontiers and ﬁght in foreign
campaigns. A corps of full-time soldiers and police was employed to guard
members of the upper class, protect government installations, arrest crimi-
nals, and intimidate dissidents. As states grew more powerful they relied in-
creasingly on full-time soldiers. Armed forces, whether made up of conscripts
or professional soldiers, were organized in a modular, hierarchical fashion,
no doubt for the same reasons that the political administration was. Some
physical coercion was required to punish rebels and ensure the payment of
taxes. In general, such punishment seems to have been easier to impose in
territorial states than in city-states. The boundaries of territorial states were
fortiﬁed or patrolled, making it difﬁcult for dissidents to escape. Armed rebel-
lions were generally local and easily crushed. In city-state systems, in contrast,
malcontents and rebels could ﬂee to neighbouring states, where they had a

Culture and Reason
667
good chance of being welcomed by kings who were rivals or enemies of their
own ruler. Central governments also generally sought to curb blood feuds,
especially ones that might be directed against the sovereign.
The basic elements of legal procedures – socially recognized rules with
universal applicability, authorities who rendered judgements, and some means
of enforcement – were already widespread and probably universal among
small-scale societies (Pospisil 1958). What early civilizations added was a hier-
archicaldimensionthatparalleledthepoliticalhierarchy.Thekingwasascribed
ultimate authority in legal matters, especially with respect to life-and-death
decisions. Law courts were established at various administrative levels. Be-
cause of the greater ability of the state to deploy force, decisions by higher
courts tended to be rapid, deﬁnitive, and often arbitrary. Yet administrative
economy was achieved by allowing lower-level tribunals to regulate legal prob-
lems within extended families and local groups as much as possible. At this level
decisions were generally enforced by public opinion. Higher-level courts were
controlled by members of the upper classes, and their judgements reﬂected
the self-interest of that social stratum. They normally imposed much harsher
penalties on lower-class individuals than on upper-class ones. Only the Aztec
and their neighbours inﬂicted more severe penalties on the upper classes, in
this case for a series of personal misdemeanours that called into question their
self-control and hence the supernatural power they were supposed to possess.
Witchcraft accusations, which in small-scale societies had been used to enforce
redistribution and protect economic equality, were redirected to coerce the
less powerful and afﬂuent.
Whether the upper classes in speciﬁc early civilizations viewed themselves as
self-disciplined bureaucrats, audacious warriors, or comfortable landowners,
they agreed about the need to protect their privileges and possessions by keep-
ing the lower classes subservient. They also agreed about the means, including
both physical and legal coercion, by which this could be accomplished. It is,
however, also clear that those who controlled early civilizations relied heavily
on at least the passive consent if not the active support of a substantial majority
of the governed. Rulers could never have deployed enough force to suppress
even a signiﬁcant minority of their subjects. It is also evident that governments
of early civilizations did not interfere unduly in the affairs of the lower classes.
Kin groups and communities were allowed to regulate their internal affairs so
long as their doing so did not interfere with the privileges of the powerful. The
frequent delegation of political and legal power demonstrated a preference
for less expensive government, even if it increased the risk of disintegration.
The state focused its administrative skills and resources on key concerns of the
upper classes, such as collecting taxes. Because the wealth that was available

668
Discussion
to the upper classes was limited, leaders preferred to expend as much of it as
possible on their own lifestyles and on creating symbols of power and therefore
sought to spend only what was necessary on coercion.
The most potent source of power for the upper classes was probably the
pervasiveness and hence the seeming normality of inequality. Hierarchical re-
lations pervaded almost every aspect of life. Relations between a ruler and his
subjects provided a model for relations between male heads and other mem-
bers of extended or nuclear families, as well as between adults and children,
teachers and pupils, employers and employees, and masters and slaves. All
such relations tended to be construed as father-son relations. As the result of a
growing emphasis on male public leadership, the position of women declined.
Thus, from birth, children lived in families and communities that were char-
acterized by institutionalized inequality and the dominance of male authority
ﬁgures.
The training of children regularly involved physical punishment, which was
used to deal not only with disobedience but also with failure to perform up to
the level expected of them. Pupils, apprentices, and employees were required
to respect and obey those in authority. Thus the experiences of everyday life in
early civilizations encouraged obedience to authority ﬁgures. These relations
contrasted dramatically with what was found in small-scale societies, where
social control was enforced by public opinion and children were rarely, if ever,
physically coerced or punished (Trigger 1985b). Smaller-scale societies often
lacked even the concept of obedience, in the sense of one person’s being
thought to have the moral right to tell another person what to do. This dis-
tinction is understandable in terms of the information-theoretical notion that
the development of control hierarchies resulted from the need to regulate in-
creasingly large-scale societies. Information theory also explains why decision
making came to be associated with people who did not perform manual labour
and manual labour was associated with the carrying out of orders. The cultural
encoding of concepts of status and power into family life, gender relations,
and relations between young and old might appear to be a hierarchizing of
social relations at an intimate level where hierarchy was not operationally re-
quired. Yet, only by making hierarchical relations pervasive in everyday life
could unequal relations be made to appear sufﬁciently natural that they oper-
ated effectively at the societal and hence the political level. Unequal relations
probably diffused through complex societies as a result of status emulation.
The need to develop a command hierarchy to manage complex societies
does not, however, explain why decision-makers and their families invariably
acquired such exalted social status and appropriated such large amounts of
surplus wealth for their personal use. Few social scientists have recognized this

Culture and Reason
669
as an issue worth investigating. Instead they have assumed that power, wealth,
and social status are naturally correlated. Opposed to such a correlation is the
religious ideal of service without personal or material beneﬁt, as embodied in
the Christian belief that a true leader should serve his followers. Occasionally
ascetic religious ﬁgures appear to be satisﬁed with moral inﬂuence alone, but
even in religious hierarchies leaders normally control wealth and live more
luxuriously than their followers. In general, power over others is correlated
with control of wealth as well as with enhanced social status.
Several explanations have been proposed for this correlation. Leaders need
to possess wealth to reward their supporters and sustain subordinate ofﬁcials.
Unless those in command control sufﬁcient material resources, a hierarchi-
cal system cannot be created or maintained. Public displays of wealth may
also have been necessary to signal the importance of leaders and elicit re-
spect for them. To survive, people had always had to extract more calories
in the form of food from the environment than they expended in doing
so, and this had made them implicitly aware of the practical importance of
Zipf’s (1949) law of least effort. The ability to ﬂout this law by indulging in con-
spicuous and often wasteful consumption was therefore a statement of power
that would have been immediately comprehensible (Trigger 1990a; Veblen
1899).
In small-scale societies leadership is not correlated with the possession of
wealth. Hunter-gatherer societies are mobile, and those who live in them
have little opportunity to accumulate possessions. The sharing of food results
in balanced reciprocity, which promotes the well-being of everyone and is
therefore highly adaptive. The most successful hunters share their catches
with less successful hunters and their families and in return are accorded
implicit positions of leadership. Any lack of generosity or of appropriately
modest behaviour is punished by gossip and ridicule and believed to incite
assaults of witchcraft (Lee 1990). In small-scale sedentary societies, leaders
and their kin and supporters labour hard to produce surplus wealth that can
be given away to incur moral indebtedness and thus sustain political support,
often working harder than their followers and sometimes being poorer (Sahlins
1972; Trigger 1990b).
Eighteenth-century reports of such behaviour were interpreted by Jean-
Jacques Rousseau and other Enlightenment philosophers as evidence that
civilization had corrupted instinctive human generosity – an idea taken up
in turn by Marxist thinkers, who attributed oppression to the development
of hierarchy rather than to human nature. David Erdal and Andrew Whiten
(1996) have argued that there must be some innate human predisposition
that favours egalitarian behaviour in small-scale societies that is not present

670
Discussion
among other higher primate species. Yet it is clear that the social and economic
egalitarianism of small-scale societies is everywhere a product of social engi-
neering that requires the vigorous support of public opinion for its enforce-
ment. When leaders acquire the power to control public communication and
silence criticism of their behaviour, they invariably begin to accumulate wealth,
which they use not only to perform public duties but also to confer dispropor-
tionate social and material beneﬁts on themselves and their families.
That social and economic inequality becomes universal under these cir-
cumstances suggests that the tendency to equate power and wealth relates to a
general acquisitiveness that is deeply embedded in human behaviour. In small-
scale societies, such acquisitiveness is effectively suppressed by public opinion,
which enforces the redistribution of such wealth as exists. Public opinion also
imposes modesty on individuals who possess talents that are important for the
well-beingoftheirsocietiesandmakethemdefactoleaders.Yet,whileinprein-
dustrial civilizations public criticism and discontent were directed against the
arbitrary appropriation of wealth and the abuse of power, economic inequality
was accepted as a normal condition (Weber 1976 [1896]: 258). Revolutionary
activity, when it occurred, sought to curb excesses rather than to eliminate
the class system. Small-scale societies recognize acquisitiveness and domina-
tion as tendencies in human behaviour and seek ways to curb them through
the exercise of public opinion. These mechanisms fail to control leaders as
societies grow more complex, and power begins to be expressed through the
conspicuous consumption of wealth. Neither cultural ecology nor information
theory can readily explain why this happens.
Religions in early civilizations were based on the belief that supernatural
forces animated (or were) the natural world; hence they did not distinguish the
natural and the supernatural. Supernatural forces were ascribed minds, wills,
andsensesresemblingthoseofhumanbeings.Thesecapacitiesfacilitatedcom-
munication between the human and the natural/supernatural realms. Human
beings believed themselves to be animated by supernatural power, which fur-
ther reduced the distinction between the social and the natural/supernatural.
Because humans depended on the natural environment, they sought to guar-
antee their well-being by maintaining good relations with the supernatural
beings that controlled nature. These relations constituted the central focus of
religion in early civilizations. Morality remained primarily a social rather than
a religious concern.
Not distinguishing the natural, supernatural, and social realms appears, on
the basis of comparative ethnographic data, to have been an inheritance from
the past. Yet much older ideas of supernatural power as animal spirits that
had kinship relations with humans or as supportive but demanding ancestors

Culture and Reason
671
were increasingly displaced by the perception of major deities as powerful
natural or cosmic forces on whose support the welfare of all human beings de-
pended. This broader vision of the supernatural was stimulated by a growing
appreciation of the importance of political articulation and control for the sur-
vival and well-being of societies (Swanson 1960: 191–93). As forces of nature,
deities were born, died, competed with one another, changed, and revealed
both good and bad qualities. They were not all equally powerful, and weaker
deities were subordinated in various ways to stronger ones. Thus widely shared
beliefs that antedated the development of early civilizations were transformed
in signiﬁcant ways in the context of more complex and hierarchical social
structures.
Out of this process emerged a set of distinctive beliefs that were common to
all early civilizations. Humans saw themselves as dependent on the supernat-
ural energy that sustained the universe and provided for their material needs.
The gods, as the forces of nature, were the source of all life and sustenance,
but they depended on the energy that human beings returned to them in the
form of sacriﬁces. This complex of beliefs distributed complementary roles
that were believed essential for sustaining the cosmos among commoners,
the upper classes, and the gods. Deities provided the energy and order that
animated the universe and all that was in it, including human beings. Farmers
supplied the food and labour that supported the upper classes and the gods,
while the upper classes provided the political order that allowed farmers to
produce food surpluses and ritually cycled into the supernatural realm the
energy that permitted the gods to maintain the cosmic order.
By assigning responsibility for nourishing the gods to the king and the upper
classes, religious beliefs in early civilizations imposed strict limitations on the
upper classes’ exploitation of farmers. If food production faltered as the result
of mistreatment of commoners by the upper classes, not only the stability of
human society but the cosmic order was threatened – a situation for which
human rulers were answerable to the gods. The maintenance of balanced and
reciprocal relations between the upper and lower classes may explain why class
conﬂict was not a major feature of early civilizations.
Nothing resembling this conceptualization of relations between human
beings and the cosmic order could have existed before. Its tenets repre-
sented a projection into the supernatural realm of the general relations of
production and government that linked farmers and the upper classes in early
civilizations. Yet these religious beliefs cannot be dismissed as epiphenome-
nal. Nor, although based in part on views inherited from earlier times, can
they be described as a simple or predictable reworking of these beliefs to
ﬁt new circumstances. They were instead products of profound reﬂections

672
Discussion
concerning the nature of society that took account of the general practices and
accommodations that best governed relations among classes and extended
these relations to the supernatural forces that were thought to maintain
(or be) the universe. Relations between social classes were used analogically to
conceptualize relations between human beings and the natural/supernatural
forces on which humans had to rely. Through a conceptual inversion, the orga-
nization of the supernatural came to be perceived as a model and justiﬁcation
for human political and religious conduct. In a social realm that had become
too large to be conceptualized in terms of kinship metaphors, religious con-
cepts provided the basis for thinking about political issues and creating the
equivalent of a constitution. It is highly signiﬁcant that, in all the early civi-
lizations, religion offered the context for such formulations and that, despite
many speciﬁc differences in social organization and in beliefs concerning both
the cosmic order and the gods, the same view of a sociocosmic order was
created.
These conclusions are very different from those I would have reached had I
discovered, for instance, that the people in every early civilization in my sample
had believed in a powerful male deity named Ra, who was identiﬁed with the
sun. Such evidence would have supported an Egyptocentric, or perhaps an
Atlantean, explanation of the origins of religious beliefs in early civilizations.
The fact that detailed similarities of this sort were not shared by early civi-
lizations, combined with the lack of evidence of major historical links (except
those of Mesoamerica) among the early civilizations being examined, strongly
supports the view that we are dealing with a series of independent intellectual
constructions.
The early civilizations also shared many general beliefs concerning the struc-
ture of the universe. Ideas about a multilevel cosmos with exclusively super-
natural levels above and beneath the earth, a terrestrial world divided into
quarters and surrounded by an ocean, and communication between levels oc-
curring mainly at the centre and the outer edges of the earth may have been
derived from beliefs that were already widespread prior to the development of
the various early civilizations. These beliefs were supplemented by the more
extensive empirical knowledge of the world that people in early civilizations
were able to assemble as a result of contacts with increasingly distant societies
andtheirrecordingofobservationsofnaturalphenomenaoverlengthyperiods.
The constraints of empirical knowledge account for the greater cross-cultural
uniformity associated with beliefs concerning the terrestrial plane than with
beliefs about the celestial and underworld levels and those relating to cos-
mology by comparison with more speculative topics such as creation, cosmic
history, and the ultimate fate of the universe.

Culture and Reason
673
The idea that human beings possessed multiple souls, which disaggregated
after they died, also appears to have been a continuation of earlier widespread
beliefs. So too was the notion that an individual’s identity survived, though not
necessarily permanently, after death. Belief in the ability of souls to enjoy an
enhanced existence after death appears to have been stronger in territorial
states than in city-state systems. These optimistic beliefs seem to have devel-
oped among the upper classes and to have spread through status emulation to
the lower classes.
The most important forms of learning that were patronized by the upper
classes included divination and medicine. Doctors not only had to be familiar
with natural remedies but had to know how to practise divination, interpret
oracles, and discern the will of the gods in relation to health and sickness.
Divination, oracles, and magic were also thought to enable leaders to learn the
will of the gods concerning political and personal matters, avoid divine anger,
control deities, ward off evil, and uncover witches. Much of this specialized
knowledge was focused on regulating relations between human beings and
the supernatural. This focus was not an obfuscation of practical knowledge
that the upper classes hoped would halt technological and social progress
and hence protect their special privileges, as Marxist historians of science
once argued (Childe 1965 [1936]; B. Farrington 1936). While the people
of early civilizations coped with most everyday problems in a practical and
straightforward manner (Hallpike 1979), their view of the cosmos encouraged
them to rely on the supernatural to try to resolve any problems that did not
have an obvious pragmatic solution. To the upper classes, discovering tech-
niques for managing relations with the supernatural was a supremely practical
activity.
The development of writing systems provides detailed insights into the mix-
ture of conceptual uniformity and idiosyncratic variation underlying a major
intellectual achievement of some early civilizations. Writing systems were in-
vented in at least four early civilizations, and all four scripts adopted similar
logophonic approaches. Logograms, or word signs, were of primary impor-
tance, but sounds also had to be represented to resolve ambiguities result-
ing from their semantic extensions. Three different methods were employed
for representing sounds: the Sumerians and Maya used syllabograms, the
Egyptians noted only consonants, and the Chinese increasingly combined two
signs, one of which functioned as a logogram while the other suggested its pro-
nunciation. Purely syllabic or alphabetic scripts were produced only in societies
that lacked writing systems but were aware of existing logophonic scripts. This
pattern suggests a natural tendency for humans to privilege logography when
developing systems to record speech.

674
Discussion
theoretical implications
Comparative study reveals abundant idiosyncratic variation from one early
civilization to another. Some of this variation was ecologically adaptive. Other
variation helped to deﬁne the identity and status of different ethnic or po-
litical groups. Idiosyncratic variation characterized the content of the myths,
art styles, and knowledge of early civilizations. Because all understanding is
symbolically mediated, it is not surprising that idiosyncratic cultural traditions
shaped human behaviour in highly signiﬁcant and often unpredictable ways.
Yet there is also abundant evidence of cross-cultural regularities that cannot
be explained by historical relations. These regularities structured important
aspects of the economies, social and political organization, and belief sys-
tems of early civilizations. There is no sector of early civilizations that did not
display a signiﬁcant combination of cultural idiosyncrasies and cross-cultural
regularities. Such ﬁndings do not correspond with the expectations of either
neoevolutionists or cultural determinists.
Neoevolutionary anthropologists have long been preoccupied with explain-
ing cross-cultural similarities that appear to have arisen independently in so-
cieties at the same level of development. Most anthropologists assume that in
the course of hominid evolution natural selection favoured the development
of the biological capacity to manipulate symbols as a more ﬂexible means of
adaptation to the environment (Mithen 1996). This assumption has encour-
aged many archaeologists and anthropologists to interpret cultural transfor-
mations as rational responses to changing ecological conditions. Demographic
and environmental changes and shifting patterns of competition with other
societies require alterations in the ways in which human groups adapt to their
environments. Most neoevolutionists have assumed that sociocultural change
occurs only when ecological shifts require it. These ideas accord with the
views articulated by Boasian cultural anthropologists and Durkheimian social
anthropologists late in the nineteenth century and differ from those of a minor-
ity of materialists (mainly Marxists), who believe that systemic changes occur
as a result of competition over resources. Both approaches view convergent
change as a product of what Sahlins (1976) called ‘practical reason’ (Sanderson
1990).
Cultural ecologists regard human intelligence as individuals’ ability to
regulate, rationally and often on the basis of near-perfect knowledge, their
relations with the natural world and with other human beings. Considerations
of least effort and risk avoidance allow human groups to implement optimally
adaptive solutions. People who must cope with similar problems in analogous
environments are expected to devise similar solutions. For these theorists,

Culture and Reason
675
necessity is truly the mother of invention. They disagree, however, on the level
at which ecological inﬂuences are manifested. Leslie White (1949: 390–91)
suggested that technological subsystems shaped social subsystems, while both
together inﬂuenced philosophies and the arts, but he maintained (1945: 346)
that these inﬂuences shaped cultural patterns only in a general fashion. Marvin
Harris (1974; 1977; 1979), in contrast, has gone to great lengths to demonstrate
that adaptive strategies shape very speciﬁc aspects of human behaviour and
beliefs. He assumes that all aspects of cultures are functionally interrelated
and that adaptive changes produce alterations throughout cultural systems.
He further regards values and beliefs as epiphenomenal and determined by
adaptation to the environment. Culture is treated as a facilitator – a way to
encode adaptive behaviour and make it automatic.
Others, whose views are closer to White’s, regard change as limited to an
adaptive ‘core’ of society, while allowing that established aspects of behaviour
and belief, which promote adaptation or are neutral with respect to it, persist.
Julian Steward (1949) argued that the adaptive core revealed itself through
cross-cultural regularities, while less adaptive features of culture survived as
particularities. Thus kingship would have been identiﬁed as a core feature
of early civilizations, while the symbolic association of monarchs in speciﬁc
cultures with crowns, stools, or parasols would have constituted historical par-
ticularities. Steward (1955: 209) equated the study of cross-cultural regular-
ities with science and that of particularities with history, arguing that there
was no place for the study of particularities in a science of anthropology. He
also stressed, however, that it was necessary to determine empirically which
features were cross-culturally recurrent and which were not – an idea that un-
derlies the present study. Robert Dunnell (1978) made a similar point when he
argued that functional traits, which are affected by selection and therefore non-
random, have to be distinguished from stylistic ones, which are functionally
neutral and therefore have random or stochastic distributions. The problems
inherent in distinguishing between style and function have already been noted.
Roy Rappaport (1968) and Kent Flannery and Joyce Marcus (1976) have as-
signed a more proactive role to traditional beliefs, which they believe may play
a signiﬁcant role in regulating adaptive behaviour. The epiphenomenal role
of culture was further called into question by Ian Hodder’s (1982a) demon-
stration that material culture was not limited to reﬂecting social relations (also
Cannon 1989).
Drawing on ideas derived from Enlightenment philosophy, neoevolution-
ists emphasized similarities in all human behaviour and the unilinear nature
of cultural development throughout the world. Their approach encouraged
belief in the similarities of responses of societies that were at the same level

676
Discussion
of development. Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service (1960) formulated their
distinction between speciﬁc and general evolution in a similar vein. They ar-
gued that, while cultures necessarily adapted in diverse ways to various types of
environments, the resulting speciﬁc differences were eventually overwhelmed
by similarities in the successively more complex general adaptations that made
more advanced societies dominant over less advanced ones. Steward, with his
concept of multilinear evolution, appears to have advocated speciﬁc evolu-
tion, but in adopting Wittfogel’s idea that all early civilizations had evolved in
areas where irrigation was necessary he subjected cultural evolution to a uni-
linear straitjacket (Steward 1949; 1955: 178–209). It is now evident that early
civilizations did not develop in a single type of environment or as the result
of a particular agricultural practice such as extensive reliance on irrigation.
Because subsistence adaptation always occurred in relation to particular local
conditions, it had to be speciﬁc and was therefore highly variable.
Nor does much support remain for the suggestion that population pressure
was the main factor promoting the development of early civilizations. De-
spite claims to the contrary by Ester Boserup (1965) and Mark Cohen (1977),
population growth is not an independent variable but is inﬂuenced by nu-
merous economic, social, and cultural factors. Much remains to be learned
about relations between forms of government and population density. In New
Guinea, communities have traditionally tended to split when their population
rises above three hundred rather than grow larger and develop more elaborate
forms of government. This process continues in areas that have overall pop-
ulation densities that are as high as 135 persons per square kilometre (Forge
1972). There was great variation in population density in relation to the amount
of arable land in early civilizations.
The most important factor relating to agriculture that encouraged the de-
velopment of early civilizations appears to have been the investment of labour
in the long-term improvement of land, which created a need for protection
against predation. State support ensured the owners of the best agricultural
land that others could have access to it only on terms that they set (Linton
1933; 1939). Alternatively, where land was abundant but labour scarce, the
state was looked to as a power that could guarantee the contractual rights of
the afﬂuent to the labour of the poor. Kent Flannery (1972) has noted that trade
and many other factors promoted the development of early civilizations. The
emergence of states created conditions that encouraged population growth and
agricultural intensiﬁcation. These developments increased the dependence of
afﬂuent groups on the government’s capacity to maintain law and order.
The factors promoting the development of early civilizations thus appear to
have been less ecological than economic or political. Land and labour were of

Culture and Reason
677
less consequence in their own right than because they were regarded as forms
of property, and ownership of land became less important than appropriation
of the surpluses produced on that land.
As societies expanded, they required more complex hierarchical adminis-
trative structures. Kent Flannery (1972) has suggested that determining how
these structures worked is more important for the functional understanding
of early civilizations than discovering the varied and often idiosyncratic fac-
tors that encouraged the formation of speciﬁc large-scale political entities. In
addition, authorities had to be able to deploy force to protect the society as
a whole, uphold the rights of its more privileged members, and ensure that
ofﬁcials’ orders were carried out. Achieving these goals required the develop-
ment of armies, police forces, and law courts that served the interests of the
upper classes. City-state systems and territorial states constituted alternative
political structures for achieving those ends. These two varieties of political
organization exemplify the complex roles played by functional constraints in
shaping social organization.
More speciﬁc attention must be paid, however, to the correlation between
the development of decision-making hierarchies and increasing social and
economic inequality. It is generally assumed that, to be effective, authoritative
decision-making roles in early civilizations had to be associated with wealth
and high status. The accumulation of wealth for the personal beneﬁt of the
upper class cannot, however, be explained from a purely functional or rational
perspective. Instead, it appears to be rooted in higher-primate behaviour and
in a universal human tendency to interpret conspicuous consumption as evi-
dence of political power.
Chimpanzees combine a strong predisposition for sociability and member-
ship in groups with intense rivalries for positions of dominance and inﬂuence
within those groups. Alliance making, deceit, and betrayal characterize these
rivalries (Conroy 1990). The development of complex human societies under-
mined the highly effective social mechanisms that had been developed for
combating self-assertiveness and acquisitiveness in hunter-gatherer societies,
where generalized reciprocity had been important for survival. In complex
societies, leaders who controlled the public dissemination of information were
able to curb any public gossip and ridicule directed against them and sup-
press and punish their critics. The unprecedented isolation of rulers in their
houses and then their palaces made them still more immune to public criticism
(P. Wilson 1988). In these ways, individuals in positions of authority could pro-
tect and reinforce their power. Public deference was demanded from the vast
majority of people, and overt criticism of the upper classes was not tolerated.
Under these conditions, the lower classes lost any active role in governing

678
Discussion
society as a whole. Yet, while the upper classes were at least passively accepted
and economically supported in return for the regulatory beneﬁts they con-
ferred on society, they remained subject to covert public opinion, which could
become openly hostile if their control became ineffectual or their behaviour
grew too oppressive.
Steven Mithen (1996) has argued that human social behaviour is biologi-
cally grounded not in general intelligence but in speciﬁc forms of cerebration
that were already highly developed in humanity’s ancestors prior to their sep-
aration from the great apes. His modular view of human intelligence lacks
anatomical substantiation, and many neuroscientists emphasize the ﬂexibility
and adaptability of the modern human brain (Dubrovsky 1999). Yet some as-
pects of human behaviour do appear to be controlled by biological factors. The
human cortex, which is associated with the capacity to reason, is anatomically
linked to the limbic system, the seat of the emotions. Close connections be-
tween reason, will, and emotions are essential if reason is to promote effective
goal-oriented and social behaviour (E. Armstrong 1991). Tendencies towards
sociability and competitiveness seem likely to be genetically encoded in all
the higher primates. If this is so, a biologically based tendency toward indi-
vidual competitiveness, the overt expression of which had been held in check
by public opinion among hunter-gatherers, came to be expressed more openly
as societies grew more complex. As the state replaced public opinion as the
principal instrument for maintaining social order, mechanisms for reinforcing
social cooperation and solidarity of great antiquity were suppressed.
Egalitarian societies and states sought to promote different basic human
behavioural tendencies. Thus there is no basis for claiming that, because they
had temporal priority, egalitarian societies present human nature more accu-
rately than do hierarchical ones. Yet societies appear to have been shaped not
only by the adaptive requirements of their environments but also by aspects
of human nature that are a product of long-term biological evolution. Prac-
tical reason cannot be equated solely with ecological adaptation. The human
brain is not simply a rational calculating machine but a biological organ with its
own needs and its own biologically determined modes of operation (E. White
1993). Phylogenetic and evolutionary psychological approaches point to the
error of assuming that the inegalitarian behaviour that has emerged relatively
recently in the course of human history is entirely culturally determined, just
as information theory and functional analyses generally reveal that not every-
thing that characterizes societies at a particular stage of cultural development
is necessarily biologically determined.
Equally challenging to explain is why the upper classes everywhere lived
luxuriously. Wealth is essential to maintain supporters and ofﬁcials, and the

Culture and Reason
679
conspicuous display and consumption of resources is universally interpreted
as a sign of power. Yet this does not account for the enthusiasm with which the
upper class lavished wealth on itself. Although better nutrition, superior hous-
ing, and less physical labour had selective advantages for an upper-class family,
the luxury of upper-class lifestyles vastly transcended what was biologically re-
quired. Indeed, it may even have been counterproductive in terms of personal
health. While hierarchically organized decision-makers were essential to en-
sure the functioning of complex societies, if these leaders and their families
had lived frugal personal lives they would still, as administrative specialists,
have been able to make the decisions necessary to regulate their societies.
Luxurious lifestyles are unique to humans living in class societies, but they
are also universal in these societies. At most, other primates quarrel over the
possession of food. In the early stages of hominid evolution, prior to the devel-
opment of generalized reciprocity, competitive behaviour with respect to food
probably had a signiﬁcant selective advantage in periods of life-threatening
scarcity. In the course of human evolution, this behavior may have expanded
to include striving for all sorts of possessions whenever public opinion was
insufﬁcient to enforce generosity.
As societies came to be marked by increasing political inequality, the accu-
mulation of wealth invariably paralleled the acquisition of political power, and
conspicuous consumption was interpreted as evidence of power. Thus wealth
and status became mutually reinforcing. In early civilizations, political power
was both an important means of obtaining wealth and essential for protecting
it. Conversely, controlling wealth was necessary to maintain political power.
Yet there was little opportunity for economic and political interests to com-
pete (Eisenstadt 1963). Wealth alone could not confer high social status on
long-distance traders. Sociopolitical forces were clearly more important deter-
minants of early class societies than economic ones. Yet humans appear to opt
for wealth as well as political power whenever the opportunity arises. Under
these circumstances, culturally speciﬁc explanations of inequalities in wealth
appear to be epiphenomenal rationalizations of a universal human tendency.
This universality calls into question the relativist claim that the object of wants
is always particular and historically determined (Sahlins 1976: 152). Despite
the group-enforced equality of hunter-gatherer societies, the correlation be-
tween power, status, and wealth appears to be deeply rooted in the human
psyche.
Western individualism has encouraged an understanding of self-interest
as the pursuit of strictly personal goals. In many other societies, in contrast,
personal rewards, prestige, and well-being are believed to be derived from
working with and for others. Yet the checks on material accumulation that

680
Discussion
existed in small-scale societies were subverted in every early civilization, and
human beings displayed increasing personal acquisitiveness as well as a desire
for publicly acknowledged status and power. This suggests that there may
be signiﬁcant genetic limits to humans’ ability to sacriﬁce personal interest for
the common good and that whenever personal acquisitiveness is not effectively
controlled by public opinion it prevails over cultural conventions (Alexander
1987).
The development of analogous forms of behaviour as societies grew in-
creasingly complex was paralleled by the development of analogous beliefs.
The similar views held in early civilizations about relations between human
beings and the natural/supernatural partly represented a continuation of ideas
that were already shared by less complex societies. The same appears to hold,
with varying degrees of regularity, for ideas about the structure of the universe,
its functioning, the nature of souls, and healing. Yet all these understandings
were signiﬁcantly transformed in the hierarchical context of early civilizations.
Novel but similar beliefs about mutually supportive relations between human
societies and the supernatural arose through the development of analogous
concepts in each early civilization. Similar parallelisms characterized other
developments, including the upper classes’ cultivation of esoteric knowledge
related to the intentions of the gods, symbolizing the unity of the state through
a single person who was believed to be responsible for the functioning of all
aspects of society as well as the principal intermediary with the supernatu-
ral, and the belief that deities required human support to function properly.
Enlightenment philosophers and nineteenth-century evolutionary anthropol-
ogists attributed such similarities to ‘psychic unity’. Unfortunately, they treated
psychic unity as if it were an explanation rather than a phenomenon or a set of
phenomena to be explained.
Anthropologists still do not know enough about the reasons for widespread
uniformities in human understandings. This is at least partly because they have
too long accepted Emile Durkheim’s (1964 [1895]) dogmatic separation of the
social and the psychological and therefore paid insufﬁcient attention to the
role of psychological and biological factors in shaping human behaviour. Many
cultural anthropologists perfunctorily acknowledge that human needs, drives,
motives, desires, feelings, and sentiments are innate and universal. They also
accept that biological factors not only inﬂuence ecologically adaptive behaviour
but also account for the presence of art, music, and religious beliefs in all hu-
man societies. Boas and Malinowski both included psychological factors among
culture’s functional prerequisites, but because they believed that there were
many possible cultural solutions for the problems that each functional prereq-
uisite posed, they did not regard these prerequisites as signiﬁcantly inhibiting

Culture and Reason
681
cultural diversity. Neoevolutionary archaeologists accepted psychological pre-
dispositions as universals but discounted their importance in shaping human
behaviour by comparison with ecological considerations. Classical Marxists ac-
cepted the reality of psychological drives but, so as not to compromise their
millenarian ambitions to transform the human condition, denied that these
drives constituted a ﬁxed human nature (Geras 1983). Relativists regarded
psychological predispositions as subordinate to and controlled by cultural con-
ventions which alone guided human behaviour.
The idea that human behaviour must be explained without reference to
psychology encouraged belief in an intelligence that rationally adapted indi-
viduals and groups to their natural and social environments. Today, however,
it is increasingly acknowledged that certain abilities are neurologically and
hormonally grounded (Butterworth 1999; Gazzaniga 1992; 1998; Low 2000;
Mithen 1996). These claims are not to be confused with those of sociobiol-
ogy, which maintains that, as a result of natural selection, predispositions for
very speciﬁc forms of human behaviour become biologically embedded in the
human brain over periods as short as a few thousand years (E. Wilson 1978).
Given the accelerating rate of cultural change during the course of hominid de-
velopment, such a process would have had few adaptive advantages and many
disadvantages; hence it is difﬁcult to understand how it might have evolved
or persisted (Boyd and Richerson 1985: 199). Short-term biological encoding,
which is highly susceptible to regional evolutionary trends, also does not ac-
count for what appear to be the overwhelming universal similarities in human
nature.
The difﬁculties posed by sociobiology do not, however, rule out the possi-
bility that the biological basis of the human mind has been shaped by natural
selection acting over very long periods. The most important long-term chal-
lenge to which natural selection has adapted human beings does not appear to
have been the natural environment, which became increasingly varied as hu-
man beings expanded around the globe. Instead, it was living in small groups
within which individuals related to one another in both cooperative and com-
petitive ways. The human mind remains best equipped to make informed
decisions that relate to the activities of small groups rather than large ones and
to the immediate future rather than the long term. This suggests that individ-
uals are better adapted for pursuing immediate goals for themselves and their
families than for pursuing the long-term welfare of larger collectivities (Boyd
and Richerson 1985; Carrithers 1992).
Mithen (1996) has argued, on the basis of archaeological data and com-
parative primate ethology, that hominids’ capacities to manipulate technology
and analyse biological and physical phenomena developed far more recently

682
Discussion
than their capacity to manage social relations (Byrne and Whiten 1988). The
cognitive linking together of these specialized forms of thought, which may
have occurred between one hundred thousand and forty thousand years ago,
appears to have made human comprehension more ﬂexible and abstract. The
development of language, at least some aspects of which have a complex ge-
netic basis (Gopnik 1997), vastly increased the ability of humans to transmit
knowledge by inculcation. This form of learning is adaptively much more efﬁ-
cient than learning by demonstration or by trial and error. The development of
language not only accelerated the rate of cultural change but vastly altered and
expanded human awareness and self-awareness and enhanced human analyt-
ical abilities. This made it possible for humans to adapt ever more quickly to
varying ecological conditions and eventually, for better or worse, to dominate
the planetary ecosystem (Deacon 1997; Mellars and Gibson 1996; Noble and
Davidson 1996). Mithen claims that the interrelating of what were originally
specialized forms of cerebration also made possible the obsessive anthropo-
morphization that still characterizes human thought.
Recent cognitive research suggests that the human mind understands the
world through a complex web of metaphors that structures perception, action,
and social relations (Lakoff 1987; Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Tilley 1999). Thus
it appears that cognitive evolution has endowed the human mind with various
general and speciﬁc analytical capacities that predispose humans to attribute
analogous symbolic meanings to their perceptions of the natural and social
realms. The sun, because of its extreme brilliance, has often been used as a
symbol of supreme power, the snake, because it sheds its skin, as a symbol of
renewal, and a physically elevated position as an indication of superior social
rank (Hallpike 1979: 149–67; von Gernet 1992; 1993). The widespread myths
that identify kings or elites with strangers (Feeley-Harnik 1985; Gillespie 1989)
equate varying social status with ethnic differences, and Mary Helms (1998)
claims that this equation derives its legitimacy and authority from cosmolog-
ical beliefs. Concepts that in the past have been cited as examples of psychic
unity need to be studied in far greater detail not only from an anthropological
perspective but from the perspectives of evolutionary psychology and neuro-
science. Only then will anthropologists be in a position to understand why
many aspects of culture display varying degrees of cross-cultural unifor-
mity. Such an approach may eventually provide a reliable methodology for
distinguishing between cross-cultural uniformities resulting from the opera-
tion of similar psychological factors and similarities resulting from historical
connections.
It is misleading to deny emergent properties in society and culture in or-
der to support the erroneous positivist concept of a uniﬁed science. Yet the

Culture and Reason
683
psychological and biological bases of human cognition must be considered in
explaining human behaviour. This will require a determined effort to overcome
the extreme antireductionist biases of Durkheimian sociology and cultural an-
thropology. One beneﬁt of closer ties between the social sciences, on the one
hand, and psychology and biology, on the other, would be a better understand-
ing of those aspects of human behaviour that are inﬂuenced by long-term
human biological evolution. The present study suggests that such factors may
contribute in signiﬁcant ways to the shaping of human understanding and be-
haviour. This sort of interdisciplinary research might also advance the social
sciences’ still rudimentary understanding of the mechanisms that structuralists
claim pattern human thought.

29 Conclusion
T
he comparative study of early civilizations documents the capacity of
the human mind to generate an almost inﬁnite variety of beliefs and
ideas. Art styles, myths, and ecological knowledge differed radically from one
early civilization to another, and people’s lives were shaped and provided with
meaning by values and aspirations that were unique to each. These observa-
tions accord with the relativist view that every human group lives in its own
culturally constructed environment. While it is impossible to test Marshall
Sahlins’s (1976: 19) assertion that human beings live in meaningful cultural
schemes of their own devising that are never the only ones possible, there is
much evidence that makes this proposition appear plausible.
Cultural change does not, however, occur merely as the result of accidental
miscopying or alteration in the course of individual decodings of messages.
Culture resists random changes by striving to maintain cognitive structures and
psychological consistency. The relation between form and meaning is highly
complex. In some cases, while texts or icons remain the same, interpretations
of them alter signiﬁcantly over time. Conversely a series of highly varied or
rapidly changing texts or symbols may continue to express a single message
(Goodenough 1953–68; Marx and Engels 1964: 97–118; 287–347; Panofsky
1939). In these ways, cultural traditions can persist over long periods and
adapt to changing conditions.
Yet early civilizations also displayed a vast amount of cross-cultural unifor-
mity, especially in the sociopolitical and religious spheres. Subsistence patterns
were concerned with adaptation to local conditions and necessarily displayed
much variation. By contrast, early civilizations possessed one general form of
class structure, only two main forms of sociopolitical organization, and one set
of key religious beliefs. These ﬁndings are inconsistent with both the view that
early civilizations were shaped wholly by idiosyncratic factors and the view that
their similarities resulted only from ecological constraints.
684

Conclusion
685
Another type of functional constraint that was cross-culturally uniform
was the need for more formal and hierarchical systems of decision-making
as societies increased in scale. It appears, furthermore, that only a limited
number of sociopolitical arrangements had enough functional coherence to ex-
ist as viable systems – an observation that George P. Murdock (1949) ﬁrst made
with respect to kinship systems. Christopher Hallpike (1986) suggests than an
ever more limited range of institutions and value systems is able to survive as
societies grow larger and more likely to compete with one another. Isolated
early civilizations, which displayed two major political variants, fall midway
between highly variable small-scale societies and structurally even less variable
industrial civilizations. It has been suggested that the collapse of the Soviet
Union after fewer than seventy years of competition with capitalist societies
indicates that only a single general type of industrial economy has proved
competitively viable (Harris 1992). Only one sort of early civilization was
viable in any one region. Territorial states and city-states were not superseded
by each other but replaced by new and more complex forms of preindustrial
civilization.
Societies are altered in various ways by the need to adjust effectively to
changing ecological conditions. They are also reshaped by rational calculations
in the economic sphere, where competitive advantages are achieved by making
more efﬁcient use of available energy and resources. Contrary to the claims of
extreme relativists, human beings devise rational strategies to outmanoeuvre
competitors and seek to alter the rules of society in their own interest. While
relativists argue that self-interest is always culturally deﬁned such interests in
all early civilizations appear to have been based on competitive advantages in
controlling material resources and human labour.
Finally, the independent development of similar understandings not
only about practical matters but also with respect to religious beliefs and
symbolism is abundantly documented for early civilizations. Some of the
parallels appear to result from the operation of practical reason, while others
reﬂect little-understood tendencies of the human mind to produce particular
types of analogies.
Traditional rationalists, including the neoevolutionists of the 1960s, sought
to understand how human beings used a general capacity for rational
calculation to adapt to their environments. Yet, in addition to being capable
of rational calculation, the human brain provides the organic basis for human
drives, personality, and affective capacities. These drives and affects not only
motivate human behaviour but also constitute biological realities to which
culture must accommodate. Specialized analytical capacities that have devel-
oped in the course of human evolution may channel thought in particular

686
Discussion
directions. Consequently, anthropologists are discussing not so much Sahlins’s
‘practical reason’ as a more complex form of ‘human reason’ that provides
for the cognitive and psychological as well as the physical needs of human
beings. This view transcends the traditional dichotomies that Western thought
draws between body and intellect, matter and mind. For such an approach to
have any scientiﬁc value, however, anthropologists must shun subjective and
ethnocentric speculations, especially those of the Hegelian tradition which
seek to understand a timeless human spirit (Karlsson 1998: 188).
The background for understanding the biological component of human
behaviour is changing rapidly as a Lockean belief in general, calculative
reason gives way to the possibility of speciﬁc as well as general forms of intel-
ligence such as those associated with metaphorical thought or with particular
aspects of numeracy and language. What is needed is a better understanding,
derived from psychology and neuroscience, of how the human brain shapes
understanding and inﬂuences behaviour. Nothing about such an approach
undermines or calls into question a materialist and evolutionary (as opposed
to a narrowly ecological or environmental) approach to the understanding
of human behaviour. On the contrary, given what we know about biological
evolution, only a materialist and evolutionary approach is sustainable. Nor is
any challenge posed to viewing cultures as adaptive systems. The problem is to
understand how humans, as biological and behaviourally predisposed products
of long-term natural selection possessing both unique capacities for culture
and distinct cultural heritages, adapt to each other and to their environment.
Social scientists must cease analysing human behaviour without reference to
humans as biological entities. Evolution, both biological and cultural, is a pro-
cess that adapts humans with speciﬁc but as yet poorly understood biological,
social, and psychological predispositions and needs to the natural and social
environment in which they live.
The preoccupation of processual archaeology with rationalist ecological
adaptation represents an unacceptably simplistic understanding of the evo-
lutionary process. Humans adapt to their surroundings as beings with spe-
ciﬁc cognitive capacities, psychological predispositions, and hormonally based
drives, not just as entities equipped with the ability to calculate optimal ener-
getic relations with the environment. All these needs and capacities must be
considered as relevant for understanding human adaptation. Cognition is not
just instrumental or epiphenomenal but active in identifying human goals and
shapinghumanadaptation.Culturaltraditionsprovidetheunderstandingswith
whichspeciﬁcgroupscopewithlifeandattempttosolvenewproblems.Knowl-
edge concerning technology and economic matters is no less a cultural her-
itage from the past than are ideas about social organization or religious beliefs.

Conclusion
687
Nevertheless, instrumental reasoning, biologically deﬁned human needs, and
innate predispositions are more important in shaping or resisting changes in
human behaviour than postprocessual archaeologists or postmodernist anthro-
pologists acknowledge.
Cross-cultural regularities are not restricted to aspects of human behaviour
in which ecological concerns about the efﬁcient use of energy predominate.
A materialist approach must also explain cross-culturally similar patterns of
historically unrelated religious thought. Species-speciﬁc biological behaviour,
including speciﬁc analytical capacities of the human mind, may be neces-
sary to account for cross-cultural parallels of a symbolic nature. All the early
civilizations shared a considerable number of features that were the conver-
gent products of human needs and natural constraints transforming existing
knowledge and behaviour to speciﬁc ends. Yet this uniform cultural core (to
borrow Steward’s terminology) was accompanied by idiosyncratic features de-
rived from historical traditions that did not evolve convergently, among them
art styles, highly speciﬁc religious beliefs, and, most surprisingly, values and
personal aspirations.
The present study suggests that a broader spectrum of factors must be taken
into account to explain similarities and differences among early civilizations
than is fashionable in most current theorizing. There are no grounds for accept-
ing sociobiology’s claim that human behaviour becomes biologically grounded
in the short term, but it appears that human behaviour cannot be explained
purely in cultural and social terms. Human beings are products of biologi-
cal evolution operating over a very long period. Natural selection has shaped
the human capacity to think and communicate symbolically. Increasing ev-
idence indicates that these operations are grounded not only in a general
intelligence but also in various speciﬁc cognitive capacities that developed
separately over time. In addition, human beings have a broad set of needs,
desires, and emotions that is biologically grounded. Relativists argue that these
tendencies can be culturally managed in a vast number of ways, but this claim
does not appear to accord with the full range of cross-cultural uniformities that
characterize human behaviour. To explain such uniformities, it is necessary to
take account of biological and psychological, as well as social and cultural,
factors.
Social and cultural phenomena have their own emergent properties and can-
not wholly be explained in psychological or biological terms. Yet neither can
human behaviour or the nature of society and culture be understood without
judiciously taking account of the ﬁndings of evolutionary psychology and neu-
roscience. It would appear to be in these sciences that anthropologists must
seek explanations of certain cross-cultural uniformities in human behaviour,

688
Discussion
such as tendencies towards inequality in status and wealth. The failure of
social scientists to address these issues in the past has contributed to some of
the major disasters in utopian social engineering attempted during the twen-
tieth century, most notably in Stalinist Russia and Maoist China. Evolutionary
psychology and neuroscience remain underdeveloped, and the ﬁndings of
evolutionary psychology are strongly inﬂuenced by various social stereotypes
and activist agendas. Therefore they are not panaceas. Many cross-cultural
regularities can be explained functionally in terms of ecological or information
theory.YettheriftcreatedbyDurkheimianand,morerecently,anthropological
relativist preoccupations with purely social or cultural explanations needs to be
bridged to produce more holistic and convincing explanations of cross-cultural
similarities and differences in human behaviour.

References
Aberle, D. F., A. K. Cohen, A. K. Davis, M.-J. Levy, Jr., and F. X. Sutton. 1950. The Functional
Prerequisites of a Society. Ethics 60: 100–111.
Abimbola, Wande. 1973. ‘The Literature of the Ifa Cult’, in S. O. Biobaku, pp. 41–62.
Abiodun, Rowland, H. J. Drewal, and John Pemberton III. 1994. The Yoruba Artist: New
Theoretical Perspectives on African Arts. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Abrams, E. M. 1989. Architecture and Energy: An Evolutionary Perspective. Archaeological
Method and Theory 1: 47–87.
1994. How the Maya Built Their World: Energetics and Ancient Architecture. Austin:
University of Texas Press.
Abu-Lughod, J. 1969. ‘Varieties of Urban Experience: Contrast, Coexistence, and Coalescence
in Cairo’, in I. M. Lapidus, pp. 159–87.
Adams, Richard E. W., ed. 1977. The Origins of Maya Civilization. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
1986. R´ıo Azul. National Geographic 169: 420–51.
2000. ‘Introduction to a Survey of the Native Prehistoric Cultures of Mesoamerica’, in
R. E. W. Adams and M. J. MacLeod, pt. 1, 1–44.
Adams, R. E. W., and M. J. MacLeod, eds. 2000. The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples
of the Americas. Vol. 2. Mesoamerica. 2 parts. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Adams, R. E. W., and W. D. Smith. 1981. ‘Feudal Models for Classic Maya Civilization’, in
W. Ashmore, pp. 335–49.
Adams, Richard N. 1988. The Eighth Day: Social Evolution as the Self-Organization of Energy.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Adams, Robert McC. 1960. ‘Early Civilizations, Subsistence, and Environment’, in
C. H. Kraeling and R. McC. Adams, pp. 269–95.
1965.LandbehindBaghdad:AHistoryofSettlementontheDiyalaPlains.Chicago:University
of Chicago Press.
1966. The Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico. Chicago:
Aldine.
1974a. Anthropological Perspectives on Ancient Trade. Current Anthropology 15: 239–58.
1974b. ‘Historic Patterns of Mesopotamian Irrigation Agriculture’, in T. E. Downing and
M. Gibson, pp. 1–6.
1981. Heartland of Cities: Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Central
Floodplain of the Euphrates. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1992. ‘Ideologies: Unity and Diversity’, in A. A. Demarest and G. W. Conrad, pp. 205–21.
689

690
References
Adams, R. McC., and H. J. Nissen. 1972. The Uruk Countryside. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Adetugbo, Obiodun. 1973. ‘The Yoruba Language in Yoruba History’, in S. O. Biobaku,
pp. 176–204.
Afanasieva, V. K. 1991. ‘Sumerian Culture’, in I. M. Diakonoff, pp. 124–36.
Aguilera, Carmen. 1989. ‘Templo Mayor: Dual Symbol of the Passing of Time’, in D. Carrasco,
pp. 129–35.
Ajayi, J. F. A., and Robert Smith. 1971. Yoruba Warfare in the Nineteenth Century. 2d ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ajisafe, A. K. 1924. The Laws and Customs of the Yoruba People. London: Routledge.
Akintoye, S. A. 1971. Revolution and Power Politics in Yorubaland, 1840–1893. London:
Longman.
Aldenderfer, M. S., L. R. Kimball, and April Sievert. 1989. Microwear Analysis in the Maya
Lowlands: The Use of Functional Data in a Complex-Society Setting. Journal of Field
Archaeology 16: 47–60.
Aldred, Cyril. 1971. Jewels of the Pharaohs: Egyptian Jewellery of the Dynastic Period. London:
Thames and Hudson.
Alexander, Richard. 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de
Gruyter.
Allam, Schaﬁk. 1981. Quelques aspects du mariage dans l’Egypte ancienne. Journal of Egyptian
Archaeology 67: 116–35.
1989. ‘Women as Owners of Immovables in Pharaonic Egypt’, in B. S. Lesko, pp. 123–
35.
1991. Egyptian Law Courts in Pharaonic and Hellenistic Times. Journal of Egyptian
Archaeology 77: 109–27.
Allan, Sarah. 1991. The Shape of the Turtle: Myth, Art, and Cosmos in Early China. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Allchin, F. R. 1995. The Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia: The Emergence of Cities and
States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allen, J. P. 1988. Genesis in Egypt: The Philosophy of Ancient Egyptian Creation Accounts. Yale
Egyptological Studies 2.
2000. Middle Egyptian: An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allen, R. C. 1997. Agriculture and the Origins of the State in Ancient Egypt. Explorations in
Economic History 34: 135–54.
Amin, Samir. 1976. Unequal Development: An Essay on the Social Formations of Peripheral
Capitalism. New York: Monthly Review Press.
An Chin-huai. 1986. ‘The Shang City at Cheng-chou and Related Problems’, in K.-C. Chang,
1986b, pp. 15–48.
Andreu, Guillemette. 1997. Egypt in the Age of the Pyramids. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Andrews, G. F. 1975. Maya Cities: Placemaking and Urbanization. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Apter, Andrew. 1992. Black Critics and Kings: The Hermeneutics of Power in Yoruba Society.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Armstrong, E. 1991. The Limbic System and Culture. Human Nature 2: 117–36.
Armstrong, R. P. 1981. The Powers of Presence: Consciousness, Myth, and Affecting Presence.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ascher, Maria, and Robert Ascher. 1981. Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics,
and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

References
691
Ashmore, Wendy, ed. 1981. Lowland Maya Settlement Patterns. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
1989. ‘Construction and Cosmology: Politics and Ideology in Lowland Maya Settlement
Patterns’, in W. F. Hanks and D. S. Rice, pp. 272–86.
Ashmore, Wendy, and A. B. Knapp, eds. 1999. Archaeologies of Landscape: Contemporary
Perspectives. Oxford: Blackwell.
Assmann, Jan. 1995. Egyptian Solar Religion in the New Kingdom: Re, Amun, and the Crisis of
Polytheism. London: Kegan Paul International.
Atran, Scott. 1993. Itza Maya Tropical Agro-Forestry. Current Anthropology 34: 633–700.
Aveni, A. F. 1989. Empires of Time: Calendars, Clocks, and Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
ed. 1992. The Sky in Mayan Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Awolalu, J. O. 1979. Yoruba Beliefs and Sacriﬁcial Rites. London: Longman.
Bacus, E. A., and L. J. Lucero, eds. 1999. Complex Polities in the Ancient Tropical World.
Archeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association 9.
Baer, Klaus. 1960. Rank and Title in the Old Kingdom: The Structure of the Egyptian Adminis-
tration in the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bagley, R. W. 1980. ‘The Zhengzhou Phase (The Erligong Period)’, in W. Fong, pp. 95–108.
1999. ‘Shang Archaeology’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy, pp. 124–231.
Bailey, A. M., and J. R. Llobera, eds. 1981. The Asiatic Mode of Production: Science and Politics.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Baines, John. 1983. Literacy and Ancient Egyptian Society. Man 18: 572–99.
1991a. ‘Society, Morality, and Religious Practice’, in B. E. Shafer, pp. 123–200.
1991b. Egyptian Myth and Discourse: Myth, Gods, and the Early Written and Iconographic
Record. Journal of Near Eastern Studies 50: 81–105.
1995a. ‘Kingship, Deﬁnition of Culture, and Legitimation’, in D. O’Connor and D. P.
Silverman, pp. 3–47.
1995b. ‘Origins of Egyptian Kingship’, in D. O’Connor and D. P. Silverman, pp. 95–156.
Baines, John, and Jaromir Malek. 1980. Atlas of Ancient Egypt. Oxford: Phaidon.
Baines, John, and Norman Yoffee. 1998. ‘Order, Legitimacy, and Wealth in Ancient Egypt and
Mesopotamia’, in G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 199–260.
Bairoch, Paul. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the
Present. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ball, J. W. 1993. ‘Pottery, Potters, Palaces, and Polities: Some Socioeconomic and Political
Implications of Late Classic Maya Ceramic Industries’, in J. A. Sabloff and J. S. Henderson,
pp. 243–72.
Barber, E. W. 1994. Women’s Work – The First 20,000 Years: Women, Cloth, and Society in
Early Times. New York: Norton.
Barber, Karin. 1981. How Man Makes God in West Africa: Yoruba Attitudes towards the Orisa.
Africa 51: 724–45.
1991. I Could Speak Until Tomorrow: Oriki, Women, and the Past in a Yoruba Town.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Barlow, R. H. 1949. The Extent of the Empire of the Culhua Mexica. Ibero-Americana 28.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Barnes, Barry. 1974. Scientiﬁc Knowledge and Sociological Theory. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Barnes, G. L. 1993. China, Korea, and Japan: The Rise of Civilization in East Asia. London:
Thames and Hudson.
Barnes, S. T., ed. 1989. Africa’s Ogun: Old World and New. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Barnes, S. T., and P. G. Ben-Amos. 1989. ‘Ogun, the Empire Builder’, in S. T. Barnes, pp. 39–64.

692
References
Barraclough, Geoffrey, ed. 1984. The Times Atlas of World History. Rev. ed. London: Times
Books.
Bascom, William. 1944. The Sociological Role of the Yoruba Cult-Group. American
Anthropological Association Memoir 63.
1955. Urbanization among the Yoruba. American Journal of Sociology 60: 446–54.
1969. The Yoruba of Southwestern Nigeria. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Bassie-Sweet, Karen. 1991. From the Mouth of the Dark Cave: Commemorative Sculpture of
the Late Classic Maya. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Bates, D. G., ed. 1995. Knowledge and the Scholarly Medical Traditions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Baudez, Claude-Fran¸cois. 1994. Maya Sculpture of Cop´an: The Iconography. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.
Bauer, B. S. 1996. Legitimization of the State in Inca Myth and Ritual. American Anthropologist
98: 327–37.
1998. The Sacred Landscape of the Inca: The Cusco Ceque System. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Bauer, B. S., and D. S. P. Dearborn. 1995. Astronomy and Empire in the Ancient Andes. Austin:
University of Texas Press.
Bauval, Robert, and Adrian Gilbert. 1994. The Orion Mystery: Unlocking the Secrets of the
Pyramids. London: Heinemann.
Becker, M. J. 1973. Archaeological Evidence for Occupational Specialization among the Classic
Period Maya at Tikal, Guatemala. American Antiquity 38: 396–406.
Bell,Barbara.1971.TheDarkAgesinAncientHistory.1.TheFirstDarkAgeinEgypt.American
Journal of Archaeology 75: 1–26.
Bell, Catherine. 1992. Ritual Theory, Ritual Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bell, Lanny. 1997. ‘The New Kingdom “Divine” Temple: The Example of Luxor’, in B. E. Shafer,
pp. 127–84.
Ben-Amos, Paula. 1983. ‘In Honor of Queen Mothers’, in P. Ben-Amos and A. Rubin,
pp. 79–83.
1995. The Art of Benin. 2d ed. London: British Museum Press.
Ben-Amos, Paula, and Arnold Rubin, eds. 1983. The Art of Power, the Power of Art: Studies in
Benin Iconography. UCLA Museum of Cultural History Monograph Series 19.
Benedict, Ruth. 1934. Patterns of Culture. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Benson, E. P., and G. G. Grifﬁn, eds. 1988. Maya Iconography. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Berdan, F. F. 1982. The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Berdan, F. F., R. E. Blanton, E. H. Boone, M. G. Hodge, M. E. Smith, and Emily Umberger.
1996. Aztec Imperial Strategies. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
Betanzos, Juan de. 1996. Narratives of the Incas. Trans. and ed. Roland Hamilton and
Dana Buchanan from the Palma de Mallorca Manuscript. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Bethell, Leslie, ed. 1984. The Cambridge History of Latin America. Vol. 1. Colonial Latin
America. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Betzig, L. L. 1986. Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A Darwinian View of History.
New York: Aldine.
Bierbrier, Morris. 1982. The Tomb-Builders of the Pharaohs. London: British Museum
Publications.
Bierhorst, John. 1985. Cantares Mexicanos: Songs of the Aztecs. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

References
693
Binford, L. R. 1962. Archaeology as Anthropology. American Antiquity 28: 217–25.
1971. ‘Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential’, in Approaches to the Social
Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, J. A. Brown, ed., pp. 6–29. Memoirs of the Society for
American Archaeology 25.
1972. An Archaeological Perspective. New York: Seminar Press.
1978. Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology. New York: Academic Press.
1980. ‘Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails’: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and Archaeo-
logical Site Formation. American Antiquity 45: 4–20.
1983. In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological Record. London: Thames and
Hudson.
1989. Debating Archaeology. San Diego: Academic Press.
2001. Constructing Frames of Reference: An Analytical Method for Archaeological The-
ory Building Using Ethnographic and Environmental Data Sets. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Biobaku, S. O., ed. 1973. Sources of Yoruba History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bird-David, Nurit. 1990. The Giving Environment: Another Perspective on the Economic
System of Gatherer-Hunters. Current Anthropology 31: 189–96.
Blacker, Carmen, and Michael Loewe, eds. 1975. Ancient Cosmologies. London: Allen and
Unwin.
Blanton, R. E., G. M. Feinman, S. A. Kowalewski, and P. N. Peregrine. 1996. A Dual-Processual
Theory for the Evolution of Mesoamerican Civilization. Current Anthropology 37: 1–14.
Blanton, R. E., S. A. Kowalewski, G. Feinman, and J. Appel. 1981. Ancient Mesoamerica: A
Comparison of Change in Three Regions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bloch, Maurice, ed. 1975. Marxist Analyses and Social Anthropology. London: Malaby Press.
1985. Marxism and Anthropology: The History of a Relationship. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Boas, Franz. 1963 (1911). The Mind of Primitive Man. New York: Crowell-Collier.
Boltz, W. G. 1986. Early Chinese Writing. World Archaeology 17: 420–36.
1994. The Origin and Early Development of the Chinese Writing System. New Haven, CT:
American Oriental Society.
1999. ‘Language and Writing’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy, pp. 74–123.
Bonnet, Hans. 1999 (1939). On Understanding Syncretism. Orientalia 68: 181–98.
Bontty, Monica. 1997. Concerning hp. Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian
Antiquities 27: 1–8.
Boone, E. H., ed. 1984. Ritual Human Sacriﬁce in Mesoamerica. Washington, DC: Dumbarton
Oaks.
Boone, E. H., and W. D. Mignolo, eds. 1994. Writing Without Words: Alternative Literacies in
Mesoamerica and the Andes. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Boserup, Ester. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
Change under Population Pressure. Chicago: Aldine.
Bott´ero, Jean. 1992. Mesopotamia: Writing, Reasoning, and the Gods. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bottomore, T. B. 1974. ‘Social Differentiation and Stratiﬁcation’, in The New Encyclopaedia
Britannica, 15th ed., Macropaedia, Vol. 16: 953–59.
Boyd, Robert, and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Boyer, Pascal. 1994. The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A Cognitive Theory of Religion.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
1996. What Makes Anthropomorphism Natural: Intuitive Ontology and Cultural Represen-
tations. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 2: 83–97.

694
References
Bradbury, R. E. 1957. The Benin Kingdom and the Edo-Speaking Peoples of South-Western
Nigeria. London: International African Institute.
1973. Benin Studies. Edited by Peter Morton-Williams. London: Oxford University
Press.
Brady, J. E., and Wendy Ashmore. 1999. ‘Mountains, Caves, Water: Ideational Landscapes of
the Ancient Maya’, in W. Ashmore and A. B. Knapp, pp. 124–45.
Bram, Joseph. 1941. An Analysis of Inca Militarism. American Ethnological Society
Monographs 4.
Braudel, Fernand. 1982. Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Century. Vol. 2: The Wheels of
Commerce. New York: Harper and Row.
Bray, Warwick. 1968. Everyday Life of the Aztecs. New York: Dorsey.
Broda, Johanna. 1987. ‘Templo Mayor as Ritual Space’, in J. Broda, D. Carrasco, and E. Matos
Moctezuma, pp. 61–123.
Broda, Johanna, Dav´ıd Carrasco, and Eduardo Matos Moctezuma. 1987. The Great Temple of
Tenochtitlan: Center and Periphery in the Aztec World. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Bronson, Bennet. 1966. Roots and the Subsistence of the Ancient Maya. Southwestern Journal
of Anthropology 22: 251–79.
Brook, Timothy, ed. 1989. The Asiatic Mode of Production in China. Armonk, NY: M. E.
Sharpe.
Brown, B. A. 1984. ‘Ochpaniztli in Historical Perspective’, in E. H. Boone, pp. 195–210.
Brown, D. E. 1991. Human Universals. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Brumﬁel, E. M. 1980. Specialization, Market Exchange, and the Aztec State: A View from
Huexotla. Current Anthropology 21: 459–78.
1983. Aztec State Making: Ecology, Structure, and the Origin of the State. American
Anthropologist 85: 261–84.
1987. ‘Elite and Utilitarian Crafts in the Aztec State’, in E. M. Brumﬁel and T. K. Earle,
pp. 102–18.
1991. ‘Weaving and Cooking: Women’s Production in Aztec Mexico’, in J. M. Gero and
M. W. Conkey, pp. 224–51.
1994. ‘Ethnic Groups and Political Development in Ancient Mexico’, in E. M. Brumﬁel and
J. W. Fox, pp. 89–102.
1996. ‘Figurines and the Aztec State: Testing the Effectiveness of Ideological Domination’,
in R. P. Wright, 1996a, pp. 143–66.
1998. ‘The Multiple Identities of Aztec Craft Specialists’, in C. L. Costin and R. P. Wright,
pp. 145–52.
Brumﬁel, E. M., and T. K. Earle, eds. 1987. Specialization, Exchange, and Complex Societies.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brumﬁel, E. M., and J. W. Fox, eds. 1994. Factional Competition and Political Development in
the New World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burger, R. L. 1995. Chavin and the Origins of Andean Civilization. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Burgess, E. W. 1926. The Urban Community. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Butterworth, Brian. 1999. What Counts: How Every Brain Is Hardwired for Math. New York:
Free Press.
Butzer,K.W.1976.EarlyHydraulicCivilizationinEgypt:AStudyinCulturalEcology.Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Byrne, R. W., and Andrew Whiten, eds. 1988. Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise
and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

References
695
Calnek, E. E. 1972. Settlement Pattern and Chinampa Agriculture at Tenochtitlan. American
Antiquity 37: 104–15.
1973. The Localization of the Sixteenth-Century Map Called the Maguey Plan. American
Antiquity 38: 190–95.
1976. ‘The Internal Structure of Tenochtitlan’, in E. R. Wolf, pp. 287–302.
Cannadine, David, and Simon Price, eds. 1987. Rituals of Royalty: Power and Ceremonial in
Traditional Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cannon, Aubrey. 1989. The Historical Dimension in Mortuary Expressions of Status and
Sentiment. Current Anthropology 30: 437–58.
Carmack, Robert. 1973. Quichean Civilization: The Ethnohistoric, Ethnographic, and Archae-
ological Sources. Berkeley: University of California Press.
1981. The Quiche Mayas of Utatlan: The Evolution of a Highland Guatemala Kingdom.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Carneiro, R. L. 1970a. ‘Scale Analysis, Evolutionary Sequences, and the Rating of Cultures’, in A
Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology, R. Naroll and R. Cohen, eds., pp. 834–71.
New York: Columbia University Press.
1970b. A Theory of the Origin of the State. Science 169: 733–38.
Carpenter, L. K. 1992. ‘Inside/Outside, Which Side Counts? Duality-of-Self and Bipartization
in Quechua’, in R. V. H. Dover, K. E. Seibold, and J. H. McDowell, pp. 115–36.
Carrasco, Dav´ıd. 1987. ‘Myth, Cosmic Terror, and the Templo Mayor’, in J. Broda, D. Carrasco,
and E. Matos Moctezuma, pp. 124–62.
ed. 1989. The Imagination of Matter: Religion and Ecology in Mesoamerican Traditions.
British Archaeological Reports International Series 515.
1990. Religions of Mesoamerica: Cosmovision and Ceremonial Centers. San Francisco:
Harper and Row.
1999. City of Sacriﬁce: The Aztec Empire and the Role of Violence in Civilization. Boston:
Beacon Press.
Carrasco, Pedro. 1981. Comment on Offner. American Antiquity 46: 62–68.
Carrithers, Michael. 1992. Why Humans Have Cultures: Explaining Anthropology and Social
Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Caso, Alfonso. 1958. The Aztecs: People of the Sun. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1971. ‘Calendrical Systems of Central Mexico’, in Handbook of Middle American Indians,
Vol. 10, Archaeology of Northern Mesoamerica, pt. 1, pp. 333–48. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Caubet, Annie, and Patrick Pouyssegur. 1998. The Ancient Near East. Paris: Editions Pierre
Terrail.
Celenko, Theodore, ed. 1996. Egypt in Africa. Indianapolis: Indianapolis Museum of Art.
Chakrabarti, D. K. 1997. Colonial Indology: Sociopolitics of the Ancient Indian Past. New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers.
Chang Cheng-lang. 1986. ‘A Brief Discussion of Fu Tzu’, in K.-C. Chang, 1986b, pp. 103–19.
Chang Kwang-chih. 1962. ‘China’, in Courses toward Urban Life: Archaeological Considera-
tions of Some Cultural Alternatives, R. J. Braidwood and G. R. Willey, eds., pp. 177–92.
Chicago: Aldine.
1976. Early Chinese Civilization: Anthropological Perspectives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
1977. ‘Ancient China’, in Food in Chinese Culture: Anthropological and Historical Perspec-
tives, K.-C. Chang, ed., pp. 23–52. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1978. ‘T’ien Kan: A Key to the History of the Shang’, in Ancient China: Studies in Early
Civilization, D. T. Roy and T.-H. Tsien, eds., pp. 13–42. Hong Kong: Chinese University
Press.

696
References
1980. Shang Civilization. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1983. Art, Myth, and Ritual: The Path to Political Authority in Ancient China. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
1984. Ancient China and its Anthropological Signiﬁcance. Symbols, Spring/Fall, pp. 2–4,
20–22.
1986a. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 4th ed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
ed. 1986b. Studies of Shang Archaeology. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1999. ‘China on the Eve of the Historical Period’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy,
pp. 37–73.
Chang Ping-ch’¨uan. 1986. ‘A Brief Description of the Fu Hao Oracle Bone Inscriptions’, in
K.-C. Chang, 1986b, pp. 121–40.
Chao, Lin. 1972. Shang Government. Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.
Charlton, T. H., and D. L. Nichols. 1997a. ‘The City-State Concept: Development and
Applications’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 1–14.
1997b. ‘Diachronic Studies of City-States: Permutations on a Theme, Central Mexico from
1700 b.c. to a.d. 1600’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 169–207.
Chase, A. F., and D. Z. Chase. 1996. More Than Kin and King: Centralized Political Organization
among the Late Classic Maya. Current Anthropology 37: 803–10.
Chase, D. Z., and A. F. Chase, eds. 1992a. Mesoamerican Elites: An Archaeological Assessment.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1992b. ‘An Archaeological Assessment of Mesoamerican Elites’, in D. Z. Chase and
A. F. Chase, pp. 303–17.
Chase, D. Z., A. F. Chase, and W. A. Haviland. 1990. The Classic Maya City: Reconsidering the
‘Mesoamerican Urban Tradition’. American Anthropologist 92: 499–506.
Chˆeng, Tˆe-k’un. 1960. Archaeology in China. Vol. 2. Shang China. Cambridge: Heffer.
1963. Archaeology in China. Vol. 3. Chou China. Cambridge: Heffer.
Childe, V. G. 1928. The Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory.
London: Kegan Paul.
1930. The Bronze Age. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1934. New Light on the Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory.
London: Kegan Paul.
1945. Directional Changes in Funerary Practices during 50,000 Years. Man 45: 13–19.
1950. The Urban Revolution. Town Planning Review 21: 3–17.
1951. Social Evolution. New York: Schuman.
1956a. Society and Knowledge: The Growth of Human Traditions. New York: Harper.
1956b. Piecing Together the Past: The Interpretation of Archaeological Data. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
1958. The Prehistory of European Society. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
1965 (1936). Man Makes Himself. London: Watts.
Chisholm, Michael. 1962. Rural Settlement and Land Use: An Essay in Location. London:
Hutchinson.
Chou Hung-hsiang. 1968. Some Aspects of Shang Administration: A Survey Based
Solely on Texts Available in the Oracle Bone Texts. Ph.D. diss., Australian National
University.
Claessen, H. J. M., and Peter Skaln´ık, eds. 1978. The Early State. The Hague: Mouton.
Clancy, F. S., and P. D. Harrison, eds. 1990. Vision and Revision in Maya Studies. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.
Clarke, D. L. 1968. Analytical Archaeology. London: Methuen.
Clarke, W. H. 1972. Travels and Explorations in Yorubaland 1854–1858, J. A. Atanda, ed.
Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.

References
697
Classen, Constance. 1993. Inca Cosmology and the Human Body. Salt Lake City: University of
Utah Press.
Clendinnen, Inga. 1991. The Aztecs: An Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Litera-
ture, and Art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cobo, Bernab´e. 1979. History of the Inca Empire. Austin: University of Texas Press.
1990. Inca Religion and Customs. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Coe, M. D. 1957. The Khmer Settlement Pattern: A Possible Analogy with that of the Maya.
American Antiquity 22: 409–10.
1961. Social Typology and the Tropical Forest Civilizations. Comparative Studies in Society
and History 4: 65–85.
1977. ‘Olmec and Maya: A Study in Relationships’, in R. E. W. Adams, pp. 183–95.
1978. Lords of the Underworld: Masterpieces of Classic Maya Ceramics. Princeton: Art
Museum, Princeton University.
1988. ‘Ideology of the Maya Tomb’, in E. P. Benson and G. G. Grifﬁn, pp. 222–35.
1992. Breaking the Maya Code. London: Thames and Hudson.
1993. The Maya. 5th ed. London: Thames and Hudson.
Coe, M. D., and Justin Kerr. 1998. The Art of the Maya Scribe. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Cohen, Abner. 1972. Arab Border-Villages in Israel: A Study of Continuity and Change in Social
Organization. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Cohen, M. N. 1977. The Food Crisis in Prehistory: Overpopulation and the Origins of Agricul-
ture. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1989. Health and the Rise of Civilization. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cohen, Ronald, and Elman Service, eds. 1978. Origins of the State: The Anthropology of Political
Evolution. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues.
Collier, G. A., R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, eds. 1982. The Inca and Aztec States 1400–1800:
Anthropology and History. New York: Academic Press.
Collon, Dominique. 1987. First Impressions: Cylinder Seals in the Ancient Near East. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Connah, Graham. 1975. The Archaeology of Benin: Excavations and Other Researches in and
around Benin City, Nigeria. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1987. ‘African Civilizations: Precolonial Cities and States’, in Tropical Africa: An Archaeolog-
ical Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conrad, G. W., and A. A. Demarest. 1984. Religion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and
Inca Expansionism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conroy, G. C. 1990. Primate Evolution. New York: Norton.
Cooper, J. S. 1996. ‘Sumerian and Akkadian’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 37–57.
Coquet, Mich`ele. 1998. African Royal Court Art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Costin, C. L. 1991. Craft Specialization: Issues in Deﬁning, Documenting, and Explaining the
Organization of Production. Archaeological Method and Theory 3: 1–56.
1996. ‘Exploring the Relationship between Gender and Craft in Complex Societies:
Methodological and Theoretical Issues of Gender Attribution’, in R. P. Wright, 1996a,
pp. 111–40.
1998a. ‘Introduction: Craft and Social Identity’, in C. L. Costin and R. P. Wright, pp. 3–16.
1998b. ‘Housewives, Chosen Women, Skilled Men: Cloth Production and Social Identity in
the Late Prehispanic Andes’, in C. L. Costin and R. P. Wright, pp. 123–41.
Costin, C. L., and M. B. Hagstrum. 1995. Standardization, Labor Investment, Skill, and
the Organization of Ceramic Production in Late Prehispanic Highland Peru. American
Antiquity 60: 619–39.

698
References
Costin, C. L., and R. P. Wright, eds. 1998. Craft and Social Identity. Archeological Papers of
the American Anthropological Association 8.
Coult, A. D., and R. W. Habenstein. 1965. Cross Tabulations of Murdock’s World Ethnographic
Sample. Columbia: University of Missouri.
Cowgill, G. L. 1997. State and Society at Teotihuacan, Mexico. Annual Review of Anthropology
26: 129–61.
Crawford, Harriet. 1991. Sumer and the Sumerians. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Creel, H. G. 1937. The Birth of China: A Study of the Formative Period of Chinese Civilization.
New York: Raynal and Hitchcock.
1938. Studies in Early Chinese Culture: First Series. American Council of Learned Societies.
Studies in Chinese and Related Civilizations 3. London: Routledge.
1970. The Origins of Statecraft in China. Vol. 1. The Western Chou Empire. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cressey, George. 1955. Land of the 500 Million: A Geography of China. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Crone, Patricia. 1989. Pre-Industrial Societies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Crumley, C. L. 1987. ‘A Dialectical Critique of Hierarchy’, in T. C. Patterson and C. W. Gailey,
pp. 155–69.
Culbert, T. P., ed. 1973. The Classic Maya Collapse. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
Press.
ed. 1991a. Classic Maya Political History: Hieroglyphic and Archaeological Evidence.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1991b. ‘Maya Political History and Elite Interaction: A Summary View’, in T. P. Culbert,
1991a, pp. 311–46.
1991c. ‘Polities in the Northeast Peten, Guatemala’, in P. T. Culbert, 1991a, pp. 128–46.
Culbert, T. P., Laura Kosakowsky, R. E. Fry, and W. A. Haviland. 1990. ‘The Population of Tikal,
Guatemala’, in T. P. Culbert and D. S. Rice, pp. 103–21.
Culbert, T. P., L. J. Levi, and Lu´ıs Cruz. 1990. ‘Lowland Maya Wetland Agriculture: The Rio
Azul Agronomy Progam’, in F. S. Clancy and P. D. Harrison, pp. 115–24.
Culbert,T.P.,andD.S.Rice,eds.1990.PrecolumbianPopulationHistoryintheMayaLowlands.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Curtin, P. D. 1984. Cross-Cultural Trade in World History. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dallos, Csilla. 1997. Identity and Opportunity: The Gender and Politics of Decision-Making
among the Lanoh, Peninsular Malaysia. MS, McGill University.
Dalton,George.1975.‘KarlPolanyi’sAnalysisofLong-DistanceTradeandHisWiderParadigm’,
in J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, pp. 63–132.
D’Altroy, T. N. 1987a. Introduction: Inka Ethnohistory. Ethnohistory 34: 1–13.
1987b. Transitions in Power: Centralization of Wanka Political Organization under Inka Rule.
Ethnohistory 34: 78–101.
1992. Provincial Power in the Inka Empire. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
D’Altroy, T. N., and T. K. Earle. 1985. Staple Finance, Wealth Finance, and Storage in the Inka
Political Economy. Current Anthropology 26: 187–206.
Daniels, P. T. 1996a. ‘The Study of Writing Systems’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 3–17.
1996b. ‘The Invention of Writing’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 579–86.
Daniels, P. T., and William Bright, eds. 1996. The World’s Writing Systems. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dark, P. J. C. 1973. An Introduction to Benin Art and Technology. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

References
699
Daumas, Fran¸cois. 1979. ‘Les textes g´eographiques du tr´esoir D du temple de Dendara’, in
Edward Lipinski, pp. 689–705.
D’Auria, Sue. 1988. Mummies and Magic: The Funerary Arts of Ancient Egypt. Boston: Boston
Museum of Fine Arts.
David, A. R. 1986. The Pyramid Builders of Ancient Egypt: A Modern Investigation of Pharaoh’s
Workforce. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Davies, Nigel. 1980. The Aztecs: A History. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1984. ‘Human Sacriﬁce in the Old World and the New: Some Similarities and Differences’,
in E. H. Boone, pp. 211–26.
Davies, Vivian, and Ren´ee Friedman. 1998. Egypt Uncovered. New York: Stewart, Tabori and
Chang.
Davis, Whitney. 1992. Masking the Blow: The Scene of Representation in Late Prehistoric
Egyptian Art. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Deacon, T. W. 1997. The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain.
New York: Norton.
DeFrancis, John. 1989. Visible Speech: The Diverse Oneness of Writing Systems. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press.
Demar´ee, R. J. 1983. The 3h˘
ıkr n R-Stelae on Ancestor Worship in Ancient Egypt. Egypto-
logische Uitgaven 3. Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten.
Demarest, A. A. 1978. ‘Interregional Conﬂict and “Situational Ethics” in Classic Maya Warfare’,
in M. Giardino, B. Edmonson, and W. Creamer, eds., Codex Wauchope: A Tribute Role,
pp. 101–11. New Orleans: Human Mosaic.
1981. Viracocha: The Nature and Antiquity of the Andean High God. Peabody Museum
Monographs 6.
1992. ‘Ideology in Ancient Maya Cultural Evolution: The Dynamics of Galactic Polities’, in
A. A. Demarest and G. W. Conrad, pp. 135–57.
Demarest, A. A., and G. W. Conrad, eds. 1992. Ideology and Pre-Columbian Civilizations. Santa
Fe: School of American Research Press.
Denzer, LaRay. 1994. Yoruba Women: A Historiographical Study. International Journal of
African Historical Studies 27: 1–39.
DePutter, T. J. M., and Christina Karlshausen. 1997. In Search of the Lost Quarries of the
Pharaohs. KMT 8(3): 54–59.
Desroches-Noblecourt, Christiane. 1986. La femme au temps des pharaons. Paris: Stock.
DeVore, Irven, and K. R. L. Hall. 1965. ‘Baboon Ecology’, in Primate Behavior: Field
Studies of Monkeys and Apes, I. DeVore, ed., pp. 20–52. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Diakonoff, I. M., ed. 1969a. Ancient Mesopotamia: Socio-Economic History. Moscow: Nauka.
1969b. ‘The Rise of the Despotic State in Ancient Mesopotamia’, in I. M. Diakonoff, 1969a,
pp. 173–203.
1974. Structure of Society and State in Early Dynastic Sumer. Malibu: Undena.
1987. ‘Slave-Labor vs. Non-Slave Labor: The Problem of Deﬁnition’, in M. A. Powell, pp. 1–3.
ed. 1991. Early Antiquity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Diamond, Stanley, ed. 1960. Culture in History: Essays in Honor of Paul Radin. New York:
Columbia University Press.
1974. In Search of the Primitive: A Critique of Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Books.
Diop, Cheikh Anta. 1974. The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality. Westport, CT:
Lawrence Hill.
Diringer, D. 1962. Writing. New York: Praeger.
Donadoni, Sergio, ed. 1997. The Egyptians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

700
References
Donald, Leland. 1997. Aboriginal Slavery on the Northwest Coast of North America. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Donkin, R. A. 1979. Agricultural Terracing in the Aboriginal New World. Viking Fund Publi-
cations in Anthropology 56.
Doolittle, W. E. 1990. Canal Irrigation in Prehistoric Mexico: The Sequence of Technological
Change. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Dover, R. V. H. 1992. ‘Introduction’, in R. V. H. Dover, K. E. Seibold, and J. H. McDowell,
pp. 1–16.
Dover, R. V. H., K. E. Seibold, and J. H. McDowell, eds. 1992. Andean Cosmologies through
Time: Persistence and Emergence. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Downing, T. E., and McGuire Gibson, eds. 1974. Irrigation’s Impact on Society. Anthropological
Papers of the University of Arizona 25.
Drew, David. 1999. The Lost Chronicles of the Maya Kings. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Drewal, H. J. 1989. ‘Art or Accident: Yoruba Body Artists and Their Deity Ogun’, in S. T. Barnes,
pp. 235–60.
Drewal, M. T. 1989. ‘Dancing for Ogun in Yorubaland and in Brazil’, in S. T. Barnes, pp. 199–234.
Driver, H. E. 1966. Geographical-Historical versus Psycho-Functional Explanations of Kin
Avoidances. Current Anthropology 7: 131–82.
Dubrovsky, Bernardo. 1999. ‘Evolutionary Psychiatry and Psychology: Conﬂicts with Evolution-
ary Science’, Plenary Lecture, Fifth International Congress of Psychiatry.
Dunn, S. P. 1982. The Fall and Rise of the Asiatic Mode of Production. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Dunnell, R. C. 1978. Style and Function: A Fundamental Dichotomy. American Antiquity 43:
192–202.
Dunning, N. P. 1996. ‘A Reexamination of Regional Variability in the Pre-Hispanic Agricultural
Landscape’, in S. L. Fedick, 1996a, pp. 53–68.
Dur´an, Diego. 1964. The Aztecs: The History of the Indies of New Spain. New York: Orion.
1971. The Book of the Gods and Rites and the Ancient Calendar. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Durkheim, Emile. 1964 (1895). The Rules of Sociological Method. New York: Free Press.
Duviols, Pierre. 1989. ‘Las cinco edades primitivas del Per´u seg´un Guaman Poma de Ayala:
¿Un m´etodo de computo original?’ in M. S. Ziolkowski and R. M. Sadowski, pp. 7–16.
Eades, J. S. 1980. The Yoruba Today. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Earle, T. K. 1985. ‘Commodity Exchange and Markets in the Inca State: Recent Archaeological
Evidence’, in Markets and Marketing, Stuart Plattner, ed., pp. 369–97. Lanham, MD:
University Press of America.
1987. ‘Specialization and the Production of Wealth: Hawaiian Chiefdoms and the Inka
Empire’, in E. M. Brumﬁel and T. K. Earle, pp. 64–75.
ed. 1991. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, and Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
1994. Wealth Finance in the Inka Empire: Evidence from the Calchaqui Valley, Argentina.
American Antiquity 59: 443–60.
Earle, T. K., and T. N. D’Altroy. 1989. ‘The Political Economy of the Inka Empire: The
Archaeology of Power and Finance’, in Archaeological Thought in America, C. C. Lamberg-
Karlovsky, ed., pp. 183–204. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ebeid, Nabil. 1999. Egyptian Medicine in the Days of the Pharaohs. Cairo: General Egyptian
Book Organization.
Edens, Christopher. 1992. Dynamics of Trade in the Ancient Mesopotamian ‘World System’.
American Anthropologist 94: 118–39.
Edwards, I. E. S. 1985. The Pyramids of Egypt. Rev. ed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

References
701
Eggan, Fred. 1966. The American Indian: Perspectives for the Study of Social Change. Chicago:
Aldine.
Egharevba, Jacob. 1960. A Short History of Benin. Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
Ehrenreich, R. M., C. L. Crumley, and J. E. Levy, eds. 1995. Heterarchy and the Analysis of
Complex Societies. American Anthropological Association Archeological Papers 6.
Eisenstadt, S. N. 1963. The Political Systems of Empires. Glencoe: Free Press.
ed. 1986. The Origins and Diversity of Axial Age Civilizations. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Eisenstadt, S. N., Michel Abitbol, and Naomi Chazan. 1988. The Early State in African
Perspective: Culture, Power, and Division of Labour. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Eliade, Mircea. 1954. The Myth of the Eternal Return. New York: Pantheon Books.
Elias, Norbert. 1978. The Civilizing Process. Vol. 1. The Development of Manners: Changes in
the Code of Conduct and Feeling in Early Modern Times. New York: Urizen Books.
1982. The Civilizing Process. Vol. 2. State Formation and Civilization. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ellis, M. deJ. 1976. Agriculture and the State in Ancient Mesopotamia: An Introduction to
Problems of Land Tenure. University of Pennsylvania, University Museum, Babylonian
Fund, 1.
Ember, Melvin, and C. R. Ember. 1983. Marriage, Family, and Kinship: Comparative Studies
of Social Organization. New Haven: HRAF Press.
Englund, Gertie, ed. 1989a. The Religion of the Ancient Egyptians: Cognitive Structures
and Popular Expressions. Uppsala Studies in Ancient Mediterranean and Near Eastern
Cultures 20. Stockholm: Tryckeri Balder.
1989b. ‘Gods as a Frame of Reference: On Thinking and Concepts of Thought in Ancient
Egypt’, in G. Englund, 1989a, pp. 7–28.
Engnell, Ivan. 1967. Studies in Divine Kingship in the Ancient Near East. Oxford: Blackwell.
Eno, Robert. 1990. Was There a High God Ti in Shang Religion? Early China 15: 1–26.
Erdal, David, and Andrew Whiten. 1996. ‘Egalitarianism and Machiavellian Intelligence in
Human Evolution’, in P. Mellars and K. Gibson, pp. 139–50.
Erdosy, George. 1988. Urbanisation in Early Historic India. British Archaeological Reports
International Series 430.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1962. ‘Anthropology and History’, in Essays in Social Anthropology,
pp. 46–65. London: Faber.
Eyer, Joe. 1984. ‘Capitalism, Health, and Illness’, in Issues in the Political Economy of Health
Care, J. B. McKinlay, ed., pp. 23–59. London: Tavistock Publications.
Eyre, C. J. 1984. Crime and Adultery in Ancient Egypt. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 70:
92–105.
1987a. ‘Work and the Organisation of Work in the Old Kingdom’, in M. Powell, pp. 5–47.
1987b. ‘Work and the Organisation of Work in the New Kingdom’, in M. Powell, pp. 167–
221.
1994. The Water Regime for Orchards and Plantations in Pharaonic Egypt. Journal of
Egyptian Archaeology 80: 57–80.
1999. ‘The Village Economy in Pharaonic Egypt’, in Agriculture in Egypt: From Pharaonic
to Modern Times, A. K. Bowman and Eugene Rogan, eds., pp. 33–60. Proceedings of the
British Academy 96.
Faherty, R. L. 1974. ‘Sacriﬁce’, in The New Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., Macropaedia,
Vol. 16, pp. 128–35.
Falkenstein, Adam. 1974 (1954). The Sumerian Temple City. Malibu: Undena.
Falola, Toyin. 1991. The Yoruba Caravan System of the Nineteenth Century. International
Journal of African Historical Studies 24: 111–32.
Farrington, Benjamin. 1936. Science in Antiquity. London: Butterworth.

702
References
Farrington, I. S. 1992. Ritual Geography, Settlement Patterns, and the Characterization of the
Provinces of the Inka Heartland. World Archaeology 23: 368–85.
Fash, W. L. 1991. Scribes, Warriors and Kings: The City of Cop´an and the Ancient Maya.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Faulkner, R. O. 1969. The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, Translated into English. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
1985. The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead. London: British Museums Publications.
Fedick, S. L., ed. 1996a. The Managed Mosaic: Ancient Maya Agriculture and Resource Use.
Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
1996b. ‘Conclusion: Landscape Approaches to the Study of Ancient Maya Agriculture and
Resource Use’, in Fedick 1996a, pp. 335–47.
Fedick, S. L., and Anabel Ford. 1990. The Prehistoric Agricultural Landscape of the Cen-
tral Maya Lowlands: An Examination of Local Variability in a Regional Context. World
Archaeology 22: 18–33.
Feeley-Harnik, Gillian. 1985. Issues in Divine Kingship. Annual Review of Anthropology 14:
273–313.
Feinman, G. M. 1998. ‘Scale and Social Organization: Perspectives on the Archaic State’, in
G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 95–133.
Feinman, G. M., and Joyce Marcus, eds. 1998. Archaic States. Santa Fe: School of American
Research Press.
Feit, Harvey. 1978. Waswanipi Realities and Adaptations: Resource Management and Cognitive
Structure. Ph.D. diss., McGill University.
Fernea, Robert. 1970. Shaykh and Effendi: Changing Patterns of Authority among the
El-Shabana of Southern Iraq. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Feucht, Erika. 1997. ‘Women’, in S. Donadoni, pp. 315–46.
Finnestad, R.B. 1997. ‘Temples of the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods: Ancient Traditions in
New Contexts’, in B. E. Shafer, pp. 185–237.
Fischer, H. G. 1968. Dendera in the Third Millennium B.C. down to the Theban Domination of
Upper Egypt. Locust Valley: Augustin.
1989. ‘Women in the Old Kingdom and the Heracleopolitan Period’, in B. S. Lesko, pp. 5–24.
Flannery, K. V. 1972. The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 3: 399–426.
ed. 1982. Maya Subsistence: Studies in Memory of Dennis E. Puleston. New York: Academic
Press.
1998. ‘The Ground Plans of Archaic States’, in G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 15–57.
1999. Process and Agency in Early State Formation. Cambridge Archaeological Journal
9: 3–21.
Flannery, K. V., and Joyce Marcus. 1976. Formative Oaxaca and the Zapotec Cosmos. American
Scientist 64: 374–83.
2000. Formative Mexican Chiefdoms and the Myth of the ‘Mother Culture’. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 19: 1–37.
Folan, W. J., E. R. Kintz, and L. A. Fletcher. 1983. Coba: A Classic Maya Metropolis. New York:
Academic Press.
Folan, W. J., J. Marcus, S. Pincemin, M. del Rosario Dominguez Carrasco, L. Fletcher, and
A. Morales L´opez. 1995. Calakmul: New Data from an Ancient Maya Capital in Campeche,
Mexico. Latin American Antiquity 6: 310–34.
Fong Wen, ed. 1980. The Great Bronze Age of China: An Exhibition from the People’s Republic
of China. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Ford, C. S., ed. 1967. Cross-Cultural Approaches: Readings in Comparative Research. New
Haven: HRAF Press.

References
703
Forde, C. D. 1934. Habitat, Economy, and Society: A Geographical Introduction to Ethnology.
London: Methuen.
Forge, Anthony. 1972. ‘Normative Factors in the Settlement Size of Neolithic Cultivators (New
Guinea)’, in P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby, pp. 363–76.
Forman, Werner, Bedrich Forman, and Philip Dark. 1960. Benin Art. London: Hamlyn.
Foster, B. R. 1981. A New Look at the Sumerian Temple State. Journal of the Economic and
Social History of the Orient 24: 225–41.
1982. Administration and Use of Institutional Land in Sargonic Sumer. Mesopotamia:
Copenhagen Studies in Assyriology 9. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag.
Foster, G. M. 1960–61. Interpersonal Relations in Peasant Society. Human Organization 19:
174–78.
Fox, J. G. 1996. Playing with Power: Ballcourts and Political Ritual in Southern Mesoamerica.
Current Anthropology 37: 483–509.
Fox, J. W., G. W. Cook, A. F. Chase, and D. Z. Chase. 1996. Questions of Political and Economic
Integration: Segmentary versus Centralized States among the Ancient Maya. Current
Anthropology 37: 795–801.
Fox, R. G. 1977. Urban Anthropology: Cities in Their Cultural Settings. Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall.
Frankfort, Henri. 1948. Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient Near Eastern Religion as
the Integration of Society and Nature. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1954. The Art and Architecture of the Ancient Orient. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
1956. The Birth of Civilization in the Near East. New York: Doubleday.
Frankfort, Henri, H. A. Frankfort, J. A. Wilson, and Thorkild Jacobsen. 1949. Before Philosophy:
The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Franklin, U. M. 1983. ‘The Beginnings of Metallurgy in China: A Comparative Approach’, in
G. Kuwayama, pp. 94–99.
1990. The Real World of Technology. Toronto: CBC Enterprises.
Franklin, U. M., J. Berthong, and A. Chan. 1985. Metallurgy, Cosmology, Knowledge: The
Chinese Experience. Journal of Chinese Philosophy 12: 333–69.
Freidel, D. A. 1986. ‘Maya Warfare: An Example of Peer Polity Interaction’, in C. Renfrew and
J. Cherry, pp. 93–108.
1992. ‘The Trees of Life: Ahau as Idea and Artifact in Classic Lowland Maya Civilization’, in
A. A. Demarest and G. W. Conrad, pp. 115–33.
Freidel, D. A., and Linda Schele. 1988a. Kingship in the Late Preclassic Maya Lowlands: The
Instruments and Places of Ritual Power. American Anthropologist 90: 547–67.
1988b. ‘Symbol and Power: A History of the Lowland Maya Cosmogram’, in E. P. Benson
and G. G. Grifﬁn, pp. 44–93.
Freidel, D. A., Linda Schele, and Joy Parker. 1993. Maya Cosmos: Three Thousand Years on
the Shaman’s Path. New York: William Morrow.
Fried, M. H. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology.
New York: Random House.
Friedman, Jonathan, and M. J. Rowlands, eds. 1978a. The Evolution of Social Systems.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
1978b. ‘Notes towards an Epigenetic Model of the Evolution of “Civilisation” ’, in J. Friedman
and M. J. Rowlands, 1978a, pp. 201–76.
Friedman, Ren´ee, and Barbara Adams, eds. 1992. The Followers of Horus: Studies Dedicated to
Michael Allen Hoffman. Egyptian Studies Association Publication 2, Oxbow Monograph
20. Oxford: Oxbow Books.
Frobenius, Leo. 1913. The Voice of Africa. 2 vols. Translated by Rudolf Blind. London:
Hutchinson.

704
References
Fuerstein, Carol, ed. 1999. Egyptian Art in the Age of the Pyramids. New York: Metropolitan
Museum of Art.
Fuller, Peter. 1980. Beyond the Crisis in Art. London: Writers and Readers.
Furlong, Iris. 1987. Divine Headdresses of Mesopotamia in the Early Dynastic Period. British
Archaeological Reports International Series 334.
Furst, J. L. M. 1995. The Natural History of the Soul in Ancient Mexico. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Furst, P. T. 1977. ‘The Roots and Continuities of Shamanism’, in Stones, Bones, and Skin: Ritual
and Shamanic Art, A. T. Brodzky, R. Danesewich, and N. Johnson, eds., pp. 1–28. Toronto:
Society for Art Publications.
Fussell, G. E. 1966. Farming Technique from Prehistoric to Modern Times. Oxford: Pergamon
Press.
Gailey, C. W. 1987. ‘Culture Wars: Resistance to State Formation’, in T. C. Patterson and
C. W. Gailey, pp. 35–56.
Galarza, Joaquin. 1997. ‘Deciphering the Aztec Script’, in Virtual Archaeology: Re-creating
Ancient Worlds, Maurizio Forte and Alberto Siliotti, eds., pp. 264–71. New York: Harry
N. Abrams.
Gallagher, Jacki. 1983. ‘Between Realms: The Iconography of Kingship in Benin’, in
P. Ben-Amos and A. Rubin, pp. 21–26.
Gardiner, Alan. 1950. Egyptian Grammar: Being an Introduction to the Study of Hieroglyphs.
2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1961. Egypt of the Pharaohs: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Garner, B. J. 1967. ‘Models of Urban Geography and Settlement Location’, in Models in Geog-
raphy, R. J. Chorley and Peter Haggett, eds., pp. 303–60. London: Methuen.
Garrard, T. F. 1983. ‘Benin Metal-casting Technology’, in P. Ben-Amos and A. Rubin,
pp. 17–20.
Gasparini, Graziano, and Luise Margolies. 1980. Inca Architecture. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. 1992. Nature’s Mind: The Biological Roots of Thinking, Emotions, Sexuality,
Language, and Intelligence. New York: Basic Books.
1998. The Mind’s Past. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Geertz, Clifford. 1965. ‘The Impact of the Concept of Culture on the Concept of Man’, in New
Views of the Nature of Man, J. R. Platt, ed., pp. 93–118. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
1973. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books.
1979. ‘From the Native’s Point of View: On the Nature of Anthropological Understanding’, in
Interpretive Social Science: A Reader, Paul Rabinow and W. M. Sullivan, eds, pp. 225–41.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
1984. Anti Anti-relativism. American Anthropologist 86: 263–78.
Gelb, I. J. 1963. A Study of Writing. 2d ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1973. Prisoners of War in Early Mesopotamia. Journal of Near Eastern Studies 32: 70–98.
1979. ‘Household and Family in Early Mesopotamia’, in E. Lipinski, pp. 1–97.
Gellner, Ernest. 1982. ‘What Is Structuralisme?’ in Theory and Explanation in Archaeology:
The Southampton Conference, Colin Renfrew, M. J. Rowlands, and B. A. Segraves, eds.,
pp. 97–123. New York: Academic Press.
1983. Nations and Nationalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
1988. Plough, Sword and Book: The Structure of Human History. London: Collins Harvill.
George, A. R. 1993. House Most High: The Temples of Ancient Mesopotamia. Winona Lake, IN:
Eisenbrauns.
Geras, Norman. 1983. Marx and Human Nature: Refutation of a Legend. London: Verso.

References
705
Gero, J. M., and M. W. Conkey, eds. 1991. Engendering Archaeology: Women and Prehistory.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Ghalioungui, Paul, and Zeinab el Dawakhly. 1965. Health and Healing in Ancient Egypt. Cairo:
Dar Al-Maaref.
Gibson, McGuire. 1974. ‘Violation of Fallow and Engineered Disaster in Mesopotamian Civi-
lization’, in T. E. Downing and M. Gibson, pp. 7–19.
1977. Nippur: New Perspectives. Archaeology 30: 26–37.
Gibson, McGuire, and R. D. Biggs, eds. 1991. The Organization of Power: Aspects of Bureau-
cracy in the Ancient Near East. 2d ed. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 46. Chicago:
Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.
Giddens, Anthony. 1979. Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure, and Contradic-
tion in Social Analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.
1981. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism. Vol. 1. Power, Property, and the
State. London: Macmillan.
1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
1985. A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism. Vol. 2. The Nation-State and
Violence. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gillespie, S. D. 1989. The Aztec Kings: The Construction of Rulership in Mexica History. Tucson:
University of Arizona Press.
2000. Rethinking Ancient Maya Social Organization: Replacing ‘Lineage’ with ‘House’.
American Anthropologist 102: 467–84.
Glassner, J.-J. 1989. ‘Women, Hospitality, and the Honor of the Family’, in B. S. Lesko, pp. 71–
90.
Gledhill, John. 1984. ‘The Transformation of Asiatic Formations: The Case of Late Prehispanic
Mesoamerica’, in M. Spriggs, pp. 135–48.
Godelier, Maurice. 1978. ‘Economy and Religion: An Evolutionary Optical Illusion’, in
J. Friedman and M. J. Rowlands, pp. 3–11.
1986. The Mental and the Material: Thought, Economy, and Society. London: Verso.
Goebs, Katja. 1998. Symbolic Functions of Royal Crowns in Early Egyptian Funerary Literature.
Ph.D. diss., Oxford University.
Goedicke, Hans. 1979. ‘Cult-Temple and “State” during the Old Kingdom in Egypt’, in
E. Lipinski, pp. 113–31.
Goelet, Ogden, Jr. 1994. ‘A Commentary on the Corpus of Literature and Tradition
Which Constitutes The Book of Going Forth by Day’, in E. von Dassow, pp. 137–
70.
Gohary, Jocelyn. 1992. Akhenaten’s Sed-Festival at Karnak. London: Kegan Paul International.
Goodenough, E. R. 1953–68. Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman Period. 13 vols. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Goody, Jack. 1980. ‘Slavery in Time and Space’, in J. L. Watson, 1980a, pp. 16–42.
1986. The Logic of Writing and the Organization of Society. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Goody, Jack, and Ian Watt. 1963. The Consequences of Literacy. Comparative Studies in Society
and History 5: 304–45.
Gopnik, Myrna, ed. 1997. The Inheritance and Innateness of Grammars. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gose, Peter. 1993. Segmentary State Formation and the Ritual Control of Water under the
Incas. Comparative Studies in Society and History 35: 480–514.
1995. Les momies, les saints et les politiques d’inhumation au P´erou, au xviie si`ecle.
Recherches Am´erindiennes au Qu´ebec 25 (2): 35–51.

706
References
1996a. Oracles, Divine Kingship, and Political Representation in the Inka State. Ethnohistory
43: 1–32.
1996b. The Past Is a Lower Moiety: Diarchy, History, and Divine Kingship in the Inka Empire.
History and Anthropology 9: 383–414.
2000. The State as a Chosen Woman: Brideservice and the Feeding of Tributaries in the Inka
Empire. American Anthropologist 102: 84–97.
Gossen, G. H., and R. M. Leventhal. 1993. ‘The Topography of Ancient Maya Religious
Pluralism: A Dialogue with the Present’, in J. A. Sabloff and J. S. Henderson, pp. 185–
217.
Graham, Elizabeth. 1991. ‘Women and Gender in Maya Prehistory’, in The Archaeology
of Gender: Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Chacmool Conference, D. Walde and
N. D. Willows, eds., pp. 470–78. Calgary: Archaeological Association of the University
of Calgary.
1999. ‘Stone Cities, Green Cities’, in E. A. Bacus and L. J. Lucero, pp. 185–94.
Granet, Marcel. 1958 (1930). Chinese Civilization. New York: Meridian Books.
Grant, Michael. 1973. Roman Myths. Rev. ed. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Griffeth, Robert, and C. G. Thomas, eds. 1981. The City-State in Five Cultures. Santa Barbara:
ABC-Clio.
Grimal, Nicolas. 1992. A History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford: Blackwell.
Grou, Gilbert. 1989. La rˆole des sp´ecialistes dans l’arm´ee inca: Un subjet `a reconsid´erer. Culture
9(2): 49–60.
Guthrie, Stewart. 1993. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Haas, Jonathan. 1982. The Evolution of the Prehistoric State. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Hall, John. 1986. Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the Rise of the West.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Hallo, W. W. 1957. Early Mesopotamian Royal Titles: A Philologic and Historical Analysis.
American Oriental Society, American Oriental Series 43.
Hallpike, C. R. 1979. The Foundations of Primitive Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1986. The Principles of Social Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Halverson, John. 1992. Goody and the Implosion of the Literacy Thesis. Man 27: 301–17.
Hammond, Norman. 1991. ‘Inside the Black Box: Deﬁning Maya Polity’, in T. P. Culbert, 1991a,
pp. 253–84.
2000. ‘The Maya Lowlands: Pioneer Farmers to Merchant Princes’, in R. E. W. Adams and
M. J. MacLeod, pt. 1, pp. 197–249.
Hancock, Graham, and Santha Faiia. 1998. Heaven’s Mirror: Quest for the Lost Civilization.
London: Michael Joseph.
Hanks, W. F. 1989. ‘Word and Image in a Semiotic Perspective’, in W. F. Hanks and D. S. Rice,
pp. 8–21.
Hanks, W. F., and D. S. Rice, eds. 1989. Word and Image in Maya Culture: Explorations in
Language, Writing, and Representation. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Hansen, M. H., ed. 2000. A Comparative Study of Thirty City-State Cultures: An Investigation.
Historisk-ﬁlosoﬁske Skrifter 21. Copenhagen: Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and
Letters.
Hardin, G. J. 1968. The Tragedy of the Commons. Science 162: 1243–48.
Harner, Michael. 1977. The Ecological Basis for Aztec Sacriﬁce. American Ethnologist 4:
117–35.
Harpur, Yvonne. 1987. Decoration in Egyptian Tombs of the Old Kingdom: Studies in
Orientation and Scene Content. London: KPI.

References
707
Harris, Marvin. 1968. The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture.
New York: Crowell.
1974. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. New York: Random House.
1977. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Cultures. New York: Random House.
1979. Cultural Materialism: The Struggle for a Science of Culture. New York: Random House.
1992. Anthropology and the Theoretical and Paradigmatic Signiﬁcance of the Collapse of
Soviet and East European Communism. American Anthropologist 94: 295–305.
Harris, Rivkah. 1975. Ancient Sippar: A Demographic Study of an Old-Babylonian City
(1894–1595 B.C.). Uitgaven van het Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut te
Istanbul 36.
1989. ‘Independent Women in Ancient Mesopotamia?’ in B. S. Lesko, pp. 145–56.
Harrison, P. D. 1990. ‘The Revolution in Ancient Maya Subsistence’, in F. S. Clancy and
P. D. Harrison, pp. 99–113.
1999. The Lords of Tikal: Rulers of an Ancient Maya City. London: Thames and Hudson.
Harrison, P. D., and B. L. Turner, II, eds. 1978. Pre-Hispanic Maya Agriculture. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.
Haselberger, Herta. 1961. Method of Studying Ethnological Art. Current Anthropology 2:
341–84.
Hassan, F. A. 1993. ‘Town and Village in Ancient Egypt: Ecology, Society, and Urbanization’, in
The Archaeology of Africa: Food, Metals, and Towns. Thurstan Shaw, Paul Sinclair, Bassey
Andah, and Alex Okpoko, eds., pp. 551–69. London: Routledge.
1997. The Dynamics of a Riverine Civilization: A Geoarchaeological Perspective on the Nile
Valley, Egypt. World Archaeology 29: 51–74.
Hassig, Ross. 1985. Trade, Tribute, and Transportation: The Sixteenth-Century Political
Economy of the Valley of Mexico. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1988. Aztec Warfare: Imperial Expansion and Political Control. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Hastorf, C. A. 1990. The Effect of the Inka State on Sausa Agricultural Production and Crop
Consumption. American Antiquity 55: 262–90.
Havelock, E. A. 1986. The Muse Learns to Write: Reﬂections on Orality and Literacy from
Antiquity to the Present. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Haviland, W. A. 1968. ‘Ancient Lowland Maya Social Organization’, in Archaeological Studies in
Middle America, M. A. Harrison and Robert Wauchope, eds., pp. 93–117. Middle American
Research Institute, Tulane University, Publication 26.
1974. Occupational Specialization at Tikal, Guatemala: Stoneworking-Monument Carving.
American Antiquity 39: 494–96.
1988. ‘Musical Hammocks at Tikal: Problems with Reconstructing Household Composition’,
in R. R. Wilk and W. Ashmore, pp. 121–34.
1992. Status and Power in Classic Maya Society: The View from Tikal. American Anthropo-
logist 94: 937–40.
Hawass, Zahi. 1995. ‘The Programs of the Royal Funerary Complexes of the Fourth Dynasty’,
in D. O’Connor and D. P. Silverman, pp. 221–62.
Hayes, W. C. 1955. A Papyrus of the Late Middle Kingdom in the Brooklyn Museum (Papyrus
Brooklyn 35.1446). Wilbour Monographs 5. New York: Brooklyn Museum.
Heichelheim, F. M. 1958. An Ancient Economic History. Vol. 1. From the Palaeolithic Age to
the Migrations of the Germanic, Slavic, and Arabic Nations. Leiden: Sijthoff’s.
Heidenreich, C. E. 1971. Huronia: A History and Geography of the Huron Indians, 1600–1650.
Toronto: McClelland and Stewart.
Heizer, R. F. 1966. Ancient Heavy Transport, Methods and Achievements. Science 153 (3738):
821–30.

708
References
Helms, M. W. 1998. Access to Origins: Afﬁnes, Ancestors, and Aristocrats. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Henderson, J. S. 1981. The World of the Ancient Maya. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Henderson, J. S., and P. J. Netherly, eds. 1993. Conﬁgurations of Power: Holistic Anthropology
in Theory and Practice. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Hendrickson, Carol. 1989. ‘Twin Gods and Quich´e Rulers: The Relation between Divine Power
and Lordly Rule in the Popol Vuh’, in W. F. Hanks and D. S. Rice, pp. 127–39.
Hester, T. R., and H. J. Shafer. 1994. ‘The Ancient Maya Craft Community at Colha, Belize,
and Its External Relationships’, in G. M. Schwartz and S. E. Falconer, pp. 48–63.
Heyden, Doris. 1989. The Eagle, the Cactus, the Rock: The Roots of Mexico-Tenochtitlan’s
Foundation Myth and Symbol. British Archaeological Reports International Series
484.
Hicks, Frederic. 1982. Tetzcoco in the Early 16th Century: The State, the City, and the Calpolli.
American Ethnologist 9: 230–49.
1994. ‘Alliance and Intervention in Aztec Imperial Expansion’, in E. M. Brumﬁel and
J. W. Fox, pp. 111–16.
Hill, A. A. 1967. ‘The Typology of Writing Systems’, in Papers in Linguistics in Honor of L´eon
Dostert, W. M. Austin, ed., pp. 92–99. The Hague: Mouton.
Ho Ping-ti. 1975. The Cradle of the East: An Inquiry into the Indigenous Origins of Techniques
and Ideas of Neolithic and Early Historic China, 5000–1000 B.C. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Hobhouse, L. T., G. C. Wheeler, and Morris Ginsberg. 1915. The Material Culture and So-
cial Institutions of the Simpler Peoples: An Essay in Correlation. London: Chapman and
Hill.
Hodder, B. W., and U. I. Ukwu. 1969. Markets in West Africa: Studies of Markets and Trade
among the Yoruba and Ibo. Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
Hodder, Ian. 1982a. Symbols in Action: Ethnoarchaeological Studies of Material Culture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1982b. The Present Past: An Introduction to Anthropology for Archaeologists. London:
Batsford.
1986. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
ed. 1987. The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hodge, M. G. 1984. Aztec City-States. Memoirs of the Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, 18.
1997. ‘When Is a City-State? Archaeological Measures of Aztec City-States and Aztec City-
State Systems’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 209–27.
1998. Archaeological Views of Aztec Culture. Journal of Archaeological Research 6: 197–238.
Hodge, M. G., and M. E. Smith, eds. 1994. Economies and Polities in the Aztec Realm. Albany:
Institute for Mesoamerican Studies.
Hoffman, M. A. 1979. Egypt before the Pharaohs: The Prehistoric Foundations of Egyptian
Civilization. New York: Knopf.
Holl, A. F. C. 2000. ‘Metals and Precolonial Society’, in Ancient African Metallurgy: The Socio-
cultural Context, M. S. Bisson, S. T. Childs, Philip de Barros, and A. F. C. Holl, pp. 1–81.
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Hooke, S. H., ed. 1958. Myth, Ritual, and Kingship: Essays on the Theory and Practice of
Kingship in the Ancient Near East and in Israel. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hornung, Erik. 1982. Conceptions of God in Ancient Egypt: The One and the Many. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
1997. ‘The Pharaoh’, in S. Donadoni, pp. 283–314.

References
709
Hosler, Dorothy. 1988. Ancient West Mexican Metallurgy: South and Central American Origins
and West Mexican Transformations. American Anthropologist 90: 832–55.
Houston, S. D. 1993. Hieroglyphs and History at Dos Pilas: Dynastic Politics of the Classic
Maya. Austin: University of Texas Press.
2001. Into the Minds of Ancients: Advances in Maya Glyph Studies. Journal of World
Prehistory. In press.
Houston, S. D., John Robertson, and David Stuart. 2000. The Language of Classic Maya In-
scriptions. Current Anthropology 41: 321–56.
Houston, S. D., and David Stuart. 1996. Of Gods, Glyphs, and Kings: Divinity and Rulership
among the Classic Maya. Antiquity 70: 289–312.
Howell, Nancy. 1979. Demography of the Dobe !Kung. New York: Academic Press.
Hsu, C.-Y., and K. M. Linduff. 1988. Western Chou Civilization. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Huber, L. G. F. 1988. The Bo Capital and Questions Concerning Xia and Early Shang. Early
China 13: 46–77.
Hudson, Michael. 1996. ‘The Dynamics of Privatization, from the Bronze Age to the Present’,
in Michael Hudson and B. A. Levine, pp. 33–72.
Hudson, Michael, and B.A. Levine, eds. 1996. Privatization in the Ancient Near East and
Classical World. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology Bulletin 5.
Hunt, Eva. 1972. ‘Irrigation and the Socio-Political Organization of Cuicatec Cacicazgos’, in The
Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley, Vol. 4, F. Johnson, ed., pp. 162–259. Austin: University
of Texas Press.
Hunt, R. C. 1987. Agricultural Ecology: The Impact of the Aswan High Dam Reconsidered.
Culture and Agriculture 31: 1–6.
1991. ‘The Role of Bureaucracy in the Provisioning of Cities: A Framework for
Analysis of the Ancient Near East’, in M. Gibson and R. D. Biggs, pp. 141–
68.
Huntington, Ellsworth. 1956. Principles of Human Geography. 6th ed. New York: J. Wiley.
Huot, J.-L. 1989. Les Sum´eriens: Entre le Tigre et l’Euphrate. Paris: Errance.
Hyslop, John. 1984. The Inka Road System. Orlando: Academic Press.
1990. Inka Settlement Planning. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Il’yin, G. F., and I. M. Diakonoff. 1991. ‘India, Central Asia, and Iran in the First Half of the
First Millennium b.c.’, in I. M. Diakonoff, pp. 366–86.
Ingold, Tim. 1996. ‘Hunting and Gathering as Ways of Perceiving the Environment’, in
Redeﬁning Nature: Ecology, Culture, and Domestication, Roy Ellen and Katsuyoshi Fukui,
eds., pp. 117–55. Oxford: Berg.
Inomata, Takeshi. 2001. The Power and Ideology of Artistic Creation: Elite Craft Specialists in
Classic Maya Society. Current Anthropology 42: 321–49.
Isaac, B. L. 1993. ‘AMP, HH & OD: Some Comments’, in V. L. Scarborough and B. L. Isaac,
pp. 429–71.
Isbell, W. H. 1997. Mummies and Mortuary Monuments: A Postprocessual Prehistory of Central
Andean Social Organization. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Jacobsen, Thorkild. 1943. Primitive Democracy in Ancient Mesopotamia. Journal of Near
Eastern Studies 2: 159–72.
1970. Toward the Image of Tammuz and Other Essays on Mesopotamian History and Culture.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
1974. ‘Mesopotamian Religions’, in The New Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th ed., Macropae-
dia, Vol. 11, pp. 1001–1106.
1976. The Treasures of Darkness: A History of Mesopotamian Religion. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

710
References
1982. Salinity and Irrigation Agriculture in Antiquity: Diyala Basin Archaeological Projects,
Report on Essential Results, 1956–58. Malibu: Undena.
James, T. G. H. 1962. The H
• ek
• anakhte Papers and Other Early Middle Kingdom Documents.
Publications of the Metropolitan Museum of Art Egyptian Expedition 19.
Janssen, J. J. 1978. ‘The Early State in Ancient Egypt’, in H. Claessen and P. Skaln´ık, pp. 213–34.
Janssen, R. M., and J. J. Janssen. 1990. Growing Up in Ancient Egypt. London: Rubicon Press.
1996. Getting Old in Ancient Egypt. London: Rubicon Press.
Jaspers, Karl. 1953. The Origin and Goal of History. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Jing, Zhichun, George Rapp, Jr., and Tianlin Gao. 1997. Geoarchaeological Aids in the Inves-
tigation of Early Shang Civilization on the Floodplain of the Lower Yellow River, China.
World Archaeology 29: 36–50.
Joffe, A. H. 2000. Egypt and Syro-Mesopotamia in the 4th Millennium: Implications of the New
Chronology. Current Anthropology 41: 113–23.
Johnson, G. A. 1973. Local Exchange and Early State Development in Southwestern Iran.
University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology Anthropological Papers 51.
1978. ‘Information Sources and the Development of Decision-Making Organizations’, in
Social Archeology: Beyond Subsistence and Dating, C. L. Redman et al., eds., pp. 87–112.
New York: Academic Press.
Johnson, Samuel. 1921. The History of the Yorubas from the Earliest Times to the Beginning of
the British Protectorate, O. Johnson, ed. London: Routledge.
Jonckheere, Frans. 1958. Les m´edecins de l’Egypte pharaonique: Essai de prosopographie.
Bruxelles: Fondation Egyptologique Reine Elisabeth.
Jones, Julie. 1964. The Art of Empire: The Inca of Peru. New York: Museum of Primitive Art.
Jorgensen, J. G. 1966. Addendum: Geographical Clusterings and Functional Explanations
of In-Law Avoidances: An Analysis of Comparative Method. Current Anthropology 7:
161–82.
ed. 1974. Comparative Studies by Harold E. Driver and Essays in His Honor. New Haven:
HRAF Press.
Joyce, R. A. 1992. ‘Images of Gender and Labor Organization in Classic Maya Society’, in
Exploring Gender through Archaeology: Selected Papers from the 1991 Boone Confer-
ence, Cheryl Claassen, ed., pp. 63–70. Monographs in World Archaeology 11. Madison:
Prehistory Press.
1996. ‘The Construction of Gender in Classic Maya Monuments’, in R. P. Wright, 1996a,
pp. 167–95.
2000. Gender and Power in Prehispanic America. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Julien, C. J. 1988. How Inca Decimal Administration Worked. Ethnohistory 35: 257–79.
2000. Reading Inca History. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
Justeson, J. S. 1986. The Origin of Writing Systems: Preclassic Mesoamerica. World Archaeology
17: 437–58.
1989. ‘The Representational Conventions of Mayan Hieroglyphic Writing’, in W. F. Hanks
and D. S. Rice, pp. 25–38.
Justeson, J. S., W. M. Norman, and Norman Hammond. 1988. ‘The Pomona Flare: A Preclassic
Maya Hieroglyphic Text’, in E. P. Benson and G. G. Grifﬁn, pp. 94–151.
Kamenka, Eugene. 1989. Bureaucracy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kanawati, Naguib. 1977. The Egyptian Administration in the Old Kingdom: Evidence on Its
Economic Decline. Warminster: Aris and Phillips.
1980. Governmental Reforms in Old Kingdom Egypt. Warminster: Aris and Phillips.
Kane, V. C. 1974–75. The Independent Bronze Industries in the South of China Contemporary
with the Shang and Western Chou Dynasties. Archives of Asian Art 28: 77–107.
Karlsson, H˚akan. 1998. Re-thinking Archaeology. G¨oteborg: Novum Graﬁska.

References
711
Ke Changji. 1989. ‘Ancient Chinese Society and the Asiatic Mode of Production’, in T. Brook,
pp. 47–64.
Keatinge, R. W. 1988. Peruvian Prehistory: An Overview of Pre-Inca and Inca Society.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kees, Hermann. 1961. Ancient Egypt: A Cultural Topography. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Keightley, D. N. 1969. Public Work in Ancient China: A Study of Forced Labor in the Shang
and Western Chou. Ph.D. diss., Columbia University.
1978a. Sources of Shang History: The Oracle-Bone Inscriptions of Bronze Age China.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
1978b. The Religious Commitment: Shang Theology and the Genesis of Chinese Political
Culture. History of Religions 17: 211–25.
1979–80. The Shang State as Seen in the Oracle-Bone Inscriptions. Early China 5: 25–34.
ed. 1983a. The Origins of Chinese Civilization. Berkeley: University of California Press.
1983b. ‘The Late Shang State: When, Where, and What?’ In D. N. Keightley, 1983a,
pp. 523–64.
1987. Archaeology and Mentality: The Making of China. Representations 18: 91–128.
1999a. ‘The Environment of Ancient China’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy, pp. 30–36.
1999b. ‘The Shang: China’s First Historical Dynasty’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy,
pp. 232–91.
1999c. Theology and the Writing of History: Truth and the Ancestors in the Wu Ding
Divination Records. Journal of East Asian Archaeology 1: 207–30.
2000. The Ancestral Landscape: Time, Space, and Community in Late Shang China, ca.
1200–1045 B.C. University of California Center for Chinese Studies, China Research
Monograph 53.
Kelley, D. H. 1971. ‘Diffusion: Evidence and Process’, in C. L. Riley et al., pp. 60–65.
Kellogg, Susan. 1995. The Woman’s Room: Some Aspects of Gender Relations in Tenochtitlan
in the Late Pre-Hispanic Period. Ethnohistory 42: 563–76.
Kemp, B. J. 1977. The Early Development of Towns in Egypt. Antiquity 51: 185–200.
1983. ‘Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and Second Intermediate Period c. 2686–1552 bc’,
in B. G. Trigger et al., pp. 71–182.
1989. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. London: Routledge.
Kemp, B. J., and Salvatore Garﬁ. 1993. A Survey of the Ancient City of El-‘Amarna. Egypt
Exploration Society Occasional Publications 9.
Kendall, Ann. 1973. Everyday Life of the Incas. London: Batsford.
Kennedy, J. S. 1992. The New Anthropomorphism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1997. ‘Early City-States in South Asia: Comparing the Harappan Phase and Early
Historic Period’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 51–70.
King, Eleanor, and Daniel Potter. 1994. ‘Small Sites in Prehistoric Maya Socioeconomic
Organization: A Perspective from Colha, Belize’, in G. M. Schwartz and S. E. Falconer,
pp. 64–90.
King, Ross. 1996. ‘Korean Writing’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 218–27.
Klor de Alva, J. J. 1982. ‘Spiritual Conﬂict and Accommodation in New Spain: Toward a Typology
of Aztec Responses to Christianity’, in G. A. Collier, R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth,
pp. 345–66.
K¨obben, A. J. F. 1952. New Ways of Presenting an Old Idea: The Statistical Method in Social
Anthropology. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 82: 129–46.
1973. ‘Comparativists and Non-Comparativists in Anthropology’, in A Handbook of Method
in Cultural Anthropology, Raoul Naroll and Ronald Cohen, eds., pp. 581–96. New York:
Columbia University Press.

712
References
Kolb, M. J. 1994. Monumentality and the Rise of Religious Authority in Precontact Hawai’i.
Current Anthropology 35: 521–47.
Krader, Lawrence. 1975. The Asiatic Mode of Production: Sources, Development, and Critique
in the Writings of Karl Marx. Assen: Van Gorcum.
Kraeling, C. H. and R. McC. Adams, eds. 1960. City Invincible: A Symposium on Urbanization
and Cultural Development in the Ancient Near East. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kramer, S. N. 1963. The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
1981. History Begins at Sumer: Thirty-nine Firsts in Man’s Recorded History. 3d rev. ed.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Krapf-Askari, Eva. 1969. Yoruba Towns and Cities: An Enquiry into the Nature of Urban Social
Phenomena. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kroeber, A. L. 1948. Anthropology. 2d ed. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Kuhrt, Am´elie. 1987. ‘Usurpation, Conquest, and Ceremonial: From Babylon to Persia’, in
D. Cannadine and S. Price, pp. 20–55.
Kuwayama, George, ed. 1983. The Great Bronze Age of China: A Symposium. Los Angeles: Los
Angeles County Museum of Art.
La Barre, Weston. 1984. Muelos: A Stone Age Superstition about Sexuality. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Lacovara, Peter. 1997. The New Kingdom Royal City. London: Kegan Paul International.
Lagercrantz, Sture. 1968. African Tally-Strings. Anthropos 63/64: 115–28.
Lakoff, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal about the
Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
La Lone, D. E. 1982. ‘The Inca as a Nonmarket Economy: Supply on Command versus Supply
and Demand’, in Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange, J. E. Ericson and T. K. Earle, eds.,
pp. 291–316. New York: Academic Press.
La Lone, M. B., and D. E. La Lone. 1987. The Inka State in the Southern Highlands: State
Administrative and Production Enclaves. Ethnohistory 34: 47–62.
Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. 1996. Beyond the Tigris and Euphrates: Bronze Age Civilizations.
Beer-Sheva: Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Press.
Lambert, W. G. 1975. ‘The Cosmology of Sumer and Babylon’, in C. Blacker and M. Loewe,
pp. 42–65.
Landsberger, Benno. 1976. The Conceptual Autonomy of the Babylonian World. Malibu:
Undena.
Lapidus, I. M., ed. 1969. Middle Eastern Cities: A Symposium on Ancient, Islamic, and
Contemporary Middle Eastern Urbanism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Larsen, M. T. 1976. The Old Assyrian City-State and Its Colonies. Copenhagen: Akademisk
Forlag.
Laufer, Berthold. 1913. The Development of Ancestral Images in China. Journal of Religious
Psychology 6: 111–23.
Law, Robin. 1977. The Oyo Empire, c. 1600–c. 1836: A West African Imperialism in the Era of
the Atlantic Slave Trade. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lechtman, Heather. 1993. ‘Technologies of Power: The Andean Case’, in J. S. Henderson and
P. J. Netherly, pp. 244–80.
Lee, R. B. 1972. ‘Population Growth and the Beginnings of Sedentary Life among the
!Kung Bushmen’, in Population Growth: Anthropological Implications, Brian Spooner,
ed., pp. 329–42. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
1990. ‘Primitive Communism and the Origin of Social Inequality’, in S. Upham, pp. 225–46.

References
713
Leemans, W. F. 1950. The Old-Babylonian Merchant: His Business and His Social Position.
Leiden: E. J. Brill.
1954. Legal and Economic Records from the Kingdom of Larsa. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
1960a. Legal and Administrative Documents of the Time of Hammurabi and Samsuiluna
(mainly from Lagaba). Leiden: E. J. Brill.
1960b. Foreign Trade in the Old Babylonian Period. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Lehner, Mark. 1997. The Complete Pyramids. London: Thames and Hudson.
Le´on-Portilla, Miguel. 1963. Aztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Nahuatl Mind.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1984. ‘Mesoamerica before 1519’, in L. Bethell, pp. 3–36.
1992. The Aztec Image of Self and Society: An Introduction to Nahua Culture. Salt Lake City:
University of Utah Press.
Leprohon, R. J. 1999. The Concept of Family in Ancient Egyptian Literature. KMT 10(2):
50–85.
Lerner, Gerda. 1986. The Creation of Patriarchy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lesko, B. S. 1989. Women’s Earliest Records: From Ancient Egypt and Western Asia. Brown
Judaic Studies 166. Atlanta: Scholars Press.
Levi, L. J. 1996. ‘Sustainable Production and Residential Variation: A Historical Perspective
on Pre-Hispanic Domestic Economies in the Maya Lowlands’, in S. L. Fedick, 1996a,
pp. 92–106.
LeVine, T. Y. 1987. Inka Labor Service at the Regional Level: The Functional Reality.
Ethnohistory 34: 14–46.
ed. 1992. Inka Storage Systems. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
L´evi-Strauss, Claude. 1962. La pens´ee sauvage. Paris: Plon.
1982. The Way of the Masks. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Lewis, M. E. 1990. Sanctioned Violence in Early China. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
Li Boqian. 1999. The Sumptuary System Governing Western Zhou Rulers’ Cemeteries, Viewed
from a Jin Rulers’ Cemetery. Journal of East Asian Archaeology 1: 251–76.
Li Chi. 1977. Anyang. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Lichtheim, Miriam. 1973. Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of Readings. Vol. 1. The Old
and Middle Kingdoms. Berkeley: University of California Press.
1976. Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of Readings. Vol. 2. The New Kingdom. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Linton, Ralph. 1933. The Tanala: A Hill Tribe of Madagascar. Field Museum of Natural History
Anthropological Series 22.
1939. ‘The Tanala of Madagascar’, in The Individual and His Society: The Psychodynamics
of Primitive Social Organization, Abram Kardiner, ed., pp. 251–90. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Lipinski, Edward, ed. 1979. State and Temple Economy in the Ancient Near East. Leuven:
Departement Ori¨entalistiek, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.
Liverani, Mario. 1996. Reconstructing the Rural Landscape of the Ancient Near East. Journal
of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 39: 1–41.
Lloyd, P. C. 1955. The Yoruba Lineage. Africa 25: 235–51.
1960. Sacred Kingship and Government among the Yoruba. Africa 30: 221–37.
1962. Yoruba Land Law. London: Oxford University Press.
1974. Power and Independence: Urban Africans’ Perception of Social Inequality. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Loewe, Michael, and E. L. Shaughnessy, eds. 1999. The Cambridge History of Ancient China:
From the Origins of Civilization to 221 B.C. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

714
References
L´opez Austin, Alfredo. 1988. The Human Body and Ideology: Concepts of the Ancient Nahuas.
2 vols. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Loprieno, Antonio. 1997. ‘Slaves’, in S. Donadoni, pp. 185–219.
Lounsbury, F. G. 1986. ‘Some Aspects of the Inka Kinship System’, in J. V. Murra, N. Wachtel,
and J. Revel, pp. 121–36.
Low, B. S. 2000. Why Sex Matters: A Darwinian Look at Human Behavior. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Lu Liancheng. 1993. Chariot and Horse Burials in Ancient China. Antiquity 67: 824–38.
Lucas, J. Olumide. 1948. The Religion of the Yorubas. Lagos: C. M. S. Bookshop.
Lucero, L. J. 1999. ‘Water Control and Maya Politics in the Southern Maya Lowlands’, in
E. A. Bacus and L. J. Lucero, pp. 35–49.
Lumbreras,L.G.1974.ThePeoplesandCulturesofAncientPeru.Washington,DC:Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Lustig, Judith, ed. 1997a. Anthropology and Egyptology: A Developing Dialogue. Shefﬁeld:
Shefﬁeld University Press.
1997b. ‘Kinship, Gender and Age in Middle Kingdom Tomb Scenes and Texts’, in J. Lustig,
1997a, pp. 43–65.
Mabogunje, A. L. 1962. Yoruba Towns. Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
McAnany, P. A. 1993. ‘The Economics of Social Power and Wealth among Eighth-Century Maya
Households’, in J. A. Sabloff and J. S. Henderson, pp. 65–89.
1995. Living with the Ancestors: Kinship and Kingship in Ancient Maya Society. Austin:
University of Texas Press.
MacCormack, Sabine. 1991. Religion in the Andes: Vision and Imagination in Early Colonial
Peru. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
McDowell, A. G. 1999. Village Life in Ancient Egypt: Laundry Lists and Love Songs. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
McNeill, W. H. 1976. Plagues and Peoples. Garden City: Anchor.
Mace, Ruth, and Mark Pagel. 1994. The Comparative Method in Anthropology. Current
Anthropology 35: 549–64.
Maekawa, Kazuya. 1984. Cereal Cultivation in the Ur III Period. Bulletin on Sumerian
Agriculture 1: 73–96.
Maisels, C. K. 1990. The Emergence of Civilization: From Hunting and Gathering to Agriculture,
Cities, and the State in the Near East. London: Routledge.
1993. The Near East: Archaeology in the ‘Cradle of Civilization’. London: Routledge.
1999. Early Civilizations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of Egypt, the Levant,
Mesopotamia, India, and China. London: Routledge.
Malek, Jaromir. 1997. Review of Ancient Egyptian Kingship, D. O’Connor and D. P. Silverman,
eds. Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 83: 227–28.
Malek, Jaromir, and Werner Forman. 1986. In the Shadow of the Pyramids: Egypt during the
Old Kingdom. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1939. The Group and the Individual in Functional Analysis. American
Journal of Sociology 44: 938–64.
Malpass, M. A., ed. 1993a. Provincial Inca: Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Assessment of
the Impact of the Inca State. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
1993b. ‘Variability in the Inka State: Embracing a Wider Perspective’, in M. A. Malpass,
1993a, pp. 234–44.
Mander, Pietro. 1999. Space-Time Connections in Aspects of Kingship in Ancient Mesopotamia.
Anthropology and Philosophy 3: 5–13.
Mann,Michael. 1986. TheSourcesofSocialPower.Vol.1. AHistoryofPowerfromtheBeginning
to A.D. 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

References
715
Marcus, Joyce. 1976. Emblem and State in the Classic Maya Lowlands. Washington, DC:
Dumbarton Oaks.
1992a. Mesoamerican Writing Systems: Propaganda, Myth, and History in Four Ancient
Civilizations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
1992b.PoliticalFluctuationsinMesoamerica.NationalGeographicResearchandExploration
8: 392–411.
1993. ‘Ancient Maya Political Organization’, in J. A. Sabloff and J. S. Henderson, pp. 111–83.
1998. ‘The Peaks and Valleys of Ancient States: An Extension of the Dynamic Model’, in
G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 59–94.
Marcus, Joyce, and G. M. Feinman. 1998. ‘Introduction’, in G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus,
pp. 3–13.
Margueron, J.-C. 1982. Recherches sur les palais m´esopotamiens de l’ˆage du Bronze. Paris: Paul
Geuthner.
Mark, Samuel. 1998. From Egypt to Mesopotamia: A Study of Predynastic Trade Routes. College
Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.
Marriott, McKim, ed. 1955. Village India: Studies in the Little Community. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
Martin, G. T. 1991. The Hidden Tombs of Memphis: New Discoveries from the Time of
Tutankhamum and Ramesses the Great. London: Thames and Hudson.
Martin, Simon, and Nikolai Grube. 2000. Chronicle of the Maya Kings and Queens: Deciphering
the Dynasties of the Ancient Maya. London: Thames and Hudson.
Marx, Karl. 1964. Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations, E. J. Hobsbawm, ed. London: Lawrence
and Wishart.
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. 1962. Selected Works in Two Volumes. Moscow: Foreign
Languages Publishing House.
1964. On Religion. New York: Schocken Books.
Masuda, Shozo, Izumi Shimada, and Craig Morris, eds. 1985. Andean Ecology and Civilization:
An Interdisciplinary Perspective on Andean Ecological Complementarity. Tokyo: Univer-
sity of Tokyo Press.
Mathews, Peter. 1991. ‘Classic Maya Emblem Glyphs’, in T. P. Culbert, 1991a, pp. 19–29.
Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo. 1988. The Great Temple of the Aztecs: Treasures of Tenochtitlan.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Meeks, Dimitri, and Christine Favard-Meeks. 1996. Daily Life of the Egyptian Gods. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Mellars, Paul, and Kathleen Gibson, eds. 1996. Modelling the Early Human Mind. Cambridge:
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
Mendelssohn, Kurt. 1974. The Riddle of the Pyramids. London: Thames and Hudson.
Mercier, Paul. 1962. Civilisations du Benin. Paris: Soci´et´e Continentale d’Editions Modernes
Illustr´ees.
Meskell, Lynn. 1998a. An Archaeology of Social Relations in an Egyptian Village. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 5: 209–43.
1998b. Intimate Archaeologies: The Case of Kha and Merit. World Archaeology 29: 363–79.
Mikhaeli, Moshe. 1969. War and Society in Ancient Sumer. M.A. thesis, Department of History,
McGill University.
Millard, A. R. 1986. The Infancy of the Alphabet. World Archaeology 17: 390–98.
Miller, A. G. 1986. Maya Rulers of Time: A Study of Architectural Sculpture at Tikal, Guatemala.
Philadelphia: University Museum.
1989. ‘Comparing Maya Image and Text’, in W. F. Hanks and D. S. Rice, pp. 176–88.
Miller, Daniel, M. J. Rowlands, and Christopher Tilley, eds. 1989. Domination and Resistance.
London: Unwin Hyman.

716
References
Miller, G. A. 1956. The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our
Capacity for Processing Information. Psychological Review 63: 81–97.
Mithen, S. J. 1996. The Prehistory of the Mind: A Search for the Origins of Art, Religion, and
Science. London: Thames and Hudson.
Moholy-Nagy, Hattula. 1997. Middens, Construction Fill, and Offerings: Evidence for the
Organization of Classic Period Craft Production at Tikal, Guatemala. Journal of Field
Archaeology 24: 293–313.
Montmollin, Olivier de. 1989. The Archaeology of Political Structure: Settlement Analysis in a
Classic Maya Polity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, F. W., ed. 1961. Readings in Cross-Cultural Methodology. New Haven: HRAF Press.
Moore, J. D. 1996. The Archaeology of Plazas and the Proxemics of Ritual. American Anthro-
pologist 98: 789–802.
Moore, S. F. 1958. Power and Property in Inca Peru. New York: Columbia University Press.
Moorey, P. R. S., ed. 1979. The Origins of Civilization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1985. Materials and Manufacture in Ancient Mesopotamia: The Evidence of Archaeology and
Art. British Archaeological Reports International Series 237.
1994. Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Moreno Garc´ıa, J. C. 1998. La population mrt: Une approche du probl`eme de la servitude dans
l’Egypte du IIIe mill´enaire (1). Journal of Egyptian Archaeology 84: 71–83.
Morenz, Siegfried. 1973. Egyptian Religion. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Morgan, L. H. 1907 (1877). Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from
Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization. Chicago: Kerr.
Morris, Craig. 1998. ‘Inka Strategies of Incorporation and Governance’, in G. M. Feinman and
J. Marcus, pp. 293–309.
Morris, Craig, and D. E. Thompson. 1985. Hu´anuco Pampa: An Inca City and Its Hinterland.
London: Thames and Hudson.
Morris, Ian. 1997. ‘An Archaeology of Equalities? The Greek City-States’, in D. L. Nichols and
T. H. Charlton, pp. 91–105.
Murdock, G. P. 1945. ‘The Common Denominator of Cultures’, in The Science of Man in the
World Crisis, Ralph Linton, ed., pp. 132–42. New York: Columbia University Press.
1949. Social Structure. New York: Macmillan.
1956. ‘How Culture Changes’, in Man, Culture, and Society, H. L. Shapiro, ed., pp. 247–60.
New York: Oxford University Press.
1959a. Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History. New York: McGraw-Hill.
1959b. ‘Evolution in Social Organization’, in Evolution and Anthropology: A Centennial
Appraisal, B. J. Meggers, ed., pp. 126–43. Washington, DC: Anthropological Society of
Washington.
1981. Atlas of World Cultures. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Murdock, G. P., and Caterina Provost. 1973. Factors in the Division of Labor by Sex: A Cross-
Cultural Analysis. Ethnology 12: 203–25.
Murra, J. V. 1960. ‘Rite and Crop in the Inca State’, in S. Diamond, ed., pp. 393–407.
1962. Cloth and Its Functions in the Inca State. American Anthropologist 64: 710–28.
1980. The Economic Organization of the Inka State. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
1986. ‘The Expansion of the Inka State: Armies, War, and Rebellions’, in J. V. Murra,
N. Wachtel, and J. Revel, pp. 49–58.
Murra, J. V., Nathan Wachtel, and Jacques Revel, eds. 1986. Anthropological History of Andean
Polities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nabokov, Peter. 1996. ‘Native Views of History’, in B. G. Trigger and W. E. Washburn, pt. 1,
pp. 1–59.

References
717
Naroll, Raoul. 1961. Two Solutions to Galton’s Problem. Philosophy of Science 28: 15–39.
Nash, June. 1978. The Aztecs and the Ideology of Male Dominance. Signs 4: 349–62.
Nelson, S. M. 1991. The Statuses of Women in Ko-Shilla: Evidence from Archaeology and
Historic Documents. Korea Journal 31(2): 101–7.
Netting, R. M. 1969. ‘Ecosystems in Process: A Comparative Study of Change in Two West
African Societies’, in Contributions to Anthropology: Ecological Essays, David Damas,
ed., pp. 102–12. National Museums of Canada Bulletin 230.
Nichols, D. L., and T. H. Charlton, eds. 1997. The Archaeology of City-States: Cross-Cultural
Approaches. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Nicholson, H. B. 1971a. ‘Major Sculpture in Pre-Hispanic Central Mexico’, in Handbook of
Middle American Indians, Vol. 10, pp. 92–134. Austin: University of Texas Press.
1971b. ‘Religion in Pre-Hispanic Central Mexico’, in Handbook of Middle American Indians,
Vol. 10, pp. 395–446. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Nicholson, H. B., and Eloise Qui˜nones Keber. 1983. Art of Aztec Mexico: Treasures of Tenochti-
tlan. Washington, DC: National Gallery of Art.
Nieboer, H. J. 1900. Slavery as an Industrial System: Ethnological Researches. The Hague:
M. Nijhoff.
Niles, S. A. 1987. Callachaca: Style and Status in an Inca Community. Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press.
1993. ‘The Provinces in the Heartland: Stylistic Variation and Architectural Innovation near
Inca Cuzco’, in M. A. Malpass, pp. 145–76.
1999. The Shape of Inca History: Narrative and Architecture in an Andean Empire. Iowa
City: University of Iowa Press.
Nissen, H. J. 1988. The Early History of the Ancient Near East, 9000–2000 B.C. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Nissen, H. J., Peter Damerow, and R. K. Englund. 1993. Archaic Bookkeeping: Early Writing
and Techniques of Economic Administration in the Ancient Near East. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Noble, William, and Iain Davidson. 1996. Human Evolution, Language, and Mind: A Psycho-
logical and Archaeological Inquiry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nunn, John. 1996. Ancient Egyptian Medicine. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Oates, Joan. 1978. ‘Mesopotamian Social Organisation: Archaeological and Philological
Evidence’, in J. Friedman and M. J. Rowlands, pp. 457–85.
1996. ‘Irrigation Agriculture in Mesopotamia’, in Water in Archaeology, Geraldine Barber
and Tertia Barnett, eds., pp. 54–67. Bristol: Wessex Water.
O’Connor, David. 1989. City and Palace in New Kingdom Egypt. Cahiers de Recherches de
l’Institut de Papyrologie et d’Egyptologie de Lille 11: 73–87.
1990. Ancient Egyptian Society. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Museum of Natural History.
1992. ‘The Status of Early Egyptian Temples: An Alternative Theory’, in R. Friedman and
B. Adams, pp. 83–98.
1995. ‘Beloved of Maat, The Horizon of Re: The Royal Palace in New Kingdom Egypt’, in
D. O’Connor and D. P. Silverman, pp. 263–300.
1998. ‘The City and the World: Worldview and Built Forms in the Reign of Amenhotep III’,
in D. O’Connor and E. H. Cline, pp. 125–72.
O’Connor, David, and E. H. Cline, eds. 1998. Amenhotep III: Perspectives on His Reign. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
O’Connor, David, and D. P. Silverman, eds. 1995. Ancient Egyptian Kingship. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Offner, J. A. 1981. On the Inapplicability of ‘Oriental Despotism’ and the ‘Asiatic Mode of
Production’ to the Aztecs of Texcoco. American Antiquity 46: 43–61.
1983. Law and Politics in Aztec Texcoco. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

718
References
Ojo, G. J. A. 1966a. Yoruba Culture: A Geographical Analysis. London: University of London
Press.
1966b. Yoruba Palaces: A Study of Aﬁns of Yorubaland. London: University of London Press.
Olivier, Laurent. 1999. The Origins of French Archaeology. Antiquity 73: 176–83.
Oppenheim, A. L. 1964. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
1969. ‘Mesopotamia: Land of Many Cities’, in I. M. Lapidus, pp. 3–18.
Ortiz de Montellano, Bernard. 1990. Aztec Medicine, Health, and Nutrition. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Otterbein, Keith. 1989. The Evolution of War: A Cross-Cultural Study. 3d ed. New Haven:
HRAF Press.
Panofsky, Erwin. 1939. Studies in Iconology: Humanistic Themes in the Art of the Renaissance.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Park, T. K. 1992. Early Trends Toward Class Stratiﬁcation: Chaos, Common Property, and Flood
Recession Agriculture. American Anthropologist 94: 90–117.
Parkinson, R. B. 1995. ‘Homosexual’ Desire and Middle Kingdom Literature. Journal of Egyp-
tian Archaeology 81: 57–76.
Parrot, Andr´e. 1960. Sumer. Paris: Gallimard.
Parsons, J. R. 1976. ‘The Role of Chinampa Agriculture in the Food Supply of Aztec Tenochti-
tlan’, in Cultural Change and Continuity: Essays in Honor of James Bennett Grifﬁn,
C. E. Cleland, ed., pp. 233–57. New York: Academic Press.
Pasztory, Esther. 1983. Aztec Art. New York: Abrams.
Patterson, T. C. 1987. ‘Tribes, Chiefdoms, and Kingdoms in the Inca Empire’, in T. C. Patterson
and C. W. Gailey, pp. 117–27.
1991. The Inca Empire: The Formation and Disintegration of a Pre-Capitalist State. New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
1997. Inventing Western Civilization. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Patterson, T. C., and C. W. Gailey, eds. 1987. Power Relations and State Formation. Washington,
DC: Publication of the Archeology Section, American Anthropological Association.
Peel, J. D. Y. 1983. Ijeshas and Nigerians: The Incorporation of a Yoruba Kingdom, 1890s–1970s.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pemberton, John, III, and F. S. Afolayan. 1996. Yoruba Sacred Kingship: ‘A Power Like That of
the Gods’. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Pinch, Geraldine. 1994. Magic in Ancient Egypt. London: British Museum Press.
Pohl, Mary, ed. 1985. Prehistoric Lowland Maya Environment and Subsistence Economy.
Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 77.
Pokora, Timoteus. 1978. ‘China’, in H. J. M. Claessen and P. Skaln´ık, pp. 191–212.
Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. New York: Farrar and Rinehart.
1957. ‘Marketless Trading in Hammurabi’s Time’, in K. Polanyi, C. M. Arensberg, and H. W.
Pearson, pp. 12–26.
1968. Primitive, Archaic, and Modern Economies: Essays of Karl Polanyi, George Dalton, ed.
Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Polanyi, Karl, C. M. Arensberg, and H. W. Pearson. 1957. Trade and Market in the Early
Empires. Glencoe: Free Press.
Pollock, Susan. 1991. ‘Women in a Men’s World: Images of Sumerian Women’, in J. M. Gero
and M. W. Conkey, pp. 366–87.
1999. Ancient Mesopotamia: The Eden That Never Was. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Posener, Georges. 1940. Princes et pays d’Asie et de Nubie: Textes hi´eratiques sur des ﬁgurines
d’envoˆutement du Moyen Empire. Bruxelles: Fondation Egyptologique Reine Elisabeth.

References
719
Pospisil, L. J. 1958. Kapauku Papuans and Their Law. Yale University Publications in
Anthropology 54.
1971. Anthropology of Law: A Comparative Theory. New York: Harper and Row.
Possehl, G. L. 1998. ‘Sociocultural Complexity without the State: The Indus Civilization’, in
G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 261–91.
Postgate, J. N. 1972. ‘The Role of the Temple in the Mesopotamian Secular Community’, in
P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby, pp. 811–25.
1992. Early Mesopotamia: Society and Economy at the Dawn of History. London: Routledge.
Postgate, J. N., Tao Wang, and Toby Wilkinson. 1995. The Evidence for Early Writing: Utilitarian
or Ceremonial? Antiquity 69: 459–80.
Potter, D. R., and E. M. King. 1995. ‘A Heterarchical Approach to Lowland Maya
Socioeconomies’, in R. M. Ehrenreich, C. L. Crumley, and J. E. Levy, pp. 17–32.
Powell, M. A. 1985. Salt, Seed, and Yields in Sumerian Agriculture: A Critique of the Theory
of Progressive Salinization. Zeitschrift f¨ur Assyriologie 75: 7–38.
ed. 1987. Labor in the Ancient Near East. American Oriental Society, American Oriental
Series 68.
Price,T.D.,andG.M.Feinman,eds.1995.FoundationsofSocialInequality.NewYork:Plenum.
Priese, K.-H. 1974. ’rm und ’3m, das Land Irame: Ein Beitrag zur Topographie des Sudan im
Altertum. Altorientalische Forschungen 1: 7–41.
Pritchard, J. B., ed. 1955. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament. 2d ed.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana. 1950. A Study of Classic Maya Sculpture. Carnegie Institution of
Washington Publication 593.
Protzen, J.-P. 1993. Inca Architecture and Construction at Ollantaytambo. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pyburn, K. A. 1997. ‘The Archaeological Signature of Complexity in the Maya Lowlands’, in
D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 155–68.
Quilter, Jeffrey, and Gary Urton, eds. 2001. Narrative Threads: Explorations of Narrativity in
Andean Khipus. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Quirarte, Jacinto. 1977. ‘Early Art Styles of Mesoamerica and Early Classic Maya Art’, in
R. E. W. Adams, pp. 249–83.
Quirke, Stephen. 1992. Ancient Egyptian Religion. London: British Museum Press.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 1952. Structure and Function in Primitive Society: Essays and Addresses.
New York: Free Press.
1958. Method in Social Anthropology: Selected Essays. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rapoport, Amos. 1993. ‘On the Nature of Capitals and their Physical Expression’, in Capital
Cities: International Perspectives, John Taylor, J. G. Lengell´e, and Caroline Andrew, eds.,
pp. 31–67. Ottawa: Carleton University Press.
Rappaport, R. A. 1968. Pigs for the Ancestors: Ritual in the Ecology of a New Guinea People.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Rathje, W. L. 1975. ‘The Last Tango in Mayapan: A Tentative Trajectory of Production-
Distribution Systems’, in J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, pp. 409–48.
Rawson, Jessica. 1993. Ancient Chinese Ritual Bronzes: The Evidence from Tombs and Hoards
of the Shang (c. 1500–1050 bc) and Western Zhou (c. 1050–771 bc) Periods. Antiquity 67:
805–23.
1999. ‘Western Zhou Archaeology’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy, pp. 352–449.
Ray, J. D. 1993. ‘The Pharaohs and Their Court’, in Egypt: Ancient Culture, Modern Land,
Jaromir Malek, ed., pp. 68–77. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Read, Kay. 1994. Sacred Commoners: The Notion of Cosmic Powers in Mexica Rulership.
History of Religions 34: 39–69.

720
References
Redﬁeld, Robert. 1941. The Folk Culture of Yucatan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Redman, C. L. 1978. The Rise of Civilization from Early Farmers to Urban Society in the Ancient
Near East. San Francisco: Freeman.
Reeder, Greg. 1998. Musings on the Sexual Nature of the Human-Headed Ba Bird. KMT 9(3):
72–78.
Reents-Budet, Dorie. 1998. ‘Elite Maya Pottery and Artisans as Social Indicators’, in
C. L. Costin and R. P. Wright, pp. 71–89.
Reisner, G. A. 1932. A Provincial Cemetery of the Pyramid Age, Naga-ed-Dˆer. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Renfrew, Colin. 1972. The Emergence of Civilisation: The Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third
Millennium B.C. London: Methuen.
1975. ‘Trade as Action at a Distance: Questions of Integration and Communication’, in
J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, pp. 3–59.
1997. Review of Early Civilizations, by B. G. Trigger. American Journal of Archaeology 101:
164.
Renfrew, Colin, and J. F. Cherry, eds. 1986. Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-Political Change.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rice, D. S., and T. P. Culbert. 1990. ‘Historical Contexts for Population Reconstruction in the
Maya Lowlands’, in T. P. Culbert and D. S. Rice, pp. 1–36.
Richards, J. E. 1999. ‘Conceptual Landscapes in the Egyptian Nile Valley’, in W. Ashmore and
A. B. Knapp, pp. 83–100.
Richards, Janet, and Mary Van Buren, eds. 2000. Order, Legitimacy, and Wealth in Ancient
States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Riley,
C. L.,
J. C.
Kelley,
C. W.
Pennington,
and
R. L
Rands,
eds.
1971.
Man
Across the Sea: Problems of Pre-Columbian Contacts. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Ritner, R. K. 1996. ‘Egyptian Writing’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 73–87.
Roberts, Clayton. 1996. The Logic of Historical Explanation. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Robins, Gay. 1993. Women in Ancient Egypt. London: British Museum Press.
1997. The Art of Ancient Egypt. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rohrlich, Ruby. 1980. State Formation in Sumer and the Subjugation of Women. Feminist
Studies 6: 76–102.
Ronhaar, J. H. 1931. Women in Primitive Motherright Societies. The Hague: J. B. Wolters.
Rostworowski de Diez Canseco, Maria. 1960. Succession, Co¨option to Kingship, and
Royal Incest among the Inca. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 16: 417–
27.
1999. History of the Inka Realm. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rostworowski, Maria, and Craig Morris. 1999. ‘The Fourfold Domain: Inka Power and Its Social
Foundations’, in The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas, Vol. 3,
South America, Frank Salomon and S. B. Schwartz, eds., pt. 1, pp. 769–863. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Roth, A. M. 1991a. Egyptian Phyles in the Old Kingdom: The Evolution of a System of Social
Organization. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 48. Chicago: Oriental Institute of
the University of Chicago.
1991b. ‘The Organization and Functioning of the Royal Mortuary Cults of the Old Kingdom
in Egypt’, in M. Gibson and R. D. Biggs, pp. 115–21.
Roth, H. L. 1903. Great Benin: Its Customs, Art, and Horrors. Halifax, UK: F. King.
Rounds, J. 1982. ‘Dynastic Succession and the Centralization of Power in Tenochtitlan’, in
G. A. Collier, R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, pp. 63–89.

References
721
Rousseau, J´erˆome. 1990. Central Borneo: Ethnic Identity and Social Life in a Stratiﬁed Society.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
2001. Hereditary Stratiﬁcation in Middle-Range Societies. Journal of the Royal Anthropo-
logical Institute 7: 117–31.
Rowe, J. H. 1944. ‘Inca Culture at the Time of the Spanish Conquest’, in Handbook of South
American Indians, Vol. 2. The Andean Civilizations, J. H. Steward, ed., pp. 183–330.
Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 143.
1960. ‘The Origins of Creator Worship among the Incas’, in S. Diamond, pp. 408–29.
Rowlands, M. J. 1989. ‘A Question of Complexity’, in D. Miller, M. J. Rowlands, and C. Tilley,
pp. 29–40.
Ruhlen, Merritt. 1994. The Origin of Language: Tracing the Evolution of the Mother Tongue.
New York: Wiley.
Ruiz de Alarc´on, Hernando. 1984. Treatise on the Heathen Superstitions That Today Live Among
the Indians Native to This New Spain, 1629. Trans. and ed. J. R. Andrews and Ross Hassig.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Ryder, A. F. C. 1969. Benin and the Europeans, 1485–1897. London: Longmans.
1984. ‘From the Volta to Cameroon’, in General History of Africa, Vol. 4, Africa from the
Twelfth to the Sixteenth Century, D. T. Niane, ed., pp. 339–70. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Sabloff, J. A., and J. S. Henderson, eds. 1993. Lowland Maya Civilization in the Eighth Century
A.D. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
Sabloff, J. A., and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, eds. 1975. Ancient Civilization and Trade.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Sadowski, R. M. 1989. ‘A Few Remarks on the Astronomy of R. T. Zuidema’s “Quipu-Calendar”’,
in M. S. Ziolkowski and R. M. Sadowski, pp. 209–13.
Sagan, Eli. 1985. At the Dawn of Tyranny: The Origins of Individualism, Political Oppression,
and the State. New York: Knopf.
Sahag´un, Bernardino de. 1950–82 (1575–77). Florentine Codex: General History of the Things
of New Spain. 13 vols. A. J. O. Anderson and C. E. Dibble, eds. Santa Fe: School of
American Research/Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Sahlins, M. D. 1958. Social Stratiﬁcation in Polynesia. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
1968. Tribesmen. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
1972. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine.
1976. Culture and Practical Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1985. Islands of History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sahlins, M. D., and E. R. Service, eds. 1960. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Salomon, Frank. 1986. Native Lords of Quito in the Age of the Incas: The Political Economy of
North-Andean Chiefdoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1987. A North Andean Status Trader Complex under Inka Rule. Ethnohistory 34: 63–77.
ed. 1991. The Huarochir´ı Manuscript: A Testament of Ancient and Colonial Andean Religion.
Austin: University of Texas Press.
Salzman, P. C. 2000. Black Tents of Baluchistan. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Sampson, Geoffrey. 1985. Writing Systems: A Linguistic Introduction. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Sanders, W. T. 1973. ‘The Cultural Ecology of the Lowland Maya: A Reevaluation’, in T. P.
Culbert, pp. 325–65.
1974. ‘Chiefdom to State: Political Evolution at Kaminaljuy´u, Guatemala’, in Reconstructing
Complex Societies: An Archaeological Colloquium, C. B. Moore, ed., pp. 97–121. Bulletin
of the American Schools of Oriental Research suppl. 20.

722
References
1976. ‘The Agricultural History of the Basin of Mexico’, in E. R. Wolf, pp. 101–59.
Sanders, W. T., J. R. Parsons, and R. S. Santley. 1979. The Basin of Mexico: Ecological Processes
in the Evolution of a Civilization. New York: Academic Press.
Sanders, W. T., and B. J. Price. 1968. Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Civilization. New York:
Random House.
Sanders, W. T., and David Webster. 1988. The Mesoamerican Urban Tradition. American
Anthropologist 90: 521–46.
Sanderson, S. K. 1990. Social Evolutionism: A Critical History. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Santley, R. S. 1990. ‘Demographic Archaeology in the Maya Lowlands’, in T. P. Culbert and
D. S. Rice, pp. 325–43.
1991. ‘The Structure of the Aztec Transport Network’, in C. D. Trombold, pp. 198–210.
Sapir, Edward. 1921. Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York: Harcourt,
Brace.
Sauneron, Serge. 1960. The Priests of Ancient Egypt. New York: Grove.
Scarborough, V. L. 1993. ‘Water Management in the Southern Maya Lowlands: An Ac-
cretive Model for the Engineered Landscape’, in V. L. Scarborough and B. L. Isaac,
pp. 17–69.
Scarborough, V. L., and B. L. Isaac, eds. 1993. Economic Aspects of Water Management in the
Prehispanic New World. Research in Economic Anthropology suppl. 7.
Schaedel, R. P. 1978. ‘Early State of the Incas’, in H. J. M. Claessen and P. Skaln´ık, pp. 289–320.
Schele, Linda. 1984. ‘Human Sacriﬁce among the Classic Maya’, in E. H. Boone, pp. 6–48.
Schele, Linda, and David Freidel. 1990. A Forest of Kings: The Untold Story of the Ancient
Maya. New York: Morrow.
Schele, Linda, and Peter Mathews. 1991. ‘Royal Visits and Other Intersite Relationships among
the Classic Maya’, in T. P. Culbert, 1991a, pp. 226–52.
1998. The Code of Kings: The Language of Seven Sacred Maya Temples and Tombs. New
York: Scribner.
Schele, Linda, and M. E. Miller. 1986. The Blood of Kings: Dynasty and Ritual in Maya Art.
New York: Braziller.
Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. 1992. Before Writing. 2 vols. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Schrire, Carmel, ed. 1984. Past and Present in Hunter-Gatherer Studies. Orlando: Academic
Press.
Schulman, A. R. 1964. Military Rank, Title, and Organization in the Egyptian New Kingdom.
M¨unchner ¨Agyptologische Studien 6. Berlin: Hessling.
Schwartz, G. M., and S. E. Falconer, eds. 1994. Archaeological Views from the Countryside:
Village Communities in Early Complex Societies. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Seaman, Gary, and J. S. Day, eds. 1994. Ancient Traditions: Shamanism in Central Asia and the
Americas. Niwot, CO: University Press of Colorado.
Seidlmayer, S. J. 1987. ‘Wirtschaftliche und Gesellschaftliche Entwicklung im Ubergang vom
Alten zum Mittleren Reich: Ein Beitrag zur Arch¨aologie der Gr¨aberfelder der Re-
gion Qua-Matmar in der Ersten Zwischenzeit’, in Problems and Priorities in Egyptian
Archaeology, Jan Assmann, G¨unter Burkard, and Vivian Davies, eds., pp. 175–217. London:
KPI.
1996. ‘Town and State in the Early Old Kingdom: A View from Elephantine’, in Aspects of
Early Egypt, Jeffrey Spencer, ed., pp. 108–27. London: British Museum Press.
Service, E. R. 1971. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective. 2d ed.
New York: Random House.
1975. Origins of the State and Civilization: The Process of Cultural Evolution. New York:
Norton.

References
723
Shafer, B. E., ed. 1991. Religion in Ancient Egypt: Gods, Myths, and Personal Practice. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
ed. 1997a. Temples of Ancient Egypt. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
1997b. ‘Temples, Priests, and Rituals: An Overview’, in B. E. Shafer, 1997a, pp. 1–30.
Sharer, R. J. 1996. Daily Life in Maya Civilization. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Shaughnessy, E. L. 1999. ‘Western Zhou History’, in M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy, pp. 292–
351.
Shaw, Thurstan. 1978. Nigeria: Its Archaeology and Early History. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Shen Chen. 1994. Early Urbanization in the Eastern Zhou in China (770–221 b.c.): An
Archaeological View. Antiquity 68: 724–44.
Sherbondy, J. E. 1992. ‘Water Ideology in Inca Ethnogenesis’, in R. V. H. Dover, K. E. Seibold,
and J. H. McDowell, pp. 46–66.
Sidrys, Raymond. 1979. Supply and Demand among the Classic Maya. Current Anthropology
20: 594–97.
Siegel,B.J.1947.SlaveryduringtheThirdDynastyofUr.AmericanAnthropologicalAssociation
Memoir 66.
Silver, Morris. 1986. Economic Structures of the Ancient Near East. Totowa, NJ: Barnes and
Noble.
Silverblatt, Irene. 1987. Moon, Sun, and Witches: Gender Ideologies and Class in Inca and
Colonial Peru. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
1988a. Women in States. Annual Review of Anthropology 17: 427–60.
1988b. Imperial Dilemmas, the Politics of Kinship, and Inca Reconstructions of History.
Comparative Studies in Society and History 30: 83–102.
1991. ‘Interpreting Women in States: New Feminist Ethnohistories’, in Gender at the Cross-
roads of Knowledge: Feminist Anthropology in the Postmodern Era, Micaela di Leonardo,
ed., pp. 140–71. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Silverman, D. P. 1991. ‘Divinities and Deities in Ancient Egypt’, in B. E. Shafer, pp. 7–87.
1995. ‘The Nature of Egyptian Kingship’, in D. O’Connor and D. P. Silverman, pp. 49–
92.
Simpson, W. K. 1974. Polygamy in Egypt in the Middle Kingdom. Journal of Egyptian
Archaeology 60: 100–105.
Sjoberg, Gideon. 1955. The Preindustrial City. American Journal of Sociology 60: 438–45.
1960. The Preindustrial City: Past and Present. Glencoe: Free Press.
Smith, B. D. 1996. ‘Agricultural Chiefdoms of the Eastern Woodlands’, in B. G. Trigger and
W. E. Washburn, pt. 1, pp. 267–323.
Smith, J. S. 1996. ‘Japanese Writing’, in P. T. Daniels and W. Bright, pp. 209–17.
Smith, Mary. 1973. Picture Writing from Ancient Southern Mexico: Mixtec Place Signs and
Maps. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Smith, M. E. 1986. The Role of Social Stratiﬁcation in the Aztec Empire: A View from the
Provinces. American Anthropologist 88: 70–91.
1996. The Aztecs. Oxford: Blackwell.
Smith, M. E., and Cynthia Heath-Smith. 1980. Waves of Inﬂuence in Postclassic Mesoamerica?
A Critique of the Mixteca-Puebla Concept. Anthropology 4: 15–20.
Smith, P. E. L. 1976. Food Production and Its Consequences. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings.
Smith, Robert. 1969. Kingdoms of the Yoruba. London: Methuen.
1973. ‘Yoruba Warfare and Weapons’, in S. O. Biobaku, pp. 224–49.
Smith, S. T. 1995. Askut in Nubia: The Economics and Ideology of Egyptian Imperialism in the
Second Millennium B.C. London: Kegan Paul International.
Smith, W. S. 1958. The Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

724
References
Snell, Daniel. 1982. Ledgers and Prices: Early Mesopotamian Merchant Accounts. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Sokal, Alan, and Jean Bricmont. 1998. Intellectual Impostures: Postmodern Philosophers’ Abuse
of Science. London: Proﬁle Books.
Somerville, Siobhan. 1997. ‘Scientiﬁc Racism and the Invention of the Homosexual Body’, in
The Gender/Sexuality Reader: Culture, History, Political Economy, R. N. Lancaster and
Micaela di Leonardo, eds., pp. 37–52. New York: Routledge.
Sørenson, J. P. 1989. ‘Divine Access: The So-called Democratization of Egyptian Funerary
Literature as a Socio-cultural Process’, in G. Englund, pp. 109–25.
Soustelle, Jacques. 1961. The Daily Life of the Aztecs on the Eve of the Spanish Conquest. New
York: Macmillan.
Southall, A. W. 1956. Alur Society: A Study in Processes and Types of Domination. Cambridge:
Heffer.
1988. The Segmentary State in Africa and Asia. Comparative Studies in Society and History
30: 52–82.
Spalding, Karen. 1984. Huarochir´ı: An Andean Society under Inca and Spanish Rule. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Spath, C. D. 1973. The Problem of the Calpulli in Classic Nahuatlaca Social Structure. Journal
of the Steward Anthropological Society 5 (1): 25–44.
Spencer, A. J. 1993. Early Egypt: The Rise of Civilisation in the Nile Valley. London: British
Museum Press.
Spencer,
Herbert.
1873–1932.
Descriptive
Sociology,
or,
Groups
of
Sociological
Facts,
Classiﬁed
and
Arranged
by
Herbert
Spencer.
London:
Williams
and
Norgate.
1876–96. The Principles of Sociology. 3 vols. London: Williams and Norgate.
Sperber, Dan. 1985. On Anthropological Knowledge: Three Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Spriggs, Matthew, ed. 1984. Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Stein, Burton. 1980. Peasant, State, and Society in Medieval South India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Stein, G. J. 1998. Heterogeneity, Power, and Political Economy: Some Current Research Issues
in the Archaeology of Old World Complex Societies. Journal of Archaeological Research
6: 1–44.
Steinkeller, Piotr. 1981. The Renting of Fields in Early Mesopotamia and the Development of
the Concept of ‘Interest’ in Sumerian. Journal of the Economic and Social History of the
Orient 24: 113–45.
1993.
‘Early
Political
Development
in
Mesopotamia
and
the
Origins
of
the
Sargonic Empire’, in Akkad, The First World Empire: Structure, Ideology, Traditions,
M. Liverani, ed., pp. 107–29. History of the Ancient Near East Studies 5.
Steinmetz, S. R. 1930 (1900). ‘Classiﬁcation des types sociaux et catalogue des peuples’, in
Gesammelte kleinere Schriften zur Ethnologie und Soziologie von S. R. Steinmetz, Vol. 2,
pp. 96–210. Groningen: P. Noordhoff.
Stepugina, T. V. 1991. ‘The First States in China’, in I. M. Diakonoff, pp. 387–419.
Stevens, Phillips, Jr. 1978. The Stone Images of Esie, Nigeria. Ibadan: Ibadan University
Press.
Steward, J. H. 1949. Cultural Causality and Law: A Trial Formulation of the Development of
Early Civilizations. American Anthropologist 51: 1–27.
1955. Theory of Culture Change. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Stierlin, Henri. 1984. Art of the Incas and Its Origins. New York: Rizzoli.

References
725
Stone, E. C. 1987. Nippur Neighborhoods. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 44. Chicago:
Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.
1990. The Tell Abu Duwari Project, Iraq, 1987. Journal of Field Archaeology 17: 141–62.
1997. ‘City-States and Their Centers: The Mesopotamian Example’, in D. L. Nichols and
T. H. Charlton, pp. 15–26.
Stone, E. C., and Paul Zimansky. 1995. The Tapestry of Power in a Mesopotamian City. Scientiﬁc
American 272 (4): 92–97.
Storey, Rebecca. 1985. An Estimate of Mortality in a Pre-Columbian Urban Population.
American Anthropologist 87: 519–35.
Strommenger, Eva, and Max Hirmer. 1964. 5,000 Years of the Art of Mesopotamia. New York:
Abrams.
Strouhal, Eugen. 1992. Life of the Ancient Egyptians. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Strudwick, Nigel. 1985. The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom: The Highest Titles
and Their Holders. London: KPI.
Sullivan, L. E. 1985. ‘Above, Below, or Far Away: Andean Cosmology and Ethical Order’, in
Cosmogony and Ethical Order: New Studies in Comparative Ethics, R. W. Lovin and
F. E. Reynolds, eds., pp. 98–129. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sumner, W. G. 1906. Folkways. Boston: Ginn.
Swanson, G. E. 1960. The Birth of the Gods: The Origin of Primitive Beliefs. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Tainter, J. A. 1988. The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Tang, Jigen, Zhichun Jing, and George Rapp. 2000. The Largest Walled Shang City Located in
Anyang, China. Antiquity 74: 479–80.
Tanner, Adrian. 1979. Bringing Home Animals: Religious Ideology and Mode of Production of
the Mistassini Cree Hunters. Memorial University of Newfoundland, Institute of Social
and Economic Research, Social and Economic Studies 23.
Tate, C. E. 1992. Yaxchilan: The Design of a Maya Ceremonial City. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Taube, K. A. 1992. The Major Gods of Ancient Yucatan. Studies in Pre-Columbian Art and
Archaeology 32. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
Terray, Emmanuel. 1975. ‘Classes and Class Consciousness in the Abron Kingdom of Gyaman’,
in M. Bloch, pp. 85–135.
Textor, R. B., ed. 1967. A Cross-Cultural Summary. New Haven: HRAF Press.
Thompson, J. E. S. 1954. The Rise and Fall of Maya Civilization. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
1970. Maya History and Religion. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Thompson, R. F. 1976. Black Gods and Kings: Yoruba Art at UCLA. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Thorp, R. L. 1985. The Growth of Early Shang Civilization: New Data from Ritual Vessels.
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 45: 5–75.
1991. Erlitou and the Search for the Xia. Early China 16: 1–38.
Tijm, Jan. 1933. Die Stellung der Frau bei den Indianern der Vereinigten Staaten und Canada’s.
Zutphen: W. J. Thieme.
Tilley, Christopher. 1999. Metaphor and Material Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Tolstoy, Paul. 1963. Cultural Parallels between Southeast Asia and Mesoamerica in the Manu-
facture of Bark Cloth. Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, Series 2, 25:
646–62.
1966. Method in Long-Range Comparison. Acts of the 36th International Congress of
Americanists 1: 69–89.

726
References
Tourtellot, Gair. 1988. ‘Developmental Cycles of Households and Houses at Seibal’, in R. R. Wilk
and W. Ashmore, pp. 97–120.
Townsend, R. F. 1979. State and Cosmos in the Art of Tenochtitlan. Studies in Pre-Columbian
Art and Archaeology 20. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks.
1989. ‘Coronation at Tenochtitlan’, in D. Carrasco, pp. 155–88.
1992. The Aztecs. London: Thames and Hudson.
Treistman, J. M. 1972. The Prehistory of China: An Archaeological Exploration. Garden City,
NY: Doubleday.
Trigger, B. G. 1968. Beyond History: The Methods of Prehistory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
1972. ‘Determinants of Urban Growth in Pre-Industrial Societies’, in P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham,
and G. W. Dimbleby, pp. 575–99.
1976a. Nubia under the Pharaohs. London: Thames and Hudson.
1976b. Inequality and Communication in Early Civilizations. Anthropologica 18: 27–52.
1978. ‘The Inter-Societal Transfer of Institutions’, in Time and Traditions: Essays in
Archaeological Interpretation, pp. 216–28. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
1979. ‘Egypt and the Comparative Study of Early Civilizations’, in Egyptology and the Social
Sciences: Five Studies, K. R. Weeks, ed., pp. 23–56. Cairo: American University in Cairo
Press.
1985a. ‘The Evolution of Pre-Industrial Cities: A Multilinear Perspective’, in M´elanges offerts
`a Jean Vercoutter, Francis Geus and Florence Thill, eds., pp. 343–53. Paris: Editions
Recherche sur les Civilisations.
1985b. ‘Generalized Coercion and Inequality: The Basis of State Power in the Early
Civilizations’, in Development and Decline: The Evolution of Sociopolitical Organization,
H. J. Claessen, Pieter van de Velde, and M. E. Smith, eds., pp. 46–61. South Hadley, MA:
Bergin and Garvey.
1989. A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1990a. Monumental Architecture: A Thermodynamic Explanation of Symbolic Behaviour.
World Archaeology 22: 119–32.
1990b. ‘Maintaining Economic Equality in Opposition to Complexity: An Iroquoian Case
Study’, in S. Upham, pp. 119–45.
1990c. The Huron: Farmers of the North. 2d ed. Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
1993. Early Civilizations: Ancient Egypt in Context. Cairo: American University in Cairo
Press.
1998a. Sociocultural Evolution: Calculation and Contingency. Oxford: Blackwell.
1998b. Writing Systems: A Case Study in Cultural Evolution. Norwegian Archaeological
Review 31: 39–62.
1998c. Archaeology and Epistemology: Dialoguing across the Darwinian Chasm. American
Journal of Archaeology 102: 1–34.
Trigger, B. G., B. J. Kemp, D. O’Connor, and A. B. Lloyd. 1983. Ancient Egypt: A Social History.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trigger B. G., and W. E. Washburn, eds. 1996. The Cambridge History of the Native Peo-
ples of the Americas. Vol. 1. North America. 2 parts. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Trombold, C. D., ed. 1991. Ancient Road Networks and Settlement Hierarchies in the New
World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Troy, Lana. 1986. Patterns of Queenship in Ancient Egyptian Myth and History. Uppsala Studies
in Ancient Mediterranean and Near Eastern Civilizations 14.
1989. ‘Have a Nice Day! Some Reﬂections on the Calendars of Good and Bad Days’, in
G. Englund, 1989a, pp. 127–47.

References
727
Trubitt, M. B. D. 2000. Mound Building and Prestige Goods Exchange: Changing Strategies in
the Cahokia Chiefdom. American Antiquity 65: 669–90.
Turner, B. L., II. 1990. ‘Population Reconstruction of the Central Maya Lowlands: 1000 b.c. to
a.d. 1500’, in T. P. Culbert and D. S. Rice, pp. 301–24.
Turner, Victor. 1967. The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
1975. Revelation and Divination in Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Tylor, E. B. 1871. Primitive Culture. London: John Murray.
1889. On a Method of Investigating the Development of Institutions; Applied to Laws of
MarriageandDescent.JournaloftheAnthropologicalInstituteofGreatBritainandIreland
18: 245–72.
Tyumenev, A. I. 1969. ‘The Working Personnel on the Estate of the Temple of dBA- ´U in Lagaˇs
during the Period of Lugalanda and Urukagina (25th–24th cent. b.c.)’, in I. M. Diakonoff,
1969a, pp. 88–126.
Ucko, P. J., Ruth Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby, eds. 1972. Man, Settlement, and Urbanism.
London: Duckworth.
Unger, J. M., and John DeFrancis. 1995. ‘Logographic and Semasiographic Writing Systems:
A Critique of Sampson’s Classiﬁcation’, in Scripts and Literacy: Reading and Learning to
Read Alphabets, Syllabaries, and Characters, I. Taylor and D. R. Olsen, eds., pp. 45–58.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Upham, Steadman, ed. 1990. The Evolution of Political Systems: Sociopolitics in Small-Scale
Sedentary Societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Uphill, E. P. 1988. Egyptian Towns and Cities. Aylesbury: Shire Publications.
Urton, Gary. 1981. At the Crossroads of the Earth and the Sky: An Andean Cosmology. Austin:
University of Texas Press.
1990. The History of a Myth: Pacariqtambo and the Origin of the Inkas. Austin: University
of Texas Press.
1998. From Knots to Narratives: Reconstructing the Art of Historical Record Keep-
ing in the Andes from Spanish Transcriptions of Inka Khipus. Ethnohistory 45: 409–
38.
Valeri, Valerio. 1985. Kingship and Sacriﬁce: Ritual and Society in Ancient Hawaii. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
van Buren, Mary. 1996. Rethinking the Vertical Archipelago: Ethnicity, Exchange, and History
in the South Central Andes. American Anthropologist 98: 338–51.
van de Guchte, Maarten. 1999. ‘The Inca Cognition of Landscape: Archaeology, Ethno-
history, and the Aesthetic of Alterity’, in W. Ashmore and A. B. Knapp, pp. 149–
68.
Van De Mieroop, Marc. 1989. ‘Women in the Economy of Sumer’, in B. S. Lesko, pp. 53–66.
1999. The Ancient Mesopotamian City. 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van der Bij, T. S. 1929. Ontstaan en Eerste Ontwikkeling van de Oorlog. Groningen: Wolters.
van der Leeuw, S. E. 1981. ‘Information Flows, Flow Structures, and the Explanation of Change
in Human Institutions’, in Archaeological Approaches to the Study of Complexity, S. E.
van der Leeuw, ed., pp. 229–329. Cingula 6. Amsterdam: Albert Egges van Giffen Instituut
voor Prae- und Protohistorie.
Vandermeersch, L´eon. 1977. Wangdao, ou La voie royale: Recherches sur l’esprit des institutions
de la Chine archa¨ıque. Vol. 1. Structures cultuelles et structures familiales. Publications de
l’Ecole fran¸caise d’Extrˆeme-Orient 113.
1980. Wangdao, ou La voie royale: Recherches sur l’esprit des institutions de la Chine ar-
cha¨ıque. Vol. 2. Structures politiques, les rites. Publications de l’Ecole fran¸caise d’Extrˆeme-
Orient 113 (2).

728
References
vanZantwijk,Rudolph.1985.TheAztecArrangement:TheSocialHistoryofPre-SpanishMexico.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
1994. ‘Factional Divisions within the Aztec (Colhua) Royal Family’, in E. M. Brumﬁel and
J. W. Fox, pp. 103–10.
Veblen, Thorstein. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study in the Evolution
of Institutions. New York: Macmillan.
Vernant, Jean-Pierre. 1995. ‘Introduction’, in The Greeks, J.-P. Vernant, ed., pp. 1–21. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Vila, Andr´e. 1970. L’armement de la forteresse de Mirgissa-Iken. Revue d’Egyptologie 22: 171–
99.
Vining, Rutledge. 1955. A Description of Certain Spatial Aspects of an Economic System.
Economic Development and Cultural Change 3: 147–95.
von Dassow, Eva. 1994. The Egyptian Book of the Dead: The Book of Going Forth by Day. San
Francisco: Chronicle Books.
von Gernet, A. D. 1992. ‘New Directions in the Construction of Prehistoric Amerindian
Belief Systems’, in Ancient Images, Ancient Thought: The Archaeology of Ideology,
A. S. Goldsmith, Sandra Garvie, David Selin, and Jeannette Smith, eds., pp. 133–40.
Calgary: University of Calgary Archaeological Association.
1993. The Construction of Prehistoric Ideation: Exploring the Universality-Idiosyncrasy Con-
tinuum. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3: 67–81.
von Hagen, Adriana, and Craig Morris. 1998. The Cities of the Ancient Andes. London: Thames
and Hudson.
von Hagen, V. W., ed. 1959. The Incas of Pedro de Cieza de Le´on. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Wachtel, Nathan. 1982. ‘The Mitimas of the Cochabamba Valley: The Colonization Pol-
icy of Huayna Capac’, in G. A. Collier, R. I. Rosaldo, and J. D. Wirth, pp. 199–
235.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974. The Modern World-System. Vol. 1. Capitalist Agriculture and the
Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century. New York: Academic
Press.
Walters, S. D. 1970. Water for Larsa: An Old Babylonian Archive Dealing with Irrigation. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Wang Ming-Ke. 1999. Western Zhou Remembering and Forgetting. Journal of East Asian
Archaeology 1: 231–50.
Ward, W. A. 1989. ‘Non-Royal Women and Their Occupations in the Middle Kingdom’, in B. S.
Lesko, pp. 33–43.
Warrick, G. A. 1990. A Population History of the Huron-Petun, a.d. 900–1650. Ph.D. diss.,
McGill University.
Watanabe, J. M. 1983. In the World of the Sun: A Cognitive Model of Mayan Cosmology. Man
18: 710–28.
Watson, J. L., ed. 1980a. Asian and African Systems of Slavery. Oxford: Blackwell.
1980b. ‘Slavery as an Institution: Open and Closed Systems’, in J. L. Watson, 1980a, pp. 2–
15.
Watson, William. 1979. ‘The City in Ancient China’, in P. R. S. Moorey, pp. 54–77.
Watterson, Barbara. 1991. Women in Ancient Egypt. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Weber, Max. 1949. Max Weber on the Methodology of the Social Sciences. Trans. E. A. Shils and
H. A. Finch. Glencoe: Free Press.
1968. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology, Guenther Roth and Claus
Wittich, eds. New York: Bedminster Press.
1976 (1896). The Agrarian Sociology of Ancient Civilizations. London: NLB.

References
729
Webster, David. 1993. ‘The Study of Maya Warfare: What It Tells Us about the Maya and What
It Tells Us about Maya Archaeology’, in J. A. Sabloff and J. S. Henderson, pp. 415–44.
1997. ‘City-States of the Maya’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 135–54.
1998. ‘Warfare and Status Rivalry: Lowland Maya and Polynesian Comparisons’, in G. M.
Feinman and J. Marcus, pp. 311–51.
Wegner, Josef. 2000. A Middle Kingdom Town at South Abydos. Egyptian Archaeology 17:
8–10.
Wenig, Steffen. 1969. The Women in Egyptian Art. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wenke, R. J. 1997. ‘City-States, Nation-States, and Territorial States: The Problem of Egypt’,
in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 27–49.
Westermann, W. L. 1955. The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity. Memoirs of the
American Philosophical Society 40.
Wheatley, Paul. 1971. The Pivot of the Four Quarters: A Preliminary Enquiry into the Origins
and Character of the Ancient Chinese City. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Whitaker, Ian. 1976. Regal Succession among the D´alriata. Ethnohistory 23: 343–63.
White, Elliott. 1993. Genes, Brains, and Politics: Self-Selection and Social Life. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
White, L. A. 1945. ‘Diffusion vs. Evolution’: An Anti-Evolutionist Fallacy. American Anthro-
pologist 47: 339–56.
1949. The Science of Culture: A Study of Man and Civilization. New York: Grove.
1959. The Evolution of Culture: The Development of Civilization to the Fall of Rome. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Whorf, B. L. 1956. Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf,
J. B. Carroll, ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wilk, R. R. 1988. ‘Maya Household Organization: Evidence and Analogies’, in R. R. Wilk and
W. Ashmore, pp. 135–51.
Wilk, R. R., and Wendy Ashmore, eds. 1988. Household and Community in the Mesoamerican
Past. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Wilkinson, R. H. 2000. The Complete Temples of Ancient Egypt. London: Thames and Hudson.
Wilkinson, T. A. H. 1996. State Formation in Egypt: Chronology and Society. British Archaeo-
logical Reports International Series 651.
1999. Early Dynastic Egypt. London: Routledge.
Wilks, Ivor. 1975. Asante in the Nineteenth Century: The Structure and Evolution of a Political
Order. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Willett, Frank. 1967. Ife in the History of West African Sculpture. London: Thames and Hudson.
1973. ‘Archaeology’, in S. O. Biobaku, pp. 111–39.
Willey, G. R. 1955. ‘The Interrelated Rise of the Native Cultures of Middle and South America’,
in New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture History, B. J. Meggers and Clifford
Evans, eds., pp. 28–45. Washington, DC: Anthropological Society of Washington.
1985. Ancient Chinese-New World and Near Eastern Ideological Traditions: Some Observa-
tions. Symbols, Spring, pp. 14–17, 22–23.
Willey, G. R., and Philip Phillips. 1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Williams, R. J. 1964. ‘Literature as a Medium of Political Propaganda in Ancient Egypt’, in
The Seed of Wisdom: Essays in Honour of T. J. Meek, W. S. McCullough, ed., pp. 14–30.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
1972. Scribal Training in Ancient Egypt. Journal of the American Oriental Society 92: 214–21.
Wilson, D. J. 1997. ‘Early State Formation on the North Coast of Peru: A Critique of the
City-State Model’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 229–44.
Wilson, E. O. 1978. On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

730
References
Wilson, J. A. 1960. ‘Egypt through the New Kingdom: Civilization without Cities’, in
C. H. Kraeling and R. McC. Adams, pp. 124–64.
Wilson, P. J. 1988. The Domestication of the Human Species. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Wittfogel,
K. A.
1938.
Die
Theorie
der
orientalischen
Gesellschaft.
Zeitschrift
f¨ur
Sozialforschung 7: 90–122.
1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study in Total Power. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Wolf, E. R., ed. 1976. The Valley of Mexico: Studies in Pre-Hispanic Ecology and Society.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Wright, H. T. 1998. ‘Uruk States in Southwestern Iran’, in G. M. Feinman and J. Marcus,
pp. 173–97.
Wright, M. R. 1995. Cosmology in Antiquity. London: Routledge.
Wright, R. P., ed. 1996a. Gender and Archaeology. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
1996b. ‘Technology, Gender, and Class: Worlds of Difference in Ur III Mesopotamia’, in
R. P. Wright, 1996a, pp. 79–110.
1998. ‘Crafting Social Identity in Ur III Southern Mesopotamia’, in C. L. Costin and
R. P. Wright, pp. 57–69.
Wu Hung. 1988. From Temple to Tomb: Ancient Chinese Art and Religion in Transition. Early
China 13: 78–115.
Yan Wenming. 1999. Neolithic Settlements in China: Latest Finds and Research. Journal of
East Asian Archaeology 1: 131–47.
Yang Hsi-chang. 1986. ‘The Shang Dynasty Cemetery System’, in K.-C. Chang, 1986b, pp. 49–
63.
Yates, R. D. S. 1997. ‘The City-State in Ancient China’, in D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton,
pp. 71–90.
Yoffee, Norman. 1977. The Economic Role of the Crown in the Old Babylonian Period. Malibu:
Undena.
1988. Aspects of Mesopotamian Land Sales. American Anthropologist 90: 119–30.
1991.‘MayaEliteInteraction:ThroughaGlassSideways’,inT.P.Culbert,1991a,pp.285–310.
1993. ‘Too Many Chiefs? (or, Safe Texts for the ’90s)’, in Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the
Agenda? Norman Yoffee and Andrew Sherratt, eds., pp. 60–78. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
1995. Political Economy in Early Mesopotamian States. Annual Review of Anthropology 24:
281–311.
1997. ‘The Obvious and the Chimerical: City-States in Archaeological Perspective’, in D. L.
Nichols and T. H. Charlton, pp. 255–63.
Zagarell, Allen. 1986. Trade, Women, Class, and Society in Ancient Western Asia. Current
Anthropology 27: 415–30.
Zeder, M. A. 1991. Feeding Cities: Specialized Animal Economy in the Ancient Near East.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Zimmerer, K. S. 1993. Agricultural Biodiversity and Peasant Rights to Subsistence in the Central
Andes during Inca Rule. Journal of Historical Geography 19: 15–32.
Ziolkowski, M. S., and R. M. Sadowski, eds. 1989a. Time and Calendars in the Inca Empire.
British Archaeological Reports International Series 479.
1989b. ‘The Reconstruction of the Metropolitan Calendar of the Incas in the Period 1500–
1572 ad’, in M. S. Ziolkowski and R. M. Sadowski, 1989a, pp. 167–96.
Zipf, G. K. 1949. Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-
Wesley.

References
731
Zou Heng. 1999. The Yanshi Shang City: A Secondary Capital of the Early Shang. Journal of
East Asian Archaeology 1: 195–205.
Zuidema, R. T. 1964. The Ceque System of Cuzco: The Social Organization of the Capital of
the Inca. Leiden: Brill.
1977. ‘The Inka Kinship System: A New Theoretical View’, in Andean Kinship and Marriage,
Ralph Bolton and Enrique Mayer, eds., pp. 240–81. American Anthropological Association
Special Publication 7.
1990. Inca Civilization in Cuzco. Austin: University of Texas Press.
1992. ‘Inca Cosmos in Andean Context: From the Perspective of the Capac Raymi Camay
Quilla Feast Celebrating the December Solstice in Cuzco’, in R. V. H. Dover, K. E. Seibold,
and J. H. McDowell, pp. 17–45.

Index
Abancay, 325
Abiodun, 217
Abitbol, Michel, 267
abortions, 310–11
Abu Sir, 579
Abydos, 88, 139, 514, 590
Acamapichtli, 150
acquisitiveness, 8–14, 670, 678–9
Adams, R. E. W., 98–9
Adams, Robert McC., 26, 36, 59–60, 293, 364,
410
administration, government, 47–8, 665–6
bureaucratic, 106–7, 209–16, 218–20,
270
changing patterns, 216–19
in city-states, 197–207, 219, 496
delegational, 196, 207–9, 269
feudal, 15
governors, 107, 114, 116–17, 208, 212–13,
214–15, 223, 253, 255
hierarchies in, 196–7
ofﬁcials, 44–5, 149, 154–5, 199, 201–2, 204–6,
210, 212–13, 215–17, 229, 245, 253–4, 320,
330, 348, 379, 618
in territorial states, 149–50, 207–16, 219–20
Ado-Ekiti, 286
Afanasieva, V. K., 555–6
Afghanistan, 339
Africa. See also Benin; hunter-gatherers; Yoruba;
Zulu
Central, 15–16
South, 94
sub-Saharan, 28, 51
West, 15, 43
age-grades, 198–9
agriculture. See also chinampas; domestic animals;
farms; food production; food storage;
gardens; terraces
circumscription of arable land, 283–4
crops and plants, 37, 279, 285, 288, 290, 294,
299, 301–2, 304
division of labour, 282–3
fallowing, 286, 288, 292, 295, 299, 301, 306, 396
famine, famine relief, 299, 306–7, 387
as heritage from earlier cultures, 405
implements, 279–80, 308–9, 340
intensiﬁcation of, 283–4, 396–9
investment in land, 283–4
irrigation and, 288, 289–90, 293, 295–6, 299,
304, 307, 313, 381, 395–7
production, 282, 304, 395
regimes, 284–307
surpluses, 47, 313–14, 395, 404–6
swidden, 285, 301, 304
variations in, 396
ahaw (Maya noble), 145
Ahuitzotl, 558, 561, 597
ajele (Yoruba royal agents), 116
Akhenaton, 476
Akhetaton, 134–6, 476, 492
akitum. See New Year festival
Alaﬁn of Oyo, 72
alajapa (Yoruba trader), 347. See also trade; traders
Alaska, 18
Alcoman, 346
Aleketu of Ketu, 72
Alexandria, 294
altars, earth (Chinese), 422, 468, 488
altepetl, huealtepetl (Nahuatl terms for city-state),
100
733

734
Index
Alur Society (Southall), 207–8
Amerindians, 17, 38, 146
Amon, 514
amulets, 516, 617, 625, 648
An, 419, 435, 439, 458–9, 464
anachronisms, 35–6
Anatolia, 339
ancestors, as gods, 418, 421–2, 424–6. See also
sacriﬁce
power of, 524, 527, 530, 532, 534, 537
Andes
Central, 58, 180, 297–300
region, 106
animals, domestic, 123, 254, 257, 279, 281, 282,
286, 288, 292–3, 295–7, 299–300, 303, 306
anthropology, 653, 680
Boasian, 10, 22, 654–5
comparative, 19–23
cultural, 7–9, 22–3
evolutionary, 186, 659, 674, 675
physical, 67
social, 21–3, 30, 67, 659
structural, 61
western civilization and, 4
anthropomorphization, 412–13, 640
Anubis, 437
Anyang, 108–9, 137–9, 138f, 254, 372, 506, 579
Apis, 428
Apsu, 435, 458, 464
aqllakuna. See chosen women
archaeology, 3, 18, 31–4, 338
as source of data, 31–3
Archaeology of City-States, The (Nichols &
Charlton), 26–7
Archaic States (Feinman & Marcus), 27
architecture, monumental, 43–4, 582–3, 658
energy expended on, 567–8, 581–2
engineering knowledge, 570–1
functional categories, 580–1
kinds of structures, 564–5, 571–6, 574f–575f,
577–80, 583–9
materials used in, 566–8
public access to, 566
styles, 37, 568–70
symbolic role of, 121, 564, 576–7, 639
archoses, 21
art, elite, 106, 552f, 658. See also sculpture
Aztec development of, 550
commoner and, 543, 551–3
Egypt’s development of, 93–4, 550–1
materials used in, 553–5, 564
Mesopotamia’s development of, 94
Postclassic Maya, 51
production of, 543–4, 556–7
quality of, 562–4
royal patronage of, 365
rulers and deities as themes in, 555–62, 560f,
564
shamanism and, 556
shared iconographic motifs in, 38
status of, 545
stylistic diversity, 542, 545–51, 546f, 547f, 563,
582
stylistic unity, 551
traditions, 550
Asante kingdom, 75, 187
ase (Yoruba divine power), 416
Asia
East, 50, 539
Northeast, 20
South, 34, 92
Asiatic society, mode of production, 51, 377
Assur, 35
Assyrian Empire, 48–51, 85
Assyriologists, 329
Aswan, 92–3, 293
Atawalpa, 252
Atlas of World Cultures (Murdock), 18
atlatl, 244
Atum, 86, 434, 460, 464
Australia, 19
Aveni, Anthony, 610
axial era, 411–12. See also nature
axis mundi, 445–6, 449, 455, 645
Ayelala, 421
ayllu, 148, 155–6, 180–1, 317, 319, 324–5, 378–9,
418, 424, 432, 503, 515, 533–4. See also
panaqa
Azcatpotzalco, 323, 340, 365, 550
Aztalan, 469
Aztec, 15–16. See also calmecacs; telpochcalli;
Valley of Mexico
art, artists, 544, 550, 553, 558–9, 561
city-state, 97, 114
cosmogony and, 61, 457
courts and tribunals, 226, 230
craftworkers, 365
deities and, 414–15, 419–20, 474
divination, 622
festivals, 509–10

Index
735
kin and gender relations of, 178–80
kingship, 37, 71–3, 75–8, 83–4, 204–5, 217, 256,
573
land ownership, 322–3
laws, 61–2, 223, 226, 231, 235–7
marriages, 178–9
mestizo descendants, 56–7
military orders, 256
military, warfare and, 240–2, 243–4, 256–7
mobility of, 161–2
nobility, 150–1
ofﬁcials, 203–5, 495–6
popular images of, 60
schools, 608–9
taxes and corv´ees, 382–3, 387
trade and merchants, 179, 349–50
as transitional state, 26
women, 178–80, 189–90
written records of, 55–7
b3 (Egyptian soul concept), 535–7
babalawo. See priests
Babylon, 118
Bacon, Francis, 9
Bagley, Robert, 372
Baines, John, 28, 44, 444, 545
bale (Yoruba family or community head), 116, 348
Barnes, Gina, 372
barter, 353–4
basins (agricultural), 295, 296f
Belize, 300–2
Benin, 28. See also Africa, West; Yoruba
art, 177, 549–50, 561, 563
city, 100, 129, 200
city-state of, 94, 96, 100, 200
clothing, 144
councils, 200–1
craftworkers, 366–7, 543, 549–50
kingship, 77–82, 86, 88–90, 101, 153, 200, 217,
261, 348, 384–5, 479
religious beliefs, 453, 479, 501, 523, 525
social organization, 153
soldiers, 259
taxes, 384–7
Bes, 433
Binford, Lewis, 18–19, 20
biological evolution, 6, 67, 687
birth rates, 310–11
Bo, 108
bo (Chinese life force), 150, 215
Boas, Franz, 6, 10, 274, 680
bodyguards. See guards
Bolivia, 252, 325, 339
Bonampak, 553
bonded labourers, 155, 157, 159–60
Book of the Dead, 191, 621
borders, frontiers, 47, 94, 109, 112, 125, 216
Borneo, 46
Boserup, Ester, 676
Bott´ero, Jean, 232
Boyd, Robert, 12, 660
Bradbury, Richard, 286–7, 487
brain, human, 678, 680–2
brass, 338
Bricmont, Jean, 454
Britain, 16
British Columbia, 46, 543
bronze working, 108, 110, 112, 280–1, 339–41,
371–2, 544, 547f, 549–50, 551–2, 554, 558,
562–3, 610
Brown, Donald E., 6
Brumﬁel, Elizabeth, 56, 365
Buddhism, 29, 50
Buganda, 47, 94
burial(s). See also tombs
beliefs associated with, 454
within communities, 123, 523–4
rituals of kingship, 76, 81, 88–9, 101, 573–6
Butzer, K. W., 297
Byblos, 351
Cairo, 120
Calakmul, 98, 131, 248, 303, 531, 568
calendrics, 83, 98, 306, 423, 450, 456–7, 496, 510,
527, 610–16
calmecacs, 244, 345, 364–5, 608, 617
calpolli, 129, 151–6, 203–4, 217, 241–3, 382, 387,
418, 420, 452
craft specialization and, 364–5
as landholding groups, 315–17
religion of, 418, 420, 493, 495, 517
Camac Pacha, 461, 533
Cambodia, 25, 576
cameloids, 38
Canaan, 253, 312, 351, 376, 389
canals, 123, 127, 290, 295, 299, 304
Ca˜naris, 252
cannibalism, 387
Cantares Mexicanos, 57
capital punishment, 196, 221, 223–4, 227, 230, 236

736
Index
Caracol, 98, 131, 302
caravans, 347, 351
caravanserais, 356
Carneiro, Robert, 19, 398
Carrasco, David, 469
Carrasco, Peter, 322
caste, 34, 144
castration, 158
cattle, 281, 292, 295, 331, 351
causality, understanding of, 413, 624
caves, symbolism of, 54, 448, 449
cedar, 351
celibacy, 178
ceramic vessels, 54, 107, 363, 365–8, 370–1, 373,
551, 554–5
ceremonial centres, 120
Chak, 83
Chalco Lake, 306, 323
Chan-Bahlum, 568
Chang, Kwang-chih, 168, 506, 556
Chao, Lin, 160
Chapultepec, 544, 558
chariotry, 38, 109, 254–5, 257, 262, 340, 373,
481
Charlton, Thomas, 26–7
Chazan, Naomi, 267
Chengzhou, 255
Cherry, John, 101
Chichen Itza, 51
chiefdoms, 26, 44, 93, 250, 256, 580
of China, 107
of Egypt, 104
of Peru, 106–7, 446
Shang as, 556
territorial states as, 104
Childe, V. Gordon, 12–13, 23–6, 36, 279–80, 362,
624, 660
early city, criteria of, 43–4
Egypt and Mesopotamia contrasted by, 92–3
knowledge in early civilizations, 624
children, 142, 310–11, 668
Chile, 107, 339, 356
Chimu kingdom, Chimor, 106–7, 370
China
beliefs about individuals, 532–3
Eastern Zhou period, 169
Erlitou phase of, 107–8
Han Dynasty, 48–51, 461, 633–4
Lungshanoid cultures of, 107
North Chinese civilization, 38
scripts and writings of, 43
understanding of natural, social, supernatural
realms, 49–50
Zhou Dynasty of, 88
China, Shang, 28
administration of, 149–50, 214–16, 254
agricultural regimes of, 287–9
architecture, 566, 570, 579–80
art, 550–1, 556, 562
calendrics, 612
capitals of, 108
as chiefdom or prestate society, 44, 107
clans of, 109–10, 149–50, 168, 215
classes of, 150, 157, 268
cosmological beliefs of, 449–50
craft production in, 137, 371–3
deities, 413–14, 416, 422–3, 431, 480–1
divination, 623
Erligang period of, 108
expansion of, 398
festivals, 514
kin and gender relations in, 167–9
kingship of, 72–89, 108–9, 133, 488–9
labourers of, 160, 326
land ownership in, 319, 325–6
legal system of, 225, 227, 230, 233
marriages in, 168–9
metallurgists, 108, 340, 371–2, 547, 549, 551,
610
military, warfare and, 169, 241–2, 249, 254–6,
262
nobility, 149–50
populations of, 289
priests, 505–7
provinces, 214, 255
settlement patterns of, 54
taxes, corv´ees, and rents in, 378, 386
territorial states of, 108–10
titles, 150, 215–16, 254
traders, 353
as transitional state, 26
urban centres of, 108, 137–40, 138f
values, 630
women in, 168–9, 188
written records of, 43, 55, 58, 109, 587–8,
593–4, 600–1
China, Western Zhou
art, 372, 556, 582
capitals of, 110
clans of, 168, 223–4
clothing in, 144
government, 169, 215, 466

Index
737
high god, 431
kings, 109
land ownership, 326
legal system in, 227–8, 233, 235, 238
metallurgy, 372
military, warfare, and, 249, 254, 255–6
periods in, 28, 109–10
religious beliefs, 468, 485
roads, 357
settlement patterns for, 54
urban centres of, 140
values, 629–30
Warring States period of, 109, 256
writing, 110, 593
written records of, 55, 593, 594, 597
chinampas, 306, 308, 309, 313, 317, 323, 465
Cholan, 101, 584
Cholula, 365, 553
chosen women (Inka), 159, 181–2, 188, 359, 370,
380, 503, 505, 577, 607
Christianity, 29, 35, 50, 57, 410, 414, 436, 473,
669
Chu, 110
church-state rivalry, 495, 507–8, 634
Cieza de L´eon, Pedro, 283
cihuacoatl (Aztec ofﬁcial), 71, 77, 204, 226
Cihuacoatl (deity), 527
cities. See urban centres
city-states. See also architecture
adjacent, 101–2
boundaries and sizes of, 94, 95f, 100, 113–14
buildings in, 131
capitals of, 99–100, 123–31
classes, 146, 638
communities in, 121–2
deﬁnition of, 92–4
development of, 267–9
differences from territorial states, 110–13, 141,
165–6, 189, 219–20, 262–3, 266–70, 272, 308,
336, 354–5, 357–8, 368–9, 373–4, 395, 400,
401, 403–4, 465–7, 539–40, 562–4, 576–7,
581–2, 609–10, 620, 632, 638–9, 647, 665–7,
673
in Greece, 142–3, 197
hegemonic patterns of, 93–4
in Late Aztec civilization, 29
in later preindustrialized civilizations, 48–51
laws in, 223
of Maya, 57, 97–9
populations of, 100, 124
of southern Mesopotamia, 23
systems, 113–14
trade among, 342–50
tributary, 114–15
in Valley of Mexico, 97
of Yoruba, 57–8, 94–7
civilizations. See also early civilizations
Chinese, 20–1, 24–5
Indus Valley, 33–6, 73
Korean, 20–1
later preindustrial, 48–51
Mexican, 20–1, 24
Peruvian, 20–1, 24
pre-Mauryan Gangetic, 34
presence of writing in, 43–6
primary, 29
secondary, 25, 29, 48
of South Asia, 34
‘without cities’, 44, 120
Claessen, Henri, 27
clans. See also Zi
Chinese, 109, 149–50, 168, 215, 422
Yoruba, 80, 174
class(es). See also commoners; slaves; upper
classes
clothing and goods worn by, 143–4
deﬁnition of, 45–6
endogamy, 47, 162
hierarchies, 144–6, 165–6, 264–5, 541,
664–5
perception of, 64–5, 144–6
ruling, 16, 43–8, 268–9
classes, upper, 48, 104–7. See also specialized
knowledge
composition of, 111, 147–51
in early civilizations, 147–54, 181, 215, 264–5,
267–9
laws and, 233–8
lifestyles of, 147, 584–5, 667–8
marriages of, 163–4, 265
supernatural origin of, 145
in territorial states, 112–13
Classic Period (Maya), 98, 206
Clendinnen, Inga, 415, 510
Clifford, James, 7
climates, 279
cloisters
Mesopotamia, 172, 188
Peru, 159, 188
cloth. See also qumpi
bark, 38, 54–5
Peruvian, 111, 476

738
Index
cloth. (cont.)
production of, 359–62, 370, 381
ritual signiﬁcance of, 360, 476
clothing, 143–4, 288
Coatepec Hill, 468
Coba, 131
Cobo, Bernab´e, 107, 504, 630
Cochabamba Valley, 252, 324–5
Coe, Michael, 576
coercion, 47, 309, 666–8
Cofﬁn Texts, 538, 621
cognition, as source of uniformity in human
behaviour, 274, 601, 614–15, 624, 637,
639–44, 648–9, 672–3, 680–3
Cohen, Mark, 676
coins, 48–9
Collawayna people, 618
Collcampata, 512
colour symbolism, 447–8, 468
commoners, 46
Anglo-Saxon, 16
ranks of, 145, 152, 154–7, 160
comparative and cross-cultural approaches,
15–16, 62–5
American archaeologists and, 18–19
beliefs, values and, 44
challenges to, 19–23
craft production and, 359
cross-cultural regularities, 655, 661–74,
687–8
early civilization studies and, 23–8
emic approach and, 62–5
features of cross-cultural studies, 18–19
history of, 16, 19
methodology of current study, 28–39, 53–67
studies of kinship, 187
sustained application of, 17
competition, 183, 203, 212, 267, 507–8, 582,
628–9, 632, 634, 678
concubines, 161–2, 172–3, 181–2, 362, 380
confessions, religious, 504–5, 529
conscripts, 247–9
conspicuous consumption, 541, 669
copper, 280–1, 338–41. See also bronze
alloys, 280–1, 338–41
Coquet, Mich`ele, 563
core principles (Hallpike), 633–4, 658
corporal punishment of children, 668
corv´ee, 47–8, 87–8, 123, 139–40, 191, 233, 237,
245–6, 251, 504
exemption from, 262, 502
reciprocation for, 379–80, 387–8
cosmic order, 221, 416–17, 436, 447, 459–60,
462–6, 474–5, 486, 627, 634
cosmic tree
China, 449–50
Maya, 423, 448, 468, 531, 572
cosmogony, 641
creation myths of, 456–71, 645–6
ecological and political implications, 465–7
cosmograms, 467–70
cosmology, 644–5
explanation of these concepts, 454–6, 471
structure, of universe, 38, 61, 411–12, 444–54,
470–1, 644–6, 672
study of early beliefs about, 444–7
Costin, C. L., 23
courts. See laws
Coyoacan, 365
Coyolxauhqui, 437
craft, craftworkers, 44–5, 663–4. See also cloth;
metallurgy
associations, 365–6
elite craftworkers, 358, 364–73, 393, 403–4, 544
factors shaping development of, 405
full-time craftworkers, 135, 358, 363–4, 373–4,
403–4, 703, 770
gender correlation, 359
instruction, 359
market orientation of, 368
part-time craftworkers, 358, 364, 367–8, 373,
404
production, 358–9, 368–73
royal patronage of, 365–7, 369, 371
specialization, 103, 126, 341, 364–8, 401–2
workers, 43, 103, 126, 137, 155, 358–69
workshops, 259, 361–3, 368–70, 403, 544
Cree, 491
Creel, H. G., 238
crimes. See laws
Crone, Patricia, 45–6
Cross-Cultural Survey. See Human Relations Area
Files
Crow, cousin terminology, 180
cuicacalli (Aztec school), 243, 497
Cuicuilco, 97
Culhuacan, 150, 550
cults, role of, 449–501, 486, 514. See also festivals;
sacriﬁce
“Cultural Causality and Law” (Steward), 26

Index
739
cultural evolution, 27, 40–3, 117–18, 375–6, 636,
674. See also neoevolutionism
multilinear, 24
unilinear, 19–21, 37
cultural idiosyncracies, 542, 620, 653, 656–9, 674
cultural selection, 42
cultural traditions, 582–3, 632–9, 653–4, 659–61,
673, 684, 686–7
cultures, psychological consistency of, 654
currencies, 48–9, 353–4
money, metal coins as, 48–9
Cusipata, 136, 353, 469
Cuzco, 86, 132, 181–2, 212–13, 325, 352–3, 357,
370–1, 432, 480, 493, 504, 512–13, 577, 614.
See also New Cuzcos
Central, 135f, 136–7, 577
Lower and Upper, 136
symbolism of, 451, 469
Valley, 106, 136–7, 512–13, 577
Dahomey, 393, 595
Dallos, Csilla, 188
damgar (Mesopotamian merchants’ association),
342. See also trade, traders
Dawenko culture, 593
Dayi, 506
debts, 157, 165, 203, 229–31, 237, 317–18, 330
cancellation of, 318
sacriﬁce as debt repayment, 481, 484
defences, 124–5, 222, 244–5
deities
concepts of, in early civilizations, 411–14,
418–26, 422–3, 490–1, 640
dependence on humans, 475–90, 641
as forces of nature, 426, 433, 438–43
gender of, 418, 429, 464
as manifestations of a single god, 433–6
manifestations of, 426–33, 427f
moral behaviour of, 436–40, 471
number of, 418–19
as patrons of kingdoms, cities, and individuals,
418–25, 439–40
powers of, 412, 440–2
role in maintaining universe and humanity,
414–18, 473–5, 641
supernatural realms of, 50, 442
Delta, 104, 293–4, 331
Descriptive Sociology (Spencer), 16–17
deserts, 111
determinism, cultural, 12, 654
determinism, ecological, 12, 24–5, 653–4
Diakonoff, Igor, 483–4
diffusion, 19–21, 37–8, 614, 672
digging stick, 280
Dika, 422
diorite, 340, 553, 567
directionality. See quadripartition
diseases, 51, 123, 308, 418–19, 450, 480, 497, 512,
520. See also knowledge, specialized
medicine
divination, diviners, 79, 110, 326, 345, 415, 454,
496, 498, 500–1, 504–6, 519, 608, 622–5. See
also oracles; oracle-bone records
divorces, 178
Djedkare-Isesi, 134, 211, 578
Djoser, 571, 578
doctors, 616–19
donations, to temples, 330, 476
donkeys, 281, 292, 295, 355
Dos Pilas, 125
dowry, 172
Driver, Harold, 19
drunkenness, 227, 235, 243, 528
Dumuzi, 438, 512
Dunnell, Robert, 675
Durkheim, Emile, 680
dwarfs, 369–70
Dyke of Nezahualcoyotl, 304–6
dykes, 126, 295
eagle, 38, 256
eagle noble, 151, 162, 256–7
early civilizations, 638, 650, 684
of ancient Egypt, 23–5, 92–3
of ancient Mesopotamia, 24–5, 92–3
chronology of, 32f
classes within, 142–4, 147–54
commoners in, 154–7
conceptualizations of, 40, 272–5
deﬁnition of, 40, 43–6
emic and etic approach to, 62–5
environment settings of, 24, 279, 285, 287,
289–90, 293–4, 297–8, 300–1, 303–4, 395–6
governments of, 216–20
houses, 170f
individuality of each, 638, 650, 684
interpretations of, 58–62, 66–7
locations of seven, 29f–30f
main organizing principle of, 47–8
monarchs of, 73–7, 103

740
Index
early civilizations (cont.)
origins of, 279–80
of Peru, 106
primary, 29
role of priests in, 24
slavery in, 48
of South Asia, 34
written documentation of, 33–5, 54–7, 109,
247–8, 284, 327, 333–4, 402, 414, 462, 466
Early Dynastic period (Egypt), 139, 319–20, 477,
493, 578
Early Dynastic period (Mesopotamia), 28, 35, 88,
93–6, 123–4, 127, 152, 158, 165, 245, 257,
329, 392, 439, 484–5, 498, 526, 557, 572, 575
Early State, The (Claessen & Skaln´ık), 26
Eastern Desert, 252, 382
ecological explanations, 12, 636, 653–5, 661–5,
670, 674–7, 685–7
Ecuador, 106–7, 251–2, 339, 461, 577
Edens, Christopher, 339
Edo. See Benin
education. See schools
Eggan, Fred, 21
Egungun society, 223, 500, 519
Egypt (Old and Middle Kingdoms). See also New
Kingdom
agricultural regimes of, 293–7, 296f
anatomical knowledge, 619
architecture, 567, 570–1, 578–9
army, warfare and, 242, 245, 252–4
art, artists, 544, 550–1, 553, 557, 559–62, 582
beliefs about individuals, 534–8
biases towards, 60
calendrics, 611
civilization of, 23–8, 34–7
classes, 145, 156
cosmogonies, 460–1, 463
cosmological beliefs of, 452–3, 465–6
courts and councils in, 221, 225, 228, 230–1,
233–4, 236–7
craftworkers, 369–70
deities and, 245–6, 416–17, 426–9, 436, 474–6
farmers in, 253
farming implements of, 280–1
festivals, 513–14
government administration of, 209–11, 218–19
houses in, 183–4, 222
kin and gender relations in, 183–6
kingship, 24, 72–6, 79–91, 104–11, 133, 486,
492, 501, 535
land ownership in, 319–20, 330–1, 333–4
languages and terminology of, 28, 65, 72, 106,
584
late Predynastic period of, 93–4, 104
literacy in, 210
marriages in, 184–5
medicine, 619–20
Mesopotamia’s civilization and, 92–3
metallurgy, 340
Middle, 104, 218, 320, 331
military, 345, 631
mobility in, 162
nascent states of, 29
nobility of, 149, 268
oral traditions, 605–6
population of, 297, 312
priests, 144, 501–3
religious beliefs of, 74, 416–17, 425–9, 433, 435,
437–8, 440
roads, trails, 356
royal residences in, 134–5
schools, 607–8
scripts and writings of, 43–4, 58, 587–8,
590–1
settlement patterns for, 54
sorcery, 520–1
studies of, 209–11, 253
taxes, corv´ees, and rents in, 380–2
as territorial state, 27, 104–6
traders, 331–2
tribute, 376–7, 389
Upper, 104
urban centres of, 134–6, 135f, 139–40
values, 627–8, 630–1, 635
women, 184–6, 297
writing, 587, 590–1, 596–7, 599–600, 602–3
written records of, 55–8
Eisenstadt, S. N., 267
Ekur, 497
El Mirador, 93, 98, 580
electrum, 340
Eleventh Dynasty, 578
Eliade, Mircea, 445–7, 470, 645
emesal (Sumerian dialect), 584
emi (Yoruba life force), 522–5
emic approach, 62–5
eminent domain, 315–16
empires, 113, 118–19
hegemonic, 113–18
integrated, 113

Index
741
endogamy/exogamy, 155–6, 162–3, 168–9, 175,
178, 180
royal, 181–4
Engels, F., 413
England, 35
Enheduana, 35
Enki, 419, 426, 437–8, 458–9, 475, 477, 525
Enlightenment, 4, 7, 669
Enlil, 96, 222, 419, 426, 429, 437–9, 458–9, 497,
525
Enmerkar, 588
ensi (Mesopotamian ruler), 84, 117
Entemena, 318, 392
Enuma Elish, 436–7, 458, 525, 591
environments, of early civilizations, 24–5, 53, 279,
657–8
Epe, 286
epidemics. See diseases
Eratosthenes of Cyrene, 444
Erdal, David, 669
Eridu, 438, 511, 618
Erishkegal, 419, 437, 526, 618
Erligang period, 108, 593
Erlitou phase, 107–8, 593
esemtu (Mesopotamian life force), 562
Esie, 96
estates, 319–21, 324–32, 380–1
royal, 173, 321–2, 327–30
temple, 326–30
Esu, 430, 453–4, 479, 500, 632
etemmu (Mesopotamian soul), 525–7, 538
ethnographic research, 4, 17, 57
eunuchs, 116, 169, 199, 502
Euphrates River, 289–92, 419, 458
Europe
Eastern, 120
medieval, 15
Neolithic, 13, 22, 37
states of, 29, 48–51
Evans-Pritchard, E.E., 36
evolution. See biological evolution; cultural
evolution; neoevolutionism
Evolution of Urban Society, The (Adams), 26
execration rituals, 477, 521
exogamy. See endogamy/exogamy
Eyre, Christopher, 233, 237, 333
families, 167, 270–2. See also patrilineages;
matrilineages
extended, 167–71, 174, 177–8, 180, 184, 319
inequality within, 142, 235–6, 668
modelled on state, 271–2
polygynous, 169, 172–3, 175–6, 178, 181–2,
184, 317
variation, explanations for, 193–4
farmers, 43, 46–7, 641. See also mayeque
associations, 252, 286
cosmic importance, 490, 492, 641
deﬁnition of, 120
depend on government for defence, 100,
250–1, 490–1, 661
land ownership and, 162–3, 321, 333
land rights of, 155–6
landless, 132, 136, 323, 327–8
populations of city states and, 100
in urban centres and villages, 102–3, 120–5,
151–2
Farrington, Benjamin, 624
fatalism, 458, 624
Feeley-Harnik, Gillian, 16
Feinman, Gary, 27–8
fertility, symbolic importance of, 191
fertilizers, 292, 295, 299, 302, 306
festivals, religious, 509–14, 521
role of, 509, 515–16, 642
feudalism, 15, 49
Fifth Dynasty, 35, 134, 211, 253, 501, 530, 578,
591
Fifth Sun, 457, 463, 474, 527, 561
First Dynasty, 88, 132, 557
First Intermediate Period, 253, 474, 539, 551,
591, 606, 621
ﬁshing, 292, 297, 303, 306
Flannery, Kent, 13, 675–7
ﬂood (Mesopotamian myth), 441, 477, 525
ﬂowery war, 244
food production
collectively owned land and, 334–5
female tasks in, 282, 286–8, 293, 297, 300, 306
intensity of, 307–10, 312–13, 395–9
population sizes, densities and, 283–4
food storage, 387. See also granaries
fortiﬁcations, 107, 112, 124–5, 127, 133–4, 140,
242, 244–5, 251–3, 255, 378, 398, 565, 571,
576
Fourth Dynasty, 149, 211, 320, 537, 571, 578, 581,
591
France, 16
Frankfort, Henri, 23–6, 36, 60, 93
Frazer, James, 472

742
Index
Freidel, D. A., 481
French Revolution, 7
Fried, Morton, 250
Frobenius, Leo, 161
Fu Hao, 169
functionalism, functionalist interpretations, 3,
12–13, 30–1, 141, 273–5, 541–2, 571–2,
624–5, 654, 658, 660, 675, 677, 685, 688. See
also information theory
funerary cults, 330–1, 381, 578–80
Galton, Francis, 19
Galton’s problem, 19
gambling, 157
gardens, kitchen, 122–6, 282
of Egypt, 294–5
Maya, 302, 308–9
in Mesopotamia, 290, 308
of Shang China, 288
Valley of Mexico, 306
Garf, Salvatore, 469
Geb, 86, 417, 452, 460, 475
Geertz, Clifford, 7–11, 63, 409
Gelede society, 519
Gellner, Ernest, 23, 142–3, 636
gender studies, 23, 59, 187–90. See also women
General Will, 71
geomancy, 38
Germans, 16
Gestinnana, 438
Ghana. See Asante kingdom
Giddens, Anthony, 94
Gilgamesh, 85, 605
Gillespie, Susan, 15
Ginsberg, Morris, 17
Girsu, 123, 511
Giza, 134, 492, 537, 570, 578
Gledhill, John, 322
goddesses. See deities
Godelier, Maurice, 10, 250–1
gods. See deities
gold, 338–41, 352–4
smiths, 364–5
goods. See also trade, traders
luxury, 362–5
manufacturing and distribution of, 401–4
transportation of, 355–8
Goody, Jack, 585–6, 597
Gose, Peter, 242
gossip, as social control, 405–6, 518, 669
governments. See administration, government
governors. See administration, government
grain prices, 344
granaries, 218, 299–300, 381
granite, 340, 567
Great Pyramid, 111, 580
Great Temple (Tenochtitlan), 468, 561
Great Tradition, 542–3
Greece, 411
civilization of Classical, 48–51, 60, 92, 543, 597,
606
natural, social, supernatural realms and, 49–50,
411
guards, armed, 86, 88, 94, 226, 251–3, 255, 257,
259–60
guinea pigs, 299, 479, 623
Gulf of Guinea, 284–5, 338
Gulf of Mexico, 25, 114
guo (Chinese administrative centre), 140
Guthrie, Stewart, 413
Hall, John, 23, 633
Hallpike, C. R., 9, 13, 24, 73, 412, 633–4, 685
hallucinogens, 431, 448, 484
Hammar Swamp, 289
Hammurabi, 117, 192, 222, 231–2, 232–3, 233–4,
236–8, 328–9, 563
Han Dynasty China, 48–51, 416, 633–4
Hanab-Pakal, 576
harbour areas (Mesopotamia), 124, 350, 629
Harris, Marvin, 11, 17, 675
Hathor, 514, 535
Hausa, 347
Haviland, William, 424
Hawaii, 47, 73, 94
headrests, 38
Hebrews, 60, 411
hegemony. See political hegemony
Heliopolis, 416, 434, 460, 501, 579
Herder, Johann, 4, 23, 626
herders, 180–1, 292, 299
Hermopolis, 461
Hero Twins, 424, 438, 463, 512
Herodotus, 492
heterarchy, 36, 267, 337, 394, 399, 665
Hicks, Frederic, 204
Hierakonpolis, 112, 139
hieroglyphs, 591
historical records, 596–7
Hobbes, Thomas, 6

Index
743
Hobhouse, L. T., 17
Hodder, Ian, 10, 22, 54, 675
homosexuality, 190–3, 437, 525
Horn of Africa, 351
Hornung, Erik, 476
Horus, 74, 86, 183–4, 191, 437, 440–1, 460–1,
514, 516
houses, households
Andean and Inka, 180
Aztec, 178
in early civilizations, 170f, 222
Egyptian, 184–5
Maya, 177, 222
Mesopotamian, 169–71
Yoruba, 174–6, 523
Houses of Joy, 179
Houston, Stephen, 100, 410
Huangdi, 414, 423, 449
Huatanay, 136
Huaxtec style, 550, 553
Huehueteotl, 456
Huitzilopochtli, 419–20, 426, 437, 456–7, 468–9,
482, 484, 495, 509
human beings
creation of, 522, 525, 527–9, 531–5, 558
fate after death, 523–4, 526–7, 530–8
inﬂuence of fate on self-image, 522, 538–40
purpose of, 525–6, 629–30
Human Body and Ideology: Concepts of the
Ancient Nahuas, The (L´opez Austin), 63–4
human nature, 3, 5–6, 406, 678, 685, 687. See also
brain, human
‘human reason’, 685–6
Human Relations Area Files
creation of, 17–18
sample and statistical use of, 20
hun (Chinese soul), 532–3
Hunt, Robert, 293
hunter-gatherer societies, 16, 18–20, 41–2, 311
economic and social equality, 669
hunting, 241, 300, 303, 480, 628–9
Huot, Jean-Louis, 35
Ibn Khaldun, A., 196
Ibo, 310, 398
idealism. See relativism, cultural
ideology, 315, 410, 491
Ifa, 453, 487, 501, 511, 549–50, 608, 632
Ife, Ile lfe, 96, 101, 200, 286, 338, 366, 386, 445,
459–60, 478, 500–1, 510–11, 554, 565, 632
Ijebu, 366
Ijebu Ode, 96, 576
Ijesa people, 478
Ila Orangun, 510
Ilesa, 454
Illapa, 136
Il’yin, G. F., 483–4
Imhotep, 570–1
Inanna, 171, 192, 419, 429, 437–8, 475, 499, 512,
525
India. See also Indus Valley civilization
Gangetic, 34, 146
Mauryan, 48–51
Indians, North American, 17, 446
Indo-Europeans, 634
Indonesia, 120
Indus Valley civilization, 33–4, 36, 73
inequality, economic and political, 142–3, 264–5,
316, 320–1, 382, 395, 443, 668–70
infanticide, 310–11
information theory, 273–4, 665–8, 670
inheritance, 78, 168, 171–2, 176–8, 180, 185
injustice, 142
Inka, 34. See also chosen women (Inka); yanakuna
administrative systems of, 106–7, 118, 212–14,
379
agricultural regimes of, 297–300
Andean highlands and, 29, 106, 297–300
architecture, 106, 377–8, 566, 570–1, 582
art, artists, 547, 551, 554–6, 558, 562
biased understanding of, 34
by-privilege, 148, 161
calendrics, 614
classes, 145–9, 181
clothing, 143
cosmogony and, 461–2
cosmological beliefs of, 61, 450–2
craftworkers, 370–1
creation myths, 183, 461–2, 533–4
deities, 415–16, 424–5, 431–2, 434, 438, 461,
474, 479–80
divination, 623
farming implements, 280
festivals, 512–13
governors, 107
implements, 339–40
kin and gender relations, 180–3
king, kingship, 72–7, 80–9, 107–11, 133, 148,
150, 252, 352, 488, 492–3, 534
land ownership, 317, 319, 324–5

744
Index
Inka (cont.)
legal system, 225, 228, 230–1, 233–5, 237,
518–19
marriages, 181–2
material culture of, 29
medicine, 618–19
mestizo descendants, 56–7
metallurgy and, 339–40, 547, 551
nobility, 147–9
oral literature, 604
population, 300
priests, 503–5
provinces, 118–19, 213
record keeping, 393, 395, 597, 607
roads, 356–8
schools, 246–7, 607
soldiers and ofﬁcers, 252
state, 26, 106–7
state vs. ayllu agricultural regimes, 324
taxes, corv´ees, and rents, 378–80
trade, 352–3
urban centres of, 135f, 136–7, 140
values, 630
warfare and, 240, 242, 246–7, 246f, 251–2
women, 181–3, 378
written records about, 56–8
Inquisition, 56
Instruction Offered to King Merikare, 474,
491
Inti, 80–1, 432, 467, 503, 533
Inti Raymi, 512, 614, 630
Iran, 343
Iraq, 33
Assur Kingdom of, 35
Mari Kingdom of, 35
settlement pattern surveys in, 53, 59–60
iron, 338–41
irrigation, 288–90, 293, 295–6, 299, 304, 307, 313,
381, 395–7
Isin, 343, 617
Isis, 74, 437–8, 460, 516
Islam, 50, 57, 410, 414, 436, 473
Italy, 92, 120
´Iti t3wy, 134
Jacobsen, Thorkild, 418, 429, 465
jade, 340, 364, 373, 391, 554, 555
Japan, 15, 29, 48–51
Jaspers, Karl, 411
jewellery, 320, 340, 353–4, 366, 369, 391
Jezebel, 238
Ji (Chinese royal ritual), 514
Joseph, 387
Judaism, 50, 410, 473
Judeo-Christian tradition, 60
judges, 224–8. See also law
k3 (Egyptian life force), 535–7, 557
Kahun, 340, 607
kamaquen (Andean soul), 533–4
karma, 359
K’awil, 83, 423, 424
Kayan, 46
Keightley, David, 133, 160, 362, 449, 630
Kemp, Barry, 60–2, 333–4, 469
Kennedy, J. S., 413
Kenoyer, Jonathan, 34
Khafre, 492
khipu, 56, 595. See also recording systems
Khnum, 535
Khonsu, 514
Khosrow I, 90
Khufu, 134, 186, 492
Ki, 458
kin-avoidance practices, 19
king, kingship, 664
burial rituals of, 76, 81, 88–91
concept and role of, 15–16, 50, 143–4, 491,
664
criticism of, 491
dual, 75
etiquette for dealing with, 90
as head of society, 73–4, 103, 143–4, 261,
263–4
as legal authority, 221–4
marriages and, 163–4, 169, 173, 177, 179–80,
181–2, 184
as military leader, 202, 241–2, 249, 255, 257–9
qualiﬁcations and successions of, 74–8, 264
representation of, 33, 73, 242, 342, 559–62, 560f
revenues of, 329–31
as spiritual leader and intermediary, 79–87, 99,
486–90, 495–6
substitute kings, 85, 441, 477
supernatural attributes of, 80–7, 201, 250
terms for, 71–4, 109
travel and, 109, 133, 242, 357
and tribute, 114, 389–93
universality of kings in early civilizations, 73–4,
664

Index
745
wealth of, 45, 148, 263, 640
women as, 74–7
Kingu, 525
kinship, 46–8, 167–86
Kish, 74, 117, 459
knowing man (rh˘
), 627
knowledge, specialized, 585, 610, 624–5, 647–8,
673
calendars and, 610–16
Childe on, 43, 624–5
divination as focus of, 621–3
embalming as source of, 619
medicine in early civilizations, 616–21
Korea, 29
Koso, 501
Kramer, S. N., 605
Ku-Baba, 74
k’ul (Maya, supernatural power), 415
k’ul ahaw (Maya king), 72. See also Maya
Kwakiutl, 46
La Barre, Weston, 21
labour, labourers, 6, 313–14, 395, 663. See also
corv´ee; mayeque; yanakuna
bonded labourers, 145, 155, 157, 159–60, 182,
245, 325–6, 378, 380
control of, 309–10, 335, 376, 379, 381–2,
384
exchanges, 286
landless, 156, 293, 388
wage labour, 152, 245
Lagash, 76, 329, 343–4, 392, 511
Lagos, 96, 285
lakes, 301, 303–5
Lambert, William, 467
land, 155–6, 399–400, 662
circumscribed, 282, 309, 398
collective ownership of, 316–21, 334–5
evolution of landholding, 336–7, 400
ganaru, 328
gankur, 327–8
importance of, 388–9
institutional ownership of, 317, 319, 326–30
nigenna, 327
ofﬁce, 321, 322–3
ownership, 147–8, 152, 154–6, 315–16
palace, 317, 321–2, 325
patrimonial, 323–4
private ownership of, 319–24, 327, 331–4,
335–6
as property, 309–10, 312, 676
value of, 309–10
language(s)
Afroasiatic, 28
Akkadian, 28, 96, 102, 117, 171
of city-states, 101–2
Coptic, 63
Egyptian, 28, 63, 106, 584–5
Ewe, 96, 101
Indo-European, 9
Mayan, 101, 584
mythology and, 102
Nahuatl, 56, 63–4, 97, 101–2, 584
origins of, 20–1
Otomi, 102
properties of, 6, 9
Quechua, 107, 451, 585, 607
Semitic, 9
Sumerian, 28, 63, 96, 102, 117, 171, 584,
609
terms to designate kings in, 71–4
upper classes and, 584–5
Yoruba, 101
Late Classic period (Maya), 33–4, 98
Laufer, Berthold, 532
law(s), 53, 667
codes and, 231–3
courts and, 175, 224–8
crimes, 221
crimes, social hierarchy and, 233–9, 410
‘desert’, 232
development of, 230, 238–9
function of, 239, 265
legal procedures and, 228–31, 266, 520, 667
low level regulation of, 222–3
oaths and, 229
ordeals, oracles and, 229–30
punishment and, 196, 222–4, 227, 230–3
supernatural aspect of laws, 221–2, 237,
518–19
Law, Robin, 100
Lebanon, 351
Lechtman, Heather, 339
Le´on-Portilla, Miguel, 610
levees, 289–92, 294–5
L´evi-Strauss, Claude, 9, 412
Lewis, Mark, 169, 256, 488, 629
lexical approach to study of early civilizations,
63–5
Libya, 253, 312, 351

746
Index
life-force, 64. See also soul
as general power, 414–17, 449
individual, 79, 84, 522–32, 534–8
Lima, 58
limestone, 340, 553–4, 567
lingua franca, 107, 585
linguistics, 20–1, 62–3
literacy, 54, 105, 603
among Maya, 597
in China, 597
in Egypt, 210, 588, 596–7
in Mesopotamia, 596–7
Little Tradition, 542
Liu, Binxiong, 168
llamas, 81, 281, 299, 308, 324, 352, 355, 479–80,
486, 622
celestial, 451
and people, 4, 84
Lloque Inka Yupanki, 503
Locke, John, 6, 654
L´opez Austin, Alfredo, 63–4
Lords of Death (Maya), 431, 449
lugal (Mesopotamian king), 84
Lungshan culture, 107
m3’t (Egyptian cosmic order), 221, 416–17, 436,
486. See also cosmic order
MacCormack, Sabine, 58–9
Mace, Ruth, 20, 23
macehualtin, 156, 323
magic, 416, 441, 516, 536, 538, 621
Maisels, Charles, 43, 93, 665
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 6, 665, 680
Mama Cocha (Lady Ocean), 461, 533
Mama Waqu, 513
mana. See life force
Mandate of Heaven, 466
Manetho, 74–5
Mann, Michael, 23, 93, 283
Manqu Qhapaq, 425, 513
Marcus, Joyce, 27–9, 665, 675
on states, 93, 98
Marduk, 436–7, 439, 459
Mari, 35
market(s)
exchange, 60, 103, 126–7
rural, 351–3
for slaves, 159
for specialities, 346–7
urban, 344, 346–9, 353, 572–3
marriage(s)
Aztec, 163, 178–9
contracts, 172
Egyptian, 163, 184–5
Inka, 163, 181–2
kingship and, 163–4, 169, 173, 177, 179–82,
184
Maya, 163, 177
Mesopotamia, 172–3
patterns, 17
royal endogamy (incest), 163, 181–2, 184
in Shang China, 168–9
of upper classes, 101, 163–4, 265
Yoruba, 175–6
Marx, Karl, 6, 9, 51–2, 413, 659
Marxism, 3, 5, 51, 67, 624, 655, 659–60, 665, 669,
674, 681
classes for themselves in, 45, 157
neo, 5, 494
Material Culture and Social Institutions of the
Simpler Peoples, The (Hobhouse, Wheeler &
Ginsberg), 17
materialism, 3, 9–10
Mathews, Peter, 98
Matlatzinco, 596
matrilineages, 19–20, 75, 180
matrilocal residence, 17
Mauss, Marcel, 472
Maya
highland cultures, 25
joint government (multepal), 51
lowland cultures, 25, 93
Olmec culture and, 29
Postclassic, 51
tropical-forest environments of, 25
Maya, Classic, 15, 34
administrators and leaders, 206–7
agricultural regimes, 300–3
architecture, 468, 566–70, 573, 575
art, artists, 544, 549–50, 553–4, 556–9, 563–4
beliefs about individuals, 531–2
calendrics, 613–14, 622
cities, 129–31, 130f
city-states of, 57–8, 94–100
cosmogony and, 457–8
cosmological beliefs of, 448–9
craft specialization, 367–8
defences, 125
deities and, 413–15, 423–4, 431, 440, 474–5,
481–2

Index
747
divination, 622–3
Early Classic Period and, 75–6
farming implements, 280–1
festivals, 512
houses, 222
kin and gender relations, 177–8
kingship and rulers, 72, 79, 83–9, 99, 151, 200,
489
languages of, 101–2
Late Classic Period and, 98
Late Preclassic Period and, 97–8
nobility, 145, 149, 267–8
political organization, 15, 98–9
population of, 301, 303
priests, 501
regional states of, 98–9
scripts and writings of, 33, 43–4, 594–5, 599,
602
settlement patterns, 54, 97–8
taxes, corv´ees, and rents, 385
terms for kings and rulers, 72
trade, 348–50, 374, 404
urban centres of, 25, 98, 124, 129–31
warfare, 242, 247–9, 261–3
women, 177–8
written materials and records about, 33,
54–8
written materials and records of, 33, 54–8
mayeque (Aztec, landless farmers), 156, 323
Medjay, 253
Memphis, 87, 112, 132–4, 139, 207, 211, 218,
330, 356, 370, 428, 432, 461, 501, 547–9,
578–9
Mendoza River, 36
Menes, 132, 578
Menkaure, 211, 492
merchants. See trade, traders
Merenre, 218
Mereruka, 185–6
mes (Mesopotamian rules governing universe),
459
Meseta Central, 303
Mesoamerica, 307, 448, 454, 481, 485, 571
art in, 37
Olmec culture in, 25
Mesopotamia, 23–4, 28
agricultural regimes of, 289–93, 291f
Akkadians in, 96, 102, 117
architecture, 566, 568, 570, 572–3
art, artists, 550, 552–4, 557–8, 561, 563
beliefs about individuals, 523–7
bias about, 60
calendrics, 611–12
city-states in, 57–8, 94–6, 116–17, 123–4
classes, 152–3, 205, 267–8
cosmogony and, 458–9, 463
cosmological beliefs of, 450, 465
councils and leaders of, 201–3, 226
courts and laws, 224, 226, 229–32, 236, 618
deities of, 418–19, 429, 436–8, 477–8
differences in state and private cultivation,
329
divination, 621–2
Egypt’s civilization and, 92–3
farming implements of, 280–1
festivals, 511–12
hegemonic patterns of, 93
Hellenistic world and, 50
kin and gender relations in, 169–74
kingship, 6, 72–4, 84–9, 117–18, 219, 264, 438,
486–7, 493, 530, 576
land ownership in, 318–20, 326–30, 332–3
medicine, 617–18
metallurgy and, 339
Middle East and, 28
military, warfare and, 242, 244–5, 257–9, 258f
oral literature, 605
populations of, 124, 293
priests, 497–9
role of humans, 474, 477
scripts and writings of, 43, 55–8, 587–93, 596–9,
601–2, 609
substitute king, 85, 441, 477
Sumerian, 28, 75–6, 245
Sumerians in, 96, 102
taxes, corv´ees, and rents in, 383
trade, 342–4
tribute, 392–3
urban centres of, 100, 124–8, 128f
values, 629, 635
war and, 244–5
women in, 172–4
metallurgy, 121, 279–80, 338–41, 363–7, 370–2,
547, 551–6, 558, 561–3. See also bronze;
copper
evolutionary signiﬁcance of, 341–2
metaphors, 190–1, 682
Mexico
Michoac´an area of, 38
Spanish conquest of, 51, 56

748
Index
Mexico, Valley of, 26, 29. See also Aztec
agricultural regimes in, 303–7, 305f
architecture, 566–7, 572–3
art, artists, 544, 562
beliefs about individuals, 520, 527–31
calendrics, 612–13
centralization in, 206
Christian priests in, 56–8
city-states in, 57–8, 94–100, 114–16
classes, 145, 150–1, 156, 164, 267–8, 323
cosmogony and, 456–7, 463
cosmology and, 447–8, 465
courts and tribunals in, 224
craftworkers, 126, 341, 364–5
defences of, 125, 355
deities, 71, 414–15, 419–20, 430–1, 436, 474–5,
482–3
ethnic continuity in, 97
famine, 387
farming implements, 280
hegemonic patterns of, 93, 390–3
history, terms for, 596
kingship in, 73–5, 83–4, 88, 204–6, 487–8
land ownership in, 316–17, 321–4
languages, 101–2
Late Aztec period in, 29
laws in, 221–4, 226, 235, 237, 520
medicine, 616–17
metallurgy, 341
military, warfare and, 240–4, 256–7, 262
Nahuatl language of, 56
nobility in, 145, 150–1, 267–8
oral literature, 604–5
population, 306–7
recording systems, 43, 587, 595–8
religious practices, 431, 476, 482–3, 485, 487–8,
495–7, 509–10, 520
roads, 335–6
settlement patterns in, 54
traders, 179, 205, 344–7
urban centres of, 93, 97, 100, 124–31, 130f
values, 628–9, 631
written records about, 33, 55–8
Michoac´an, 38
Mictlan, 448, 468, 527
Mictlantecuhtli, 448
Middle East, 28, 37, 94, 126, 313
natural, social, supernatural realms and,
49–50
military, 666
conscript armies, 47–9, 242–50, 256, 262–3
effects on settlement, 100
ﬂowery wars, 244
full-time soldiers, 44–5, 144, 155, 250–63
king as commander of, 202
in late preindustrial civilizations, 49–50, 261
ofﬁcers, 144, 252–4, 255–6, 259–61
rituals and, 240–1
role of, 240–2, 251, 265, 388, 410, 480
soldier as ideal, 628–30
Steward’s theory of, 24
triple alliance armies, 114, 240–1
weapons, 244–5, 247, 251–5, 257, 260, 262, 339
Miller, Arthur, 557
Millerea, 371
Mithen, Steven, 678, 681–2
Mixcoatl, 496
Mixtec, 553, 596
mobility, social, 160–2, 256–7, 265, 664–5
Moche Valley, 106
Mochtezuma I, 222, 232
Mochtezuma II, 84, 161–2, 164, 178, 491–2, 544,
573
moderation, 627–8
moieties, 75, 136, 180–1, 451, 469
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, baron
de, 153, 315
Moore, S. F., 234
morpheme, 586
Morris, Ian, 142–3
mummies, mummiﬁcation, 136, 147–8, 325, 425,
460, 480, 492, 513, 533–4, 536, 619
Murdock, George P., 6, 13, 19, 187, 654, 685
Human Relations Area Files and, 17–19
Mut, 514
myths, 102, 444, 456, 461–2, 525, 527–8, 531, 645,
684
as reﬂection of political order, 464–7, 604
naditum (Mesopotamia, priestess), 172, 498
Naga ed-Deir, 320, 537
Nahuatl. See also languages
term for kings, 71
Nammu, 525
Nanahuatzin, 457
Nannar, 419, 429, 498
Naram-Sin, 35, 563
Naranjo, 74–5, 83
Nash, June, 189–90
natron, 352

Index
749
nature, not distinguished from supernatural and
social, 49–50, 467, 471, 606, 641–2, 670–1
Neferirkare, 211
neoevolutionism, 18–19, 22, 25–6, 43, 674, 685
Nephthys, 192, 460
Nergal, 526
neuroscience, 678, 686–8
New Cuzcos, 132, 470
New Guinea, 676
New Kingdom (Egypt), 33–5
economy, 108, 351, 362, 376
king, 163, 184, 242, 520–1
political life, 233, 250, 269, 376, 389, 547
religion, 416, 476, 514
specialized knowledge, 607, 611, 621, 630
urbanism, 132, 134, 222, 469
New Year festival (Mesopotamia), 91, 487, 511–12
Nezahualcoyotl, 631
Nichols, Deborah, 26–7
Nicholson, H. B., 419
Nieboer, H. J., 17
Nile River, 92–3, 104, 293–4, 578
ﬂood, 80, 91, 294–5, 465
religious signiﬁcance, 417, 452–3, 469, 475
Nina, 123
Ninhursaga, 419, 426, 525
Nintur, 525
Nippur, 96, 101, 343–5, 439, 459, 511,
525
nobility, 46, 86, 145, 147–53, 267–8, 528
North America
aboriginal groups in, 19
comparative and exhaustive sampling of
societies in, 20, 22
nswt (Egyptian, king), 72. See also Egypt
ntr (Egyptian, god), 80, 417
Nubia, 252–3, 312, 351, 377, 389, 469
Nunamiut Eskimos, 18–19
Nupe, 347
nursing, infants, 310–11, 397
Nut, 417, 452, 460
oaths, 229, 511
Oba (city), 96
oba (Yoruba king), 71–2. See also Yoruba
obedience, 188, 264–5
Obelisk of Maniˇstuˇsu, 332
Oceania, 22
O’Connor, David, 469
Ode Onde, 321
Oduduwa, 71, 86, 116, 268, 437, 439, 454, 459–60,
463, 467, 511, 522
Odum Ogungun, 510
oecumene, 37, 50–1
Offner, Jerome, 322
Ogbomoso, 366
Ogboni society, 161, 198, 225, 231, 499
Ogun, 229, 416, 454, 478–9
Ojo, G. J. A., 470
Oke Eso, 260
Old Babylonian Dynasty, 28, 35, 96, 117–18, 152,
173, 201–2, 226, 232, 293, 317, 343, 392–3,
436, 439, 498, 618
olive oil, 351, 389
Olmec, 25, 29, 550, 594
Olori Merin, 454
Olorun, 420–1, 434, 436–7, 439, 441, 453, 459–60,
463–4, 467, 479, 500, 522–4
Omaha, cousin terminology, 180
Ometeotl, 71, 83, 434, 437, 439, 441, 447, 456,
463–4, 527–8, 530, 605
Oni of Ife, 72
Oppenheim, Leo, 393, 618
oracle-bone records, 109, 216, 249, 288, 378, 593
oracles, 76, 213–14, 222, 229–30, 424–5, 428, 432,
480, 492–3, 504, 534, 558. See also spirit
possession
oral literature, 603–7
Orangun of Ila, 72
orchards, 288, 329
orders (castes), 144, 146, 634
Ore, 500
ori (Yoruba, soul), 523–5
Oriental despotism, 59
orisa (Yoruba, god), 420. See also deity
Orisala, 416, 437, 454, 459, 479, 499, 500, 522
Osiris, 74, 86, 183–4, 191–2, 425, 437, 440, 452,
460–1, 475, 514, 534, 537, 539
Owa of Ilesa, 72
oxen, 281, 292
Oya, 616
Oyo, 72, 74, 78, 96, 100, 116, 177, 200, 217, 253,
260–1, 263, 286, 366, 393, 421, 501, 563, 575,
604, 632
Oyo Mesi (state council of Oyo), 177, 198, 260–1
Pachakamaq, 434, 461
pachakuti (Inka, transformation), 462
Pachakutiq, 136, 462, 595, 604
Pagel, Mark, 20, 23

750
Index
pakarina (Andean, place of creation), 432, 533
Paksamama, 505
palaces, royal residences, 107, 127, 132, 134–6,
202, 469, 565, 572–3, 576–83, 605
Palenque, 74–5, 531, 549, 568, 576, 599
Palmyra, 94
panaqa, 147–8, 163, 181
papyrus scrolls, 588
Paqariktambo, 86, 533
parchment, 54, 588, 594–5
Parker, Joy, 481
Parsons, J. R., 124
Parsons, Talcott, 48
pastoralists, 181, 244, 249, 253, 282–3, 288–9,
292, 312, 357
patrilineages, 186–7, 220, 271, 634
Aztec, 178
Benin, 175
Inka, 180–1
Maya, 177
in Mesopotamia, 171–2, 318, 332
in Shang China, 167–8, 433
Yoruba, 174–5, 318
patrilocal residence, 17, 167–71, 174, 177–8,
180
Patterson, Thomas, 61
peer-polity interaction, 101
Pepi II, 192
Persian Empire, 48–51
Peru. See also Inka
ayllus in, 148, 155–6, 180–1, 225, 317
cosmogony and, 466
cultural history of, 106
environmental zones, 298
Moche civilization of, 106
settlement patterns for, 54, 106
Spanish conquest of, 51
written records about, 58–9
Petra, 94
phonemics, 62–3
phonetics, 62–3
Piedras Negras, 74–5, 549
pigs, 38, 288, 292, 295
pilli (Aztec nobility), 145, 150–1, 322
Pi-Ramesses, 132
platinum, 339
ploughs
animal-drawn, 281, 293, 328
foot plough, 280, 363, 512
po (China, life force), 532
pochteca, (Nahuatl, traders’ associations), 205,
223, 344–6, 349–50, 622, 631
Polanyi, Karl, 60, 342, 402
police, 155, 201, 226. See also military
political control, 216–20, 665–70
political hegemony, 84–5, 93, 113–18, 152, 161–2,
203, 232, 268, 322, 357, 364–5, 374, 389–93,
403–4, 485, 563, 577, 581
Pollock, Susan, 293
population(s)
Aztec, 97
change, not an independent variable, 311–12,
662, 676
of city-states, 94, 308
of Cuicuilco, 97
densities, 53, 120, 307–12, 661–2
of Egypt, 297
increase, 397
Inka, 300
of Maya, 301, 303
of Mesopotamia, 124, 293
movement, 397–8
of Shang China, 289
of Tenochtitlan, 97
of territorial states, 112
in urban centres, 99–100, 124
of Valley of Mexico, 306
of Yoruba, 124, 287
porters, 345, 347–8, 355, 390
possibilism, 399
post-axial age cultures, 412
Postgate, J. N., 35, 76, 203, 364
postmodernism, 3, 7, 10, 659
pottery. See ceramics
Powhatan polity, 47
Predynastic period (Egypt), 93–4, 107, 210, 319,
539
price ﬂuctuations, 344
priests. See also temples
babalawo, 501, 608
cults and, 499–504
high, 495–8, 501, 503, 508
ofﬁcials as, 144, 502, 506–7
possible lack of, 501, 505, 507
punishment of, 235
relations with kings, 495, 498, 501, 503,
507–8
Spanish, 56–8
training, organization, and lifestyles of,
495–508, 521

Index
751
women as, 88, 159, 172–4, 182, 236, 497–9,
503, 505
primitive/prelogical thought, 412
primogeniture, royal, 76–8
Principles of Sociology (Spencer), 16
prisoners, 88, 157, 160, 179, 241, 245, 256, 312,
482–5
prisons, 223, 225–6, 234–5, 382
Pritchard, J. B., 232
privacy, as goal, 133, 140, 677
Proskouriakoff, Tatiana, 413
prostitutes, 179, 186, 188, 192, 499
male, 192
province(s)
capitals, 133, 352, 370
Egyptian, 104, 207, 209–11
Inka, 107, 118–19, 212–14, 353
Shang China, 207, 214–16
psychic unity, 680, 682. See also cognition, as
source of uniformity
psychology, 678–82, 686–8
Ptah, 133, 428, 432, 461, 464, 467
public opinion, as social control, 405–6, 518, 669
Puebla, 553
punishment, corporal, 142, 253
Punt, 351
Pyburn, Anne, 99
Pyramid Texts, 475, 538–9, 591, 621
pyramids, 541–2
Qhapaq Raymi, 512, 614
Qi, 422
qi (China, cosmic energy), 416
Qiang, 480–1
Qorikancha, 136, 451, 480, 503–4, 595
quadripartition, 356–7, 423, 445–55, 468–70, 645
quauhpilli. See eagle noble
Quechua, 107, 298. See also languages
queens, 81, 181–7, 505
Quetzalcoatl, 86, 150, 235, 268, 420, 456, 469,
527–8, 631
Quirigua, 563
Quito, 352, 356–7
qumpi (Inka fancy cloth), 182, 360, 362
Quya Raymi, 512
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., 21, 659
radiocarbon dating, 18, 338
Ramesses II, 87
Ramesses III, 520–1
Rappaport, Roy, 675
Rathje, William, 666
rationalism, 4–7, 11–14, 18, 59, 653, 672, 685–6
Ratzel, Friedrich, 37
Re, 86–7, 417, 428, 435, 438, 440, 460, 619
reason
cultural, 4, 9, 660
practical, 4, 650, 660, 674, 685–6
primary role of, 4
rationalism and, 5–6, 678
recording systems, 589f
functions of, 587–8, 595–6
semasiography as, 586–8, 590–2, 595–8, 601
Red Sea, 351, 356
Redﬁeld, Robert, 542–3
Reisner, George, 537
relativism, cultural, 8–12, 22, 59, 654, 659, 679,
681, 684, 688
religion. See also festivals; priests; sacriﬁces;
witchcraft
as constitution, 490–4, 643–4, 650, 671
deﬁnition of, 409
in early civilizations, 64–5, 410–3, 639–44,
649–50, 670
as epiphenomenon, 5, 643
hierarchies in, 144
ideology and, 410
and morality, 670
as social and political medium, 48
as source of symbolic production, 409, 443, 643,
650
transcendental, 49–50, 410–11
Renfrew, Colin, 93–4, 101
rents, 344, 376, 380, 383, 400
residences. See houses; palaces
resins (incense), 351, 415, 475, 481
retainers, 44–5, 88–9, 116, 134, 155, 260, 556
Richerson, Peter, 12, 660
ridicule, social role of, 405–6, 518, 669
rituals, public, 509–16, 521
rivalry. See competition
rivers, 127
roads, 136, 355–8
romanticism, 7. See also relativism
Rome, 45, 48–51, 90, 157, 261, 288, 321, 472–3,
607
Ronhaar, J. H., 17
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 6, 71, 669
Rowe, John, 618
Royal Anthropological Institute, 17

752
Index
royal courts, as centres of art, culture, and
learning, 88, 104–6, 169, 185, 200, 369,
373–4, 505–6, 539, 543, 547, 551, 557, 563,
587, 597, 607, 609, 619
royal estates. See estates
royal residences. See palaces
rulers. See king, kingship
sacriﬁces
to dead, 476, 478–81, 488–9, 502, 505–6,
523–4, 526, 530, 532–3, 536, 557, 629
deﬁnition of, 472, 475
function of, 473–5, 505–6, 619, 641–4, 671
human, 81–2, 84, 88–9, 158–9, 236, 241–2,
349–50, 380, 415, 425, 430, 476–84, 484–5
kings as intermediaries for, 486–90, 641–2
offerings and, 81, 136, 240–1, 475–84, 498,
500–1, 503, 505–6, 509
opposition to human, 558, 631
reasons for human, 454, 474, 484–6, 508–9
retainer, 88–9, 257, 526, 580
royal, 81, 506
Sahara Desert, 294
Sahlins, Marshall D., 3–5, 7–9, 409, 413, 643, 658,
661, 674, 676, 684–5
Sakhmet, 438, 619
salination, 292, 295, 309, 329
Sallust, 472
Sanders, W. T., 124, 580
Sango, 116, 421, 454, 479, 500–1, 616
Santley, R. S., 124
Sanyo, 370
sapa inka (title of Inka king), 72. See also Inka
Sapir, Edward, 9
Saqqara, 502, 570–1
Saqsawaman, 133–6, 213, 469, 512, 571, 580
Sargon of Akkad, 117, 259, 392, 563
Sausero, 512–13
savanna, 174
Schele, Linda, 481
schools, schooling, 243–4, 246–7, 344, 364–5,
607–10, 628–9
sculpture, 73, 111, 155, 182, 363, 369, 543–5,
547–55, 548f, 557–62, 560f
Second Cataract, 351
Second Intermediate Period, 253
security, desire for, 5, 250–1, 490–1, 661
Sed ritual, 79, 184, 513, 578
self-interest, 3, 8, 635–6, 679–80
semasiography. See recording systems
Senwosret II, 340, 607
Senwosret III, 218, 253
Service, Elman, 250–1, 661, 676
Seth, 183, 191–2, 437, 441, 460, 475, 516
settlement patterns
in the Classic Maya territory, 97–8
for Egypt, 54, 104
information available concerning, 54
for Peru, 54, 106
public order and, 222
for the Shang and Western Zhou China, 54,
107–8
in southern Iraq, 54, 59, 94–9
in the Valley of Mexico, 97
for the Yoruba, 54, 96–7
shaduf, 294–5
shaman, shamanism, 20, 38, 445–6, 454, 486,
506–7, 556, 645
Shang Dynasty, 38, 108
Shangdi, 79–81, 422, 435, 439, 449, 467, 489, 514
Shangqiu, 108
sharecroppers, 328, 383, 387
shawabti, 536
shells, 353–4, 377, 384, 398, 447, 475, 480
shen (China, supernatural power), 416
ships, rafts, 352, 355–6, 370
Shixianggou, 108
shrines. See temples
Shu, 86, 254, 452, 460
Shulgi, 329, 356, 596
Shu-Sin, 244–5
Siberia, 20, 38, 445–6, 454
Sichuan, 108
sickles, 280
silent man (gr), 627
Sinai Peninsula, 312, 351
Sinchi Roka, 571
Sinologists, 413
Sippar, 293, 344
Sirius, 611
Sixth Dynasty, 185, 218, 245, 253
Skaln´ık, Peter, 26–7
slave(s)
capture of, 244, 247
debt, 157, 165
as human sacriﬁces, 158–9, 421
legal status, 235, 331
‘slave societies’, 157
studies of, 17
treatment of, 48, 158–9

Index
753
varieties of, 46–8, 157–60, 164–5, 265
work of, 157–8, 199, 260, 262, 312, 317, 321,
366
Smith, William Robertson, 472
social relations, their relation to culture, 67
societies
advanced intermediate, 48–51
agricultural, 17
archaic, 48
competition and, 42
hunting and ﬁshing, 17
industrial, 42
preindustrial, 45
prestate, 44
scavenging, 41
small-scale, 42, 46–7
socialist, 6
sociobiologists, 3, 681, 687
soil, 279, 292
Sokal, Alan, 454
solar temples, 561
soldiers. See military
Sopona, 616
sorcerers, 430, 504, 517–20
souls, 64, 412, 516, 520, 646–7. See also life force
intellect souls, 523–7, 529–38
multiple, 673
South Asia, 538–9
Southall, Aidan, 207
Southeast Asia, 15
sovereignty, 71, 73–4, 315–16
Soviet Union, 685
Spanish conquests, 25, 115, 118, 132, 150, 323–4
Spanish settlers, 56–7
specialists
administrators and bureaucrats as, 154–5
dependent, 154
elite craftworkers, 358, 364–73
full-time, 70–3, 154–5, 358
part-time, 358
spells. See magic
Spencer, Herbert, 16–17
Sperber, Dan, 4
spirit companions (Maya), 531
spirit possession, 430–1, 524
state(s). See also city-states; territorial states
as administrative mechanism, 195–7
agro-literate, 142–3
council, 198
deﬁnition of, 92–4, 195–7
function and role of, 221–4
inchoate, 26
incipient, 107
modiﬁed state typologies, 27
multistage state typologies, 27
nascent, 29
organizations, 43
protection by, 388
regional, 48, 118–19, 267
theatre, 15
transitional, 26
typical, 26
states, early, 46–7, 73
development of, 104
early state module, 94
statues. See sculpture
status emulation, 540, 647
Stein, Burton, 207
Steinmetz, S. R., 17
stelae
Maya, 98, 512, 549, 557–8
Mesopotamia, 561
Step Pyramid complex, 570–1, 578
Steward, Julian, 24–7, 93–4, 279, 658, 675–6
Stone, Elizabeth, 100, 117, 197, 219, 267, 309
storage, 300, 327, 381, 387, 391
structuralism, 9, 654
Stuart, David, 410
style
art, 656
diversity, 542, 545–51, 562–4, 568–70, 582
guide to behaviour, 658–9
relation to function, 657–8
relation to identity, 658
subsistence patterns, 16–17, 31, 279–313
Sumner, William, 9
sumptuary laws, 374
supernatural realms, concept of, 49–50, 411–13,
640–1
surnames, 168
surpluses
appropriation of, 375–94, 399–401, 661
production of, 47–8, 313–14, 336–7, 396–9, 661
territorial states and, 111
symbols
colour, 447–8, 454
cosmograms, 467–70
as human attribute, 6, 8
symbolic mediation, 653, 658
Syria, 376, 389

754
Index
tabula rasa, 6, 654
“Tale of the Eloquent Peasant”, 237
Tarpuntay ayllu, 503
Tawaret, 433
taxation, 329–30, 400–1. See also corv´ee
deﬁnition of, 376–7
effectiveness of multiple forms of, 388
exemption from, 252, 324–5, 371, 380, 382
on food surpluses, 204, 377–84
on goods, 378, 381, 384–7
monitoring, 376, 381, 386–7
rate of, 377, 381, 400–1
resistance to, 376, 388
sales, 347, 382–3
yields, 387–8
technology, 31, 44, 395
agricultural tools, 113, 280–1
cutting-tools, 308–9, 341–2, 395
metallurgical, 106, 338–41
tecuhtli (Nahuatl, lord), 150–1, 204
Tefnut, 460
telpochcalli (Aztec school), 243, 344, 608
Temoanchan, 527
temple(s), shrines, 43, 127, 137, 139, 241, 432–3.
See also priests
architecture, 564–5, 568, 571–3, 576–9
of Enlil, 96
estates, 202–3, 322, 326–30, 343, 493
homosexuals and, 192, 499
names of, 467, 497
prostitutes and, 173, 499
of Ptah, 134, 578
Qorikancha, 136, 451, 480, 503–4, 595
sun temples, 501–2, 561, 579
symbolism of, 449, 467, 542
temple staff, 202, 363, 487, 497–9, 501–2, 605
Tenochtitlan, 97, 102, 116, 126, 150, 203–6, 217,
232–3, 256, 308, 323, 345–6, 390–1, 397, 495,
550, 562
cosmic status, 445, 447–8, 470
councils and leaders of, 205–6
layout and size of, 103, 122, 124, 129, 203, 355,
469, 576
Teotihuacan, 36, 73, 93, 97, 123, 129, 469, 580,
582
in myth, 457, 493, 527
teotl (Nahuatl, divine power), 83–4, 414
terraces, 298–9, 302, 304, 324
terrestrial plane, 447–56
territorial states, 105f. See also city-states
areas and sizes of, 110–11
capitals of, 132–9
classes within, 146, 638–9
craft production in, 368–9
deﬁnition of, 92–4, 104
development of, 104–9, 665–9
Egypt, 104–6
features of, 337
government administration of, 207–16
Inka, 106–8
laws of, 223–4
populations of, 112–13, 131–2, 289, 297, 300
provincial centres of, 122, 132–3, 139–41
Shang as, 108–9
slavery of little importance in, 159–60
and trade, 350–3
two-tier economy, 403–4
women in, 189–90
Texcoco, 56, 63, 97, 114–16, 164, 178, 204, 223,
226–7, 233–5, 240, 308, 323, 345–6, 390–1,
520, 608
calpollis and courts of, 204–6, 226–7, 234
layout of, 129
Texcoco Lake, 303, 447
Textor, R. B., 19
teyollia (Nahuatl, soul), 529–31
Tezcatlipoca, 420, 426, 432, 437, 456
Thebes, 132–4, 356, 549, 578
theft, 222, 227, 230, 234–5, 237
theocracy, 24, 250, 490, 494
Third Dynasty, 186, 320, 578
This, 104, 132, 370
Thompson, J. Eric, 92
Thorp, Robert, 372
Thupa Inka Yupanki, 136, 325, 353
Tiamat, 435–6, 450, 458–9, 464
Tian (China, Zhou sky god), 81
Tigris River, 289–92, 458
Tijm, Jan, 17
Tikal, 83, 98–9, 125, 131, 177, 248, 303, 424, 557,
568, 576, 580
tin, 339
Titicaca Lake, 86, 106, 132, 298, 352, 371, 452,
461, 533, 577, 582, 604
Tiwanaku, 27, 106, 452, 466, 533, 554
Tizoc, 241, 561, 596
Tlacopan, 114, 240, 390
Tlaloc, 419, 437, 448, 468, 484, 488, 495, 509, 530,
616
Tlalocan, 448

Index
755
Tlatelolco, 115, 129, 346
tlatoani (Nahuatl, king), 71. See also Aztec;
Mexico, Valley of
Tlaxcalans, 244, 390, 480
tlaxilacalli, 203–4. See also calpolli
Tlazolteotli, 530
Tlingit, 46
Tochpan, 596
Tollan, 145, 150, 219, 364, 420, 469, 528, 631
toltecca (Nahuatl, elite craftworker), 364
tombs, 139, 184–5, 219, 330, 381–2, 468, 536, 542,
565, 567, 570–1, 575–6, 578–80, 583
Tonacatepetl, 468
tonalli (Nahuatl, life-force), 84, 528–31
Tonggong, 108
Townsend, Richard, 419, 563
trade, traders, 53. See also ajalapa; damgar;
pochteca
in city-states, 342–50
government control of long distance, 342,
348–9, 403
local and internal, 342, 344, 346, 348, 351–3
long distance, 43, 101, 121, 317, 342–55, 374,
402–3, 596, 622
proﬁt motives in, 344, 347, 349
status of traders, 349–50, 629
in territorial states, 350–3
transportation
costs, 102–3, 121–2
of goods, 355–8
Treistman, Judith, 556
trepanning, 618–19
‘tributary mode of production’, 388–9
tribute, 47, 663
city-states and, 114–16, 161–2, 217, 389–94, 404
impact of, 392–3
territorial states and, 389
Triple Alliance, 114, 240, 244, 323, 345, 390–2,
631
Tula, 97, 550
Tumipampa, 132, 325, 577
Turkey, 343–4
Turner, Victor, 7
Twelfth Dynasty, 132, 218, 252–3, 606
Tylor, Edward B., 17, 19, 411, 417, 472, 659
Ubaid period, 280
Uganda, 338
Umma, 392
universe. See cosmic order; cosmogony; cosmology
upani (Andean, life-force), 534
Ur, 88, 257, 498, 576
Ur III period, 85, 117, 173, 231–2, 244, 268, 290,
327–9, 343, 392, 402, 557, 563, 572, 576, 605
urban centres, 43, 54. See also city-states
artisans in, 103, 121
defence of, 125
deﬁnition of, 120–1
development of, 93
features of, 120–1, 124–5
gardens of, 122–3, 126, 290, 294, 302, 306
layouts of, 122–3, 127–31, 133–4, 469–70,
571–6
life expectancies in, 123
markets and bazaars in, 124, 126–7
organization of, 37
origins and roles of, 121
population of, 124–5
provincial, 139–41
provisioning and waste disposal in, 122–3
relocations of, 133
terms for, 100–1
transportation costs and, 102–3
walls, 123, 222
Urubamba Valley, 137
Uruk, 93–4, 125, 128f, 438–9, 511–12, 588
period, 94–6, 104, 107, 201, 245, 557
Urukagina, 76, 329
Uselu, Benin, 78
Utnapishtim, 477, 526
Utu, 222, 419, 429, 458
Vaca Plateau, 302
Valeri, Valerio, 472
Valley of Mexico. See Mexico, Valley of
values, 5
counter-ideals and, 630–2
as creations of the upper classes, 657
cultural traditions and, 632–6, 639
ideal behaviour and, 333, 626–30
self-interest and, 636–7
van der Bij, T. S., 17
van der Leeuw, Gerardus, 472
van Zantwijk, Rudolph, 61
Vandermeersch, L´eon, 145, 168
Venus (planet), 420, 424, 429, 452, 528, 531
vertical central axis. See axis mundi
vessels
bronze, 108–10, 547f, 554, 562
stone, 111

756
Index
vicunas, 299
Vijayanagara, 207
Vilcas, 503–4
villages, 100, 104–6, 120, 124, 201–2, 209, 233,
320, 367, 380–1
Virginia, 47
vizier (t3ty), 209–11
waka, 424–5, 452, 492–3, 503–4, 516, 533
Wakapata, 136, 469
Wanakauri, 512
wang (China, king), 72. See also China
war. See military
wards, 127, 198, 201, 226
Wari, 106, 466
Waro, 623
Warring States period, 109, 256, 414
Waskar, 252
wastes, organic, 122–3, 302, 306
water supply, 122, 244, 301, 567
Wayna Qhapaq, 132, 251–2, 324–5, 353, 503, 571
wealth, 669, 678
appropriation of, 315, 354, 375–94, 399–401
competition for, 376, 386, 394
deﬁnition of, 375
distribution of, 31, 44, 375–7, 640, 668–70,
678–9
money’s role in calculating, 49
power and prestige, 46, 88, 147, 404, 667–8, 679
status and, 45, 141, 354–5
tribute and, 389–93
Weber, Max, 40, 209, 329, 370, 388
W´ee, 525
Wei Valley, 109, 255
Weltgeschichte (World History), 23
Weni, 245
wheel, wheeled vehicles, 355. See also chariotry
Wheeler, G. C., 17
White, Leslie, 491, 675
White Wall (´Inb .hd), 134, 578
Whiten, Andrew, 669
Whorf, Benjamin, 9
willaq umu, 503, 508
Willett, Frank, 563
willka, 424
“Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails” (Binford), 18
Wilson, David, 27
Wilson, Peter, 141
Wiraqucha, 81, 182, 432, 434, 438–9, 441, 451,
463–4, 469, 479–80
Wiraqucha Inka, 136
Wissler, Clark, 6
witchcraft, 176, 237, 415, 423, 499–500, 667. See
also sorcerers
in complex societies, 405–6, 669
in small-scale societies, 406, 648
Wittfogel, Karl, 24, 59, 279, 676
women
class separation of, 188
as curers, 617–19
as labourers, 185–6
monarchs and rulers, 74–5
as priests, 59, 172–4, 179, 182, 236, 497–9, 500,
502, 505
relation to Inka king, 378
role in agriculture, 282, 286–8, 293, 297, 300,
306
social status, 188–90, 194, 271–2
as traders, 346–8, 351–3
values, 626–7, 629
weavers, 182, 360–2, 361f
as wives, 142, 168–9, 172–6, 179, 181–2, 184–5
World Ethnographic Sample, 18
Wright, Henry, 29
writing, 590f, 592f, 673
Classic Maya, 594–5
deﬁnition, 43, 585–7
Egypt, 590–1
evolution of, 33–4, 588–91, 593–6
as feature deﬁning civilization, 43, 585–6
hieroglyphs, 591
homophony, 588–90, 596, 600
increasing phoneticism, 596, 598, 600, 602–3
inﬂuence on thought, 585–6, 606–7
logoconsonantal scripts, 599–600
logographic scripts, 600–1
logophonic scripts, 598–603, 673
logosyllabic scripts, 598–9
Mesopotamia, 588–91, 596–7
principles of, 593–6, 598–603
Shang China, 109, 372, 505, 593–4
syllabograms, 594–5, 598–601
taxograms, 598, 600
uses of, 43, 229, 587–94, 605–7
varied forms, 598–602
Western Zhou, 593–4
Wu Ding, 169
Xachilan, 562
Xia Dynasty, 108, 466

Index
757
Xiaotun, 137–9
Xibeigang, 139
Xibo, 108
Xipe Totec, 456, 510, 558, 616
Xiuhtecuhtli, 83, 456, 488
Xochimilco Lake, 306, 323
Xochiquetzal, 437
Yale University, 17
yanakuna (Inka bonded labourer), 159–60, 325,
371, 380
Yangzi Valley, 108
Yaxchilan, 562
Yellow River, 54, 107, 226, 287
Yellow Springs, 449, 532
Yemoya, 519, 616
yi (Chinese administrative centre), 140, 214
Yoffee, Norman, 27–8, 35, 117–18, 133, 545
Yoruba, 28. See also Africa, West; Benin
agricultural regimes of, 284–7
architecture, 566, 572–3, 576
art, artists, 543–4, 547, 549–50, 552, 554, 558,
563
beliefs about individuals, 522–5
calendrics, 614
capitals, 124
Christianity, 57
city-states of, 57–8, 94–7, 116
clans, 174
classes, 146, 153, 267–8
cosmogony and, 459–60
cosmological beliefs, 453–4
councils and societies of, 197–200
courts, 224–6
craftworkers, 365–7, 552, 555, 558
deities, 413, 416, 420–1, 429–30, 436,
478–9
divination, 501, 608, 623
evolution of civilization, 38, 96
extended families, 174–5, 511, 523
farming implements of, 280
festivals, 510–11
Islam, 57
kin and gender relations of, 174–7
kingship and rulers, 71–2, 74, 77–8, 82, 85, 100,
116, 164, 199–200, 217, 264, 487, 492, 510,
573–5
land ownership of, 317–18, 321
language, 28, 96, 101–2
laws, 164, 223–6, 229–32, 236–7, 520
markets, 347–8
medicine, 616
metallurgy, 338–9
military, warfare and, 241, 247, 259–62
non-literacy of, 44
oral literature, 603–4
population of, 124, 287
priests, 499–501
recording devices, 44, 595
roads, 356
settlement patterns for, 54, 96–7, 100, 124
taxes, corv´ees, and rents, 383–6
traders, 347–9
tribute, 393
tropical-forest environments of, 25, 283–5
upper class, 153
urban centres of, 96–7, 100, 124, 127–9, 127f
values, 630–2
witchcraft, 519–20
women, 175–7, 188–9, 317–18, 346–8
writings on, 36, 57
Yucatan Peninsula, 25, 101, 301
Yucay Valley, 252
Zagros Mountains, 158, 244, 289, 292, 563
Zhengzhou, 108, 137, 138f, 373, 581
Zhou Dynasty. See China, Western Zhou
Zi clan, 86, 149–50, 168–9
ziggurat, 572
zodiac, 38
Zoroastrianism, 50, 411
Zou, Heng, 108–9
Zuidema, Thomas, 61, 75, 462
Zulu, 47, 73
