Conceptions of the Supernatural
411
postulated the existence of multiple gods who often acted at cross-purposes to
one other. On the basis of the work of Edward B. Tylor (1871), it used to be
assumed that still earlier there had been an animistic stage when the universe
was believed to be pervaded by a supernatural power that did not yet manifest
itself in the form of speciﬁc deities.
The religious concepts of early civilizations differed far more radically from
those of later transcendental religions than nineteenth-century anthropologists
assumed.Likebandandtribalsocieties,earlycivilizationsdonotappeartohave
distinguished between what we perceive as the natural, supernatural, and so-
cial realms. Beginning in the ﬁrst millennium b.c., the Greeks, the Hebrews,
the Zoroastrian Persians, and various Hindu and Chinese philosophers differ-
entiated the natural world, made up of plants, animals, and inanimate objects,
which possessed only limited or no consciousness; the social world of humans,
whose behaviour was guided by goals, reason, and moral considerations; and
the supernatural world of the gods, who for the ﬁrst time were seen as existing
apart from and independently of the natural and social realms. Supernatural
beings possessed intelligence and emotions, but they were less subject than
humans to the constraints of the material world, which they had created. In
Greece, a small number of materialistic philosophers effectively denied the ex-
istence or at least the relevance of the supernatural, leaving only the social and
natural realms as matters of human concern. This did not, however, prove to
be a popular view. The greatest and most lasting discovery of the later prein-
dustrial societies of Eurasia was that the behaviour observed in the natural
world was fundamentally different from that encountered in the social realm
and that, because of this, relations with plants, animals, and inanimate objects
had to be very different from those with human beings. The philosopher Karl
Jaspers (1953) labelled this dramatic shift in human outlook, which he believed
marked the beginning of modern society, the axial era (Eisenstadt 1986).
In early civilizations, it was assumed that the natural world, of which humans
were a part, was suffused with and animated by supernatural powers. There
was no distinction between the natural and the supernatural: everything was
alive, conscious, and interrelated (Townsend 1979: 28–31). Humans lived in a
realm composed only of other beings; there were no things (J. Allen 1988: 8).
Nature functioned because it was animated by powers that behaved much like
human beings but were usually much stronger and therefore could determine
human destiny. These powers are variously referred to in the anthropological
literature as ‘gods’, ‘goddesses’, ‘deities’, or ‘spirits’ (Swanson 1960: 6–31).
Deities possessed reason, will, a full array of human emotions (including
love, anger, jealousy, ambition, and compassion), and the ability to communi-
cate with each other and with human beings. They also possessed enhanced

412
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
powers that enabled them to do what ordinary humans could not. They lived
longer, were able to change shape, moved instantaneously from one place to
another, could be present in many places at the same time, and travelled back
and forth between the terrestrial realm and the extraterrestrial ones. Human
souls could also move about in dreams and shamans could visit the realms re-
served for the gods, but for humans these were special capacities rather than
normalattributes.Thegods,oratleastthemightiestofthem,alsopossessedthe
power to create and sustain the universe. Deities in early civilizations in many
ways resembled those found in polytheistic post-axial cultures, although the
latter were anthropomorphized more systematically and clearly distinguished
from natural phenomena.
People who lived in early civilizations believed that, because the natural
world, which they inhabited and were part of, was animated by spirits, it was
possible for them to interact with the natural/supernatural realm in much the
same way that they interacted with other human beings, especially very pow-
erful ones. They hoped, by communicating with the deities who pervaded the
natural world, to win the favour or at least avoid the anger of the powerful su-
pernatural forces that controlled the cosmos. This meant that what we identify
as the natural and the supernatural were regarded not as separate from but
as intimately linked to and interpenetrating the social realm. Human beings
could communicate with a supernaturally animated natural realm much as they
communicated with one other. It follows from this that the axial-age distinc-
tion between culture and nature, to which Claude L´evi-Strauss has attributed
universal relevance, meant no more to people living in early civilizations than
it did to hunter-gatherers (Ingold 1996: 117).
The refusal of people in early civilizations to distinguish the social, natural,
and supernatural realms has tended to be interpreted as the manifestation of a
‘primitive’ or ‘prelogical’ stage of intellectual development. Yet the distinction
between this outlook and later ones was clearly ontological rather than episte-
mological; it had to do not with perception and logic but with the manner in
which the universe was assumed to operate. Christopher Hallpike (1979) and
others have demonstrated that the people who lived in early societies were
as fully aware of causality as we are. They understood that water habitually
ﬂowed downhill, that speciﬁc types of stone could be shaped using particular
techniques, and that clay became harder and more waterproof when it was
ﬁred. The difference between early views and modern ones was that, when
it came to conceptualizing the nature of the universe, early peoples used the
understandings that were most familiar to them, those that concerned the
way human society worked. The universe was presumed to be animated by
powerful forces that possessed human-like personalities.

Conceptions of the Supernatural
413
This process was encouraged by what J. S. Kennedy (1992) has characterized
as humanity’s compulsive anthropomorphizing, a form of thought that is preva-
lent in all societies even if it has been somewhat curtailed in modern science
and engineering by trying to account for the behaviour of natural phenom-
ena other than in terms of the understandings and purposeful interventions of
actors. Stewart Guthrie (1993) argues that humans are innately predisposed
to view the natural world as social. Sahlins (1976: 53–54), echoing Marx and
Engels, maintains that explaining the world in terms of social understandings
was accompanied by a reciprocal assumption that the social order mirrored
that of the natural/supernatural realm.
As a result of the pervasiveness of human-centred explanations, it was as-
sumed in early civilizations that there were no instances of the operation of
cause and effect that could not be suspended by the gods if humans could only
persuade them to do so. Therefore the powerful human-like forces that ani-
mated nature could be appealed to when human beings needed supernatural
help to cope with insurmountable natural and social dangers. If supernatu-
ral powers ensured that water normally ran downhill, people might hope that
in times of crisis or special need these same powers might be persuaded to
make it ﬂow uphill. Conversely, ﬂint-knappers or potters might request that
appropriate supernatural forces ensure that the laws of nature, on which they
depended, not be abrogated in the course of their work (Childe 1956a; 1956b:
170). The belief that nature was controlled by supernatural forces that were
inherent in it was no more detrimental to the recognition and use of concepts
of cause and effect than was the medieval European belief in miracles. It pro-
vided people in early civilizations with reassurance that by addressing the gods
they could do something effective to cope with the many natural challenges
that their technology and medical knowledge were ill-equipped or entirely
unequipped to handle.
the nature of deities
Despite intensive study of the religions of early civilizations and a massive
data base, there is little agreement about how deities were conceptualized.
Prominent Mayanists such as Tatiana Proskouriakoff have expressed doubts
that the Maya recognized actual deities as opposed to vaguely personiﬁed and
mutable natural forces (Taube 1992: 7). Some Sinologists maintain that the
Chinese venerated primarily if not exclusively ancestral deities (Allan 1991:
19–20), and some experts on the Yoruba believe that most of their deities were
human beings who, because of their special qualities, were treated as divinities
after they had died (K. Barber 1981).

414
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Resolving such issues is difﬁcult even for the best-documented early civi-
lizations, but special problems are encountered with at least three of them.
The Yoruba have been exposed for several centuries to Christianity and Islam.
This contact may have modiﬁed indigenous religious concepts or at least the
way in which these concepts are explained to foreigners. Much of what is
known about early Chinese religious beliefs has reached the present ﬁltered
through Confucian humanism. During the Warring States period, this move-
ment appears to have reinterpreted cosmic deities and nature spirits as a
succession of human ancestral heroes beginning with Huangdi, the Yellow
Emperor. Such changes may have misleadingly enhanced the apparent impor-
tance of ancestor worship in early Chinese religion (Allan 1991: 19–20; Lewis
1990: 167–68, 195). Similarly, religious concepts of highland Mexican origin
may have altered lowland Maya religious beliefs in Postclassic times. There is,
for example, growing evidence that the idea of 5,126-year cycles of creation
and destruction of the universe may not yet have been present in Maya culture
during the Classic period (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 251; Schele and Mathews 1998:
106–7; Reents-Budet 1998: 78).
Concepts of deity seem to have varied signiﬁcantly from one early civiliza-
tion to another. This would accord with a widely accepted particularist view
of religious phenomena. Yet, while not denying that speciﬁc delineations and
classiﬁcations of deities, the myths concerning them, and the extent of their
anthropomorphization varied considerably from one early civilization to an-
other, certain features appear to be cross-culturally recurrent. In each early
civilization people viewed deities as a series of manifestations of the forces
of nature, which, whether or not they assumed human form, were aware of
human beings, as people in industrial societies believe the physical universe
is not. Deities possessed individual personalities which inclined them to treat
human beings well or badly. Yet human beings could never be certain of a par-
ticular deity’s continuing goodwill, even if that deity were a benevolent one and
they had served it assiduously. Dealing with deities was no less problematical
and potentially dangerous for humans than dealing with kings and upper-class
people was for the lower classes or dealing with the natural environment could
be for all human beings.
The deities did not, however, exhaust the varieties of supernatural power in
early civilizations. The Aztec and their neighbours believed that a numinous
divine power was diffused throughout the universe. This force animated natu-
ral phenomena, human beings, and humanly fabricated objects, as well as the
gods. The Aztec referred to this diffuse power, as well as to speciﬁc deities,
as teotl (Townsend 1979: 28). They are reported to have believed that every-
thing in nature had a soul – including plants, animals, and stones – and for

Conceptions of the Supernatural
415
this reason apologized to trees when they cut them down (L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 346). Yet, while teotl manifested itself in maize, which it caused to grow,
individual cobs of corn were not regarded as deities because they possessed
only a limited power to nourish humans (Broda 1987: 75). Likewise, an Aztec
prisoner of war contained divine power that could nourish the gods if he were
sacriﬁced to them, but this did not make him a god in the same sense that the
divine forces that controlled rain, sunlight, or success in warfare were gods.
The divine energy that pervaded the universe was of the same substance but
different in degree and in the way it behaved from the deities that determined
how the cosmos would function. Inga Clendinnen (1991: 248) has described
the Aztec gods as clusters of sacred forces engaged in complex interaction.
The Classic Maya used the same root to refer to sacred entities or deities
that possessed wills and personalities of their own (k’u) and to the cosmic
power (or soul-force) (k’ul) that they believed hallowed and activated the
entire universe. K’ul has been described as a vital, impersonal, natural force
that animated all things, including the gods (Houston and Stuart 1996: 291;
Schele and Mathews 1998: 413; Sharer 1996: 153). It was the power that
made plants grow, animals reproduce, and people live and it kept the cosmos
functioning. It also sustained objects that human beings had made, including
ceramic vessels and sacred buildings, and enabled those objects to perform
their social functions. The amount of k’ul that was concentrated in a temple
increased as a result of the building’s being repeatedly used and had to be
ritually released when the temple was abandoned if it were not to become
dangerous. K’ul appears to have been closely associated with blood, and was
also present in plant secretions (itz) such as the sap and gums (used for incense)
associated with the cosmic tree that held up the universe. They were believed
to transmit supernatural powers from one level of the cosmos to another and
used to practise witchcraft and divination (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993:
234, 448). Yet only in certain instances did these supernatural powers come
together to form deities.
The use of a single term to designate supernatural energy and deity is not
documented in the other civilizations in our sample. In highland Peru, how-
ever, kamaquen or kamaq (from kama, ‘existence’) referred to the enduring
supernatural essence or soul-power that energized and shaped matter, made
deities ﬂourish, and provided all that was necessary to sustain different forms
of life in the natural and social realms (Gose 1993). As a result of possessing
this power, deities, including animal spirits and the ancestors of human groups,
were able continuously to fashion, energize, and sustain their living descen-
dants. Being dry and unchanging, kamaquen produced life by combining their
own life-shaping power with the animating force of water, which was believed

416
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
to come from the Paciﬁc Ocean and was considered essential to produce life.
Diviners or shamans (kamasca) were believed to be infused temporarily with
the kamaquen of a particular deity (Salomon 1991: 16).
The Yoruba concept of ase signiﬁed life-force and authority and also the
energy that was associated with the act of procreation. This force existed ev-
erywhere, brought all things into existence, and opposed chaos and decay.
While ase was most notably present in deities (orisa), it could be accumulated
by individual human beings. By acquiring sufﬁcient ase, anyone or anything
could become a deity (H. Drewal 1989: 258). Some of the ase of a god could
be incorporated into a potion and transferred to a devotee of that deity by
being rubbed into his or her head (M. Drewal 1989: 203–7). The ase of a king,
who had the power of life and death over his subjects, was second only to that
of deities, who created life (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 89–90). Like the
power of life and death, ase was composed of contrasting qualities such as heat
and cold, violence and peace, danger and safety, red and white (Apter 1992:
84). Ase, as energy, manifested itself differently in different people or deities.
The ase of the war god Ogun was violent, that of the creator deity Orisala
(Obatalla) wise and peaceful (H. Drewal 1989: 240–41, 258).
Although there is no direct evidence for China from as early as the Shang or
Western Zhou periods, a similar concept, ﬁrst recorded in the Han Dynasty,
may have been qi, which is interpreted as referring to the formless but conﬁg-
uring primal energy present in everything that existed. Qi was associated with
wind, breath, life, vapours arising from cooked grain, the human spirit, strong
emotions, and sexual arousal. This concept may originally have referred to a
primordial life-force emanating from the waters under the earth and animating
everything in the cosmos, while shen denoted both individual celestial gods
and the spirit force, associated with the sky world, that created form and order
out of chaos (Lewis 1990: 140, 162, 213–18).
In Egypt the creation narrative associated with the solar cult at Heliopolis
identiﬁed the primary energy promoting the establishment and functioning of
the universe as male sexual drive and sunlight. In New Kingdom temple ritu-
als performed throughout Egypt, the sexual arousal of male deities by female
singers and dancers played a vital role in the daily rites of cosmic renewal
(Robins 1993: 153). In other Egyptian creation narratives, creative power
was identiﬁed with supernatural power or magic (h
• k3), creative utterance
(h
• w), and supernatural insight (sı3). These powers seem to have represented
a more abstract and analytical understanding of the forces that had created and
sustained the universe (J. Allen 2000: 156–57, 171–73). Associated with these
powers was cosmic order (m3t), which prevented both deities and the universe
from lapsing into primal chaos or cosmic disorder (ısft) (Englund 1989b: 19).

Conceptions of the Supernatural
417
Etymologically, h
• w was associated with h
• w, (food) (the vowels may have been
different) and m3t with m3w (food offerings). The cosmic order was thus
closely aligned with the creation and nourishment of life.
The Egyptians viewed divine power as animating and sustaining the uni-
verse. The hieroglyph for god (ntr) has been interpreted as a banner blown
in the wind, indicating the presence of an invisible force. The adjective ntry
may refer to this power. Yet, while all natural phenomena were believed to
be animated by divine power, natural phenomena were not regularly equated
lexically with deities. R was the ordinary word for the sun as well as the name
of the sun god, Re. Yet the earth god (Geb) and the sky goddess (Nut) were not
designated by the common terms for earth (t3) and sky (pt). The Nile River,
which was identiﬁed with the earth god or with Osiris, the god of fertility and
death, was never an object of worship in its own right and was referred to sim-
ply as ıtrw (the river), while the Nile ﬂood was associated with a minor deity,
H
• py. This suggests that the ancient Egyptians believed natural phenomena to
be animated and controlled by divine power or manifestations of divine power
rather than divinities in their own right.
In the past, Tylor’s followers interpreted such diffuse supernatural power
as the ‘mana-like’ vestige of an animistic stage of religious belief. This view
overlooked the lack of evidence of a belief in some general supernatural force
in small-scale human societies without an accompanying belief in behaviourally
and often physically anthropomorphized spirits (Trigger 1990c: 107–10). The
concept of an abstract supernatural force represented an attempt to describe
the power that animated the universe, including human beings. The idea of
deity sought to identify and establish relations with delimited manifestations of
that force that were vital for the survival and welfare of human beings. These
manifestations were associated with various aspects of nature, such as sunlight,
moisture, fertile soil, food, geological formations, and the powers associated
with various meteorological phenomena. Supernatural force manifested itself
in human beings in forms such as body heat, the ability to think and move,
male sexual drive, and female reproductive capacity. Thus, any one of these
forces or any combination of them could have been used to conceptualize
supernatural power in a generic sense.
This general analytical framework was shared by all societies that understood
the cosmos using the same concepts they employed to analyse social relations.
The main difference between more egalitarian societies and early civilizations
was the differing understanding of society that was brought to the analysis. In
egalitarian societies, people saw themselves relating to other human beings and
to spirits as individuals who for various personal reasons possessed differing
degrees and sorts of power.

418
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
In all early civilizations, deities were believed to participate in the con-
trol of natural processes and the shaping of social life. Some of these deities
were manifestations of what we perceive as natural forces; others represented
surviving and often supernaturally empowered aspects of deceased humans.
Ancestors were linked by their reproductive powers to the creative forces of
the natural world, and it is often difﬁcult to distinguish ancestral deities from
spirits or gods associated with the natural realm.
It is indicative of the extent to which human behavioural characteristics were
projected onto the cosmos that not only the spirits animating living beings but
also those controlling what we would regard as inanimate phenomena were
gendered. The vast majority of deities were either male or female; the rest
were bisexual or took both male and female forms (Clendinnen 1991: 168,
249). Deities became the foci of myths or sacred narratives that recounted their
deeds and in the course of doing so described their personalities and special
qualities, thus enhancing their resemblance to human beings (Taube 1992: 8).
In early civilizations, deities differed from one another in the extent of
their powers and the aspects of nature they controlled. Some exercised a
general cosmic function or controlled (or were) natural phenomena that were
of great importance to human beings, such as rainfall, sunlight, or reproductive
capacity; others were associated with the functioning of more geographically
delimited aspects of the natural world, such as particular rivers, lakes, or hills.
Minor deities occurred in large numbers and were regarded as subject to the
authority of more powerful ones.
Although deities regulated (or were) aspects of the cosmos, they also acted
as patrons of kingdoms, cities, families, craft associations, and individuals. They
were venerated by their clients, who expected them to look after their interests.
In general, major cosmic deities were the patrons of territorial or city-states
while less powerful forces of nature, or divinized ancestors, were the patrons of
smaller social groups. Ayllus, calpollis, and patrilineages worshipped ancestral
spirits, local gods, or cosmic deities according to their own rites and at their
own cult places. Humans also sought to placate hosts of minor spirits that
might inﬂict illness or bad luck on them, often by seeking help from the more
powerful deities who controlled such spirits. The relations between deities, the
natural world, and the spirits of human ancestors were complex and expressed
in culturally speciﬁc ways.
Thorkild Jacobsen (1970: 21; 1974) estimates that there were three thousand
tofourthousanddeitiesintheMesopotamianpantheon;ancientlistsrecordthe
names of more than two thousand of them, mostly in Sumerian forms (Bott´ero
1992: 216). About ﬁfty were major deities, seven of whom possessed the power
to determine annually the fate of all human communities and individuals.

Conceptions of the Supernatural
419
Lower in rank were the igigi and below them still lesser spirits and demons,
some of which caused illness. All these supernatural beings were descended
from An, the sky god. While the principal deities constituted a well-deﬁned
family extending over four or more generations, minor supernaturals were
classiﬁed in groups according to function and lacked individual genealogies.
High-ranking deities included Enlil, the storm god, Enki, the god of fresh
water and fertility, and Ninhursaga, the goddess of barren ground. Among the
younger generations of deities were Nannar, the moon god, Utu, the sun god,
Inanna, the goddess of storehouses and fertility, and Erishkegal, the goddess
of death and the underworld (Jacobsen 1976: 121–22). The principal deities
were associated with various aspects of nature and have been described as the
‘motors’ driving the natural world (Bott´ero 1992: 215). At the time of creation
they had also become the patron deities of speciﬁc city-states (Oates 1978:
474), and these assignments mirrored the economic geography of southern
Mesopotamia. In the far south, the chief urban deities were patrons of fresh
water and marsh life; along the lower Euphrates River they were associated
withorchardsandcattlebreeding;inthenorththeywerepatronsofsheepherd-
ing; and to the west they were connected with grain farming (Jacobsen 1976:
25; Maisels 1990: 310–12). In addition to controlling various natural forces
and being associated with particular urban centres, these deities presided over
speciﬁc functions of the social realm. Utu, the sun god, was the god of justice,
Enlil the god of kingship, and Enki responsible for craft production. Individual
humans looked to minor deities to promote their personal well-being. These
deities acted as intermediaries between individual humans and higher-ranking
deities.
Richard Townsend (1979: 31) observes that in the Valley of Mexico cults
addressed natural phenomena such as rain, ﬁre, sun, wind, and air through
the deities that animated them. H. B. Nicholson (1971b) has assigned most
of these deities to three thematic complexes: celestial creativity and divine
paternalism; rain, moisture, and agricultural fertility; and war, sacriﬁce, blood,
and death. Normally two deities were singled out for special reverence by each
city-state. The Aztec’s principal deities, whose main shrines were located atop
their largest temple platform, were Tlaloc, the chief god of water, rain, and
fertility, and Huitzilopochtli, a solar war god who was their patron deity.
Variation in the way in which major deities were conceptualized and named
in different city-states provided distinctive patron deities for the hundreds of
city-states that existed across central Mexico. Townsend (1979: 29) suggests
that variations in the names of gods were kennings, or descriptive titles, that
differentiated local aspects of a limited number of deities. It is also possible
that numerous originally separate gods were being systematically ordered by

420
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
identifying them as variants of a smaller number of deities. Scholars have
assigned at least eleven deities to the Tezcatlipoca complex – four of them
clearly different forms of Tezcatlipoca and the others either closely related
deities or alternative names for him (M. E. Smith 1996: 211–15). Historical
evidence suggests that the Aztec had upgraded their once humble patron deity,
Huitzilopochtli, by identifying him with the Tezcatlipoca of the south, who was
a deity of major cosmic importance. Gods also tended to be arranged in sets
of four, one for each direction, with perhaps a ﬁfth deity for the centre.
The major gods in the Valley of Mexico were the foci of elaborate myths
concerning their cosmic functions, relations with each other, and dealings with
human beings. These myths provided them with distinctive personalities and
identiﬁed them with human leaders who had played a major role in the found-
ing and early history of particular city-states. Quetzalcoatl, a major cosmic deity
associated with creation, fertility, and the planet Venus, was identiﬁed as the
ruler of the former city of Tollan, from whom all members of the nobility in the
Valley of Mexico claimed to be descended. This equating of gods and ancient
ethnic leaders has encouraged the view that all Mexican gods were deiﬁed
heroes and ancestors. As in Mesopotamia, in addition to their identiﬁcation
with the forces of nature and with particular cities, gods were assigned speciﬁc
social roles. Huitzilopochtli was a god of war, Quetzalcoatl the principal deity
of priests, and Tezcatlipoca a patron of kings.
Ranking below the principal deities were numerous nature spirits. These in-
cluded the calpolli deities (calpolteotl), to whom members of calpollis at-
tributed their corporate existence and well-being. These deities had led their
human followers to their historical places of settlement and continued to live
nearby in hills, caves, and other natural features. Minor supernatural beings
were believed to be present in inanimate objects made from stone, clay, and
other materials and capable of emerging from them to harm human beings
during periods of cosmic breakdown (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 70, 246, 252–53).
The term teotl seems to have been applied to the dead only in its broad sense
of any numinous power. There is no evidence of ancestor cults in the Valley
of Mexico, regardless of how high the status of the person, and the human
personality was believed not to endure long after death. Deities appear to
have been forces of nature that were drawn into human affairs and were often
identiﬁed with legendary political leaders.
The Yoruba revered an elaborate hierarchy of deities who were referred to
as orisa, ebora, or imole (Bascom 1969: 77). These deities were believed by
traditionalreligiousspecialiststonumberbetweenfourhundredandseventeen
hundred. Their names, interrelations, and gender varied from one place to
another (Apter 1992: 154–55). The most senior was the creator god, Olorun,

Conceptions of the Supernatural
421
who lived in the sky, while the rest either lived exclusively on earth or shifted
between earth and sky. A number of deities associated with various aspects of
nature, such as particular hills, rivers, trees, the earth, lightning, and diseases,
were worshipped in one form or another throughout the Yoruba region. Minor
bushspiritsthatmanifestedthemselvesintreesandpondstendedtobefriendly
andinclinedtohelphumans,buttheforestwasalsoarealmofghosts,monsters,
and demons who sought to harm people (Bascom 1969: 77; K. Barber 1981;
1991: 316). The most powerful deities had already existed prior to the creation
of the world, but their natures were deﬁned only later as a result of their
achievements in the terrestrial realm (Apter 1992: 151). Many deities were
created through the fragmentation or division of existing ones, and each new
deity was assigned its own taboos, songs, and personality (K. Barber 1981:
732–33).
Many powerful deities were equated with important historical personages
who had lived near the time of creation. The thunder god, Sango, was iden-
tiﬁed with the fourth king of Oyo, who committed suicide after inadvertently
destroying his palace with his powerful lightning charm. Such individuals had
been transformed into deities by sinking into the ground, rising into the sky, or
becoming a rock or a river. Despite their continued supernatural presence in
the terrestrial sphere, they were immortal beings of heaven (ara orun) instead
of simply mortal beings on earth (ara aye) (Apter 1992: 151). Thus, like the
Aztec, the Yoruba viewed their major deities as natural forces while simul-
taneously equating them with major historical ﬁgures. While Bascom (1969)
and others interpret these deities as ancestors (agbanle) who became gods,
Apter (1992: 150–52) regards many of them as nature deities on which the
personalities of speciﬁc human beings have been superimposed. The goddess
Ayelala, however, began as a slave who was sacriﬁced in the nineteenth cen-
tury in a ritual that marked the conclusion of a war between two Yoruba states
and quickly evolved into a regional deity whose main function was to punish
oath-breakers (Awolalu 1979: 41–44). It was therefore possible for humans
to become deities, as well as for deities to be woven into human history. For
humans to become or to be identiﬁed with a deity they had to depart from the
human world in some ritually signiﬁcant manner.
Yoruba kings or royal lineages claimed a special relation with one or more
major deities, making these gods the patron deities of their city-states. The
king of Oyo supported the cult of Sango, whom he claimed as his ancestor
and whose most important shrine was located in the royal quarter of the Oyo
capital. Other deities were associated with the heads of quarters and lineages.
Such patronage did not prevent these deities from having other, less important
cults in other quarters of the same city and at still lower levels in the social

422
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
hierarchy (Apter 1992: 21). Extended families often venerated one or more
major deities as their patrons or protectors. Sacriﬁces were also offered to
ancestral souls by their living patrilineal descendants in the expectation that
such souls would promote their family’s welfare among the gods. Despite
their interventionary powers, however, dead ancestors were not designated as
deities, and the worship of the gods greatly overshadowed that of ancestors
(Bascom 1969: 77).
Shang kings and nobles focused great attention on reporting to lineage and
clan ancestors and petitioning and sacriﬁcing to them at their tombs and at
special ancestral shrines and temples. In their pursuit of supernatural support
to ensure good weather, abundant harvests, productive hunts, successful jour-
neys, and health and well-being for themselves and their families, Shang rulers
approached their principal god, Shangdi, through the mediation of their ances-
tors (Eno 1990). While the most remote ancestors were regarded as the most
potent intermediaries and the ones whose sphere of operation affected society
as a whole, it was recently deceased ancestors who were directly appealed
to for intercession. Because of fear that they might be malevolent as well as
well-intentioned, they were carefully placated (Allan 1991: 50–52; Keightley
1978b: 218).
Shangdi has been variously identiﬁed as the apical ancestor of the Shang
royal clan, a dead king, the collective embodiment of all dead kings, and a
nature deity unrelated to Shang royalty. While the king communicated with
Shangdi through the deceased Shang rulers and more remote non-royal an-
cestors, Shangdi issued his commands not to living kings but to the forces of
nature (Chao 1972: 143–44). Fragmentary legends have been interpreted as
suggesting that Qi, the hero-ancestor of the Shang royal clan, was the offspring
of Shangdi, who, in the form of a black bird, had caused the wife of the mythical
emperor Diku to become pregnant by swallowing an egg. The black bird has
also been identiﬁed with the sun (ri) (Allan 1991: 39). This myth suggests that
Shangdi may have been a major nature deity who commanded other nature
deities and had the power to inﬂict disasters as well as blessings on the Shang
kings and their subjects. Each noble clan may have had its own hero-ancestor
descended from a nature deity (Keightley 1999b: 252–53).
The early Chinese worshipped many deities identiﬁed with the forces of na-
ture. Trees and groves were locales of popular cults, and earth altars (she) were
the foci of community and state agricultural rituals addressed to the deities
that ensured the fertility of the soil. They also venerated spirits associated
with rivers, lakes, forests, winds, rains, astronomical bodies, and mountains
and offered sacriﬁces to the cardinal directions (Creel 1937: 180–81; Lewis
1990: 215). Stellar deities, as well as ones associated with the winds and rain,

Conceptions of the Supernatural
423
were probably viewed as having their primary locus in the sky, while others,
perhaps originally presided over by the god Huangdi, were associated with
the Yellow Springs, or underworld (Allan 1991: 66; Granet 1958 [1930]: 153).
Deities such as the Dragon Woman and the Eastern and Western Mothers
were yet other objects of cults associated with natural forces. While it has
been suggested that only the royal and noble families venerated their ances-
tors, every extended family may have had an altar to its ancestors and to the
soil (Granet 1958 [1930]: 246).
Maya deities have been described as manifestations of natural phenomena
(Schele and Miller 1986: 42). Gary Gossen and Richard Leventhal (1993:
210–11) maintain, in contrast, that at all levels Maya religion was based on
ancestor worship and that state cults were addressed to royal ancestors as well
as to nature deities. These characterizations are not necessarily contradictory.
Regionalized manifestations of nature deities had tutelary relations to polities
ortoroyalandotherhigh-rankingfamilies,andinthiscontextnaturedeitiesand
royal ancestors became identiﬁed with each other (Houston and Stuart 1996:
292, 302; Taube 1992: 9). While major deities in different centres may have had
the same names and been recognized as part of a common overall structure of
belief, their ritual signiﬁcance, speciﬁc meanings, and myths appear to have
varied signiﬁcantly from one city-state to another. Because of this variation, it
has been questioned to what extent Maya deities constituted a clearly deﬁned
set (Taube 1992: 7).
It has been suggested that Maya gods were less personally characterized
than those of other early civilizations (Baudez 1994: 267; A. Miller 1986: 21),
tending to occur in multiple forms relating to each of the four directions
and exhibiting young, old, and dead manifestations. Yet their apparent lack of
characterization may simply be a consequence of the scarcity of known Classic-
period myths. Sons’ engendering or giving rebirth to their fathers may have
been the central mystery or metanarrative of Maya religion (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 281).
The most powerful Classic Maya deity appears to have been K’awil, an aged,
omnipresent deity associated with rulership, scribal arts, the four quarters, the
world tree, all levels of the universe, the principal bird deity, and maize. His
counterpart in the Postclassic period was the paramount deity Itzamna, whose
power was based on his command of witchcraft and other forms of esoteric
knowledge(Taube1992:31–42,78).Itisnotclear,however,thatK’awilenjoyed
a paramount position among his fellow deities during the Classic period. The
majority were identiﬁed with the sun, rain, weather, and crop fertility, as well
as with human activities such as rulership, subsistence, and trade. Maya deities
were articulated within the framework of a 260-day sacred calendar, while the

424
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
timing of their rituals was determined by the roles they played in annual natural
cycles (A. Miller 1986: 22).
Maya rulers traced their descent from major deities, and dead kings were
identiﬁed with one of the Hero Twins who had defeated the gods of death and
risen temporarily out of the underworld as the sun or Venus. Long-dead royal
ancestors were also identiﬁed with sun gods and moon goddesses and recently
dead kings with the young maize god and K’awil (Houston and Stuart 1996:
297). These were all deities whom rulers impersonated while alive. Kings also
erected elaborate funerary monuments where they were venerated after death
as manifestations of various celestial deities who sank into the underworld and
rose again.
Much attention also appears to have been paid to the mortuary cults of non-
royal ancestors. William Haviland (1968: 112) maintains that in Late Classic
Tikal only elite compounds had identiﬁable ancestral shrines, but this does
not mean that ancestral cults were limited to the nobility. Such cults may have
played an important role in religious life at all levels of Classic Maya society.
Among the Inka supernatural power was manifested in wakas, visible ob-
jects animated by deities who communicated with humans through dreams,
oracles, and supernatural signs and provided them with life, food, health, fer-
tility, and whatever else they required. The most powerful deities had as wakas
the sun, moon, ocean, stars, and meteorological phenomena such as lightning.
Most deities were, however, associated with less powerful and more localized
wakas – mountains, lakes, springs, caves, rock outcrops, trees, shrines, an-
cient ruins, and efﬁgies (MacCormack 1991: 338). Field wakas were usually
stones that served as boundary markers (saywa) or ﬁeld guardians (wanka)
(Rowe 1944: 296). Living humans who had waka status were referred to as
willka. In addition, numinous objects called conopa, including unusually large
orcuriouslyshapedcorn-cobs,werekeptandveneratedinhouses.Suchobjects
are variously referred to as minor domestic deities or talismans (MacCormack
1991: 406). Deities could be persuaded to move into new physical embod-
iments if their old ones could not be transported to a new location or had
been destroyed. From this it is clear that wakas were physical manifestations
of divine power rather than the essence of such power.
Many wakas were revered as rumapkamaq, creators and sustainers of lo-
cal human groups. Each such waka traced its origin to a deity whose body
had turned to stone but whose enduring supernatural power was a source of
fertility and protection on which the survival and well-being of an ayllu de-
pended. Through its power to shape matter, such a waka was able to create new
members for the ayllu. Wakas could speak through oracle priests and afﬂict
ayllu members with famine and disease if they became displeased with their

Conceptions of the Supernatural
425
behaviour (Gose 1993). After death the power that had shaped and sustained
a human being returned to the waka from which it had come, but the mum-
miﬁed body (mallqui) also became a waka. Mummiﬁed ancestors constituted
links between creator wakas and the living people they supported. The mum-
miﬁed bodies of dead kings were important wakas, kings having been created
by and embodying the power (kamaquen) of the sun. The body of Manqu
Qhapaq, the ﬁrst Inka king, was preserved only in the form of a stone. The
bodies of some children who had been ritually sacriﬁced by royal command also
became wakas, some of which were venerated as oracles in the communities
where they had been born (Rowe 1944: 295–98).
Egyptian deities (ntrw) were the forces that animated the various aspects
of the natural world: sun, earth, water, sky, moon, stars, winds, geological
formations, and wild and domesticated plants and animals. Each deity had its
own name and attributes, and the most important of them were the tutelary
deities of particular Egyptian towns and localities (J. Allen 2000: 43–45). Each
major Egyptian temple had not only its own presiding deity but also its own
creation myth and place of creation. While gods who bore the same name
sometimes presided over a number of widely dispersed localities, it is difﬁcult
to determine whether these deities represented syncretisms of once distinct
gods or had been transplanted from one place to another. If the latter, each
local manifestation acquired its distinctive attributes. The principal male deity
in each locality was viewed as the creator god, whose power had brought the
universe and human society into existence and sustained both. Through his
female counterpart, this god continually renewed himself by being reborn as
his own son. During their lifetimes, kings were the earthly manifestation of
the living version of each creator god; in death they became identiﬁed by
means of mummiﬁcation with the older and unchanging (dead or Osiris) form.
Offerings were made at the graves of ordinary people, and the term ntr was
applied to dead commoners as well as to living kings and nature spirits. Ntr
appears to have signiﬁed any entity that received cult offerings. The extent of
such an entity’s supernatural power seems to have corresponded to the volume
of offerings received (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 33–37). Egyptians must
have believed the supernatural powers of dead commoners to be very limited
by comparison with those of dead kings or major deities.
In all early civilizations deities or personiﬁed natural/supernatural powers
were thought to play a major role in the operation of the natural and social
realms. Tutelary deities were identiﬁed in various ways with human ancestors.
The Chinese, Inka, and perhaps the Maya looked to dead ancestors for signif-
icant protection against natural and social calamities. The Aztec and Yoruba
identiﬁed early historical ﬁgures as human manifestations of gods, while in

426
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ancient Egypt gods were believed to have ruled on earth prior to giving rise
to the ﬁrst mortal kings. The Mesopotamians, while occasionally identifying
early heroic rulers as the children of gods and mortal women, generally saw
little in common between the gods and human ancestors.
Divine power was identiﬁed most essentially with the forces of nature. Even
ancestral spirits, to whom great powers were attributed, were, because of their
fertility, regarded as forces of nature. Gods associated with natural phenomena
sometimes bore the common or generic names of those phenomena. Other
gods were given names that alluded to one or more of their characteristic
natural aspects. The Aztec sun god was called Huitzilopochtli, ‘hummingbird
of the left side’, a kenning reference to his being a solar deity who had cosmic
associations with the Tezcatlipoca of the south (the left-hand side of the sun’s
daily course across the sky) and hence with the directional colour blue, which
was associated with hummingbirds. Some Sumerian deities were referred to
as the lord (en) or lady (nin) of the element they animated, such as Enlil (Lord
Wind), Enki (Lord [moistened] Earth), and Ninhursaga (Lady of the Stony
Ground).
The whole of nature was believed to be animated by a primordial divine
power that manifested itself to varying degrees in different entities. Major
natural forces and in some civilizations deceased ancestors possessed much
more of this power than did living humans. Human destiny was seen as deter-
mined to a large extent by divine powers that manifested themselves in nature
or were nature and thus played a major role in shaping the social order.
manifestations of deities
Deities were believed to have personalities that resembled those of powerful
human beings, but they were not invariably anthropomorphized (Fig. 19.1).
Sometimes they combined human and animal attributes. Deities could also
manifest themselves as natural phenomena such as animals, plants, rocks, and
stars, in efﬁgies and ritual objects, and in living human bodies, which deities
might occupy while humans were in a trance state.
There is considerable uncertainty about the extent to which anthropomor-
phic portrayals of deities were intended to be iconic or were believed to rep-
resent their actual forms. Egyptologists debate whether Egyptian deities were
thought to exist primarily in human form or as immaterial forces that ani-
mated the universe (J. Allen 2000: 43–45; Bonnet 1999 [1939]; Silverman
1991: 15–16). Most Egyptian deities were depicted either entirely in human
form or with anthropomorphic bodies and animal heads. Sometimes the same
deity was portrayed in both fashions. Egyptian texts indicate that deities were

19.1. Deities as depicted in early civilizations: Egypt – (a) Min, (b) Seth, (c) Horus, (d) Isis;
Valley of Mexico – (e) Tonatiuh, the sun god, (f) Huitzilopochtli; Maya – (g) Young Moon
Goddess, (h) Itzamna, (i) Ix Chel, Old Moon Goddess and Goddess of Medicine, (j) Death
God, all from the Post-Classic Dresden Codex; Mesopotamia – (k) Gudea, King of Lagash, being
presented to his city god Ningirsu (seated) by two other deities, on a cylinder seal from Telloh
(ca. 2144–2124 b.c.). Sources: (a) – (d) from Gardiner 1961: 215; (e), (f) from Eduard Seler,
Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur Amerikanischen Sprach – und Alterthumskunde (Berlin, 1902–
1904); (g) – (j) from G. Zimmermann, Die Hieroglyphen der Maya-Handschriften (Hamburg,
1956), pls. 6, 7; (k) from Woolley, The Sumerians, 89.
427

428
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
thought to have imperishable bodies made of gold with lapis lazuli hair (Meeks
andFavard-Meeks1996:57),butsometimestheypassedsurreptitiouslyamong
humans in forms that were indistinguishable from those of mortals (Lichtheim
1973: 220). Major deities entered the body of the king when he procreated
the heir to the throne. It was believed that beholding a deity in his or her
full glory could cause a human being to catch ﬁre. Gods therefore most of-
ten appeared either enveloped in or in the form of natural phenomena such
as earthquakes, storms, or ﬁres (Morenz 1973: 32). These apparitions were
accompanied by dazzling radiance or a sweet aroma and created powerful
sensations of reverence or terror in the humans who witnessed them. During
such encounters, the presence of an invisible deity was sensed, and the deity
could be heard speaking in one’s heart (Hornung 1982: 132–35). The primary
form of an Egyptian deity may have been a numinous power that could take
many forms (h˘ prw), although these transformations did not include changes
of gender.
An Egyptian deity existed simultaneously as a b3 (free life-force) or 3h˘
(illuminated spirit) in the sky, as the special power in a cult statue (hnty) or in
cult objects in his or her temple or in living humans, animals, or trees on earth,
and as a mummiﬁed body (dt) in the underworld (Hornung 1982: 132–35;
Morenz 1973: 151). Different gods could temporarily combine with one an-
other to increase their power without compromising their individual person-
alities or independence. Such deities were referred to in both the singular
and the plural. These combinations often endowed local gods with the cosmic
functions of the sun god, Re (Morenz 1973: 140–46). Parts of deities, such as
eyes, could act independently of the god to whom they belonged or become
another deity. While gods behaved in a human fashion, their personalities were
only occasionally clearly distinguished from one another.
Egyptian gods were drawn down from the sky into cult statues to activate
them for daily rituals that nourished the gods and ensured that they per-
formed the acts necessary to renew creation (Morenz 1973: 88). When occu-
pied by a deity statues could make oracular pronouncements if questions were
put to them by appearing to tilt in one direction or another. In addition, priests
might sense the god present in the statue speaking to them in their hearts.
Gods communicated with ordinary Egyptians by means of dreams, visions,
and spirit possession (Baines 1991a). They also entered into trees, individual
wild or domestic animals, and even whole herds or species, and the behaviour
of these animals provided oracular responses to questions put to them. The
Apis bull of Memphis, who was associated with the Egyptian creator god, Ptah,
indicated by his actions the answers to questions that priests addressed to the
god incarnate in him (Morenz 1973: 103). Yet, the Egyptians also believed that

Conceptions of the Supernatural
429
the gods had made animals for human beneﬁt. They did not hesitate to work,
castrate, kill, and eat animals or to offer them as sacriﬁces to the gods. Pro-
hibitions against killing or eating animals that were sacred to speciﬁc deities
were observed only locally. Hence divine power was manifested in nature and
made it work, but nature itself was not regarded as divine. Rocks and animals
were no more deities than cult statues were; instead, they were places where
divine power might manifest itself.
Major Mesopotamian deities were conceptualized in human form, although
this did not extend to lesser spirits, demons, or even a son of the solar god,
Utu, who was depicted as a bull (Oppenheim 1964: 184). Gods were also rep-
resented anthropomorphically in the cult images that were the foci of temple
rituals. These statues, made of precious materials attached to a wooden base,
were manufactured in special workshops and endowed with life by means of
‘opening of the mouth’ rituals. So important were such statues that the names
used to designate particular years sometimes commemorated their creation.
These images stood or sat in the inner chambers of temples, although in some
cases, when doors were open, they could be glimpsed from temple court-
yards (Oppenheim 1964: 185–86; Postgate 1992: 118). Mesopotamian deities
had distinct personalities, and some male ones were described as engaging
in sexual relations with human women. Most encounters between deities and
humans were, however, accompanied by a divine luminosity that ﬁlled humans
with paralysing fear (Jacobsen 1976: 12; Oppenheim 1964: 176).
Thorkild Jacobsen (1976) suggests that before the Early Dynastic period
Sumerian gods were conceptualized less in human form than as natural phe-
nomena. The female deity Inanna may have begun as a date palm and only
gradually evolved into an anthropomorphic fertility deity. As natural mani-
festations were replaced by anthropomorphic ones, the older forms became
the symbolic attributes of deities, and the gods retained their natural associ-
ations. Nannar continued to be identiﬁed with the moon, Inanna with date
palms and the planet Venus, Utu with the sun, and Enlil with storms. In ad-
dition to animating cult statues, the gods entered into portable holy symbols
on which oaths were sworn (Postgate 1992: 280). These symbols were also
carried into battle and paraded around the countryside to encourage the pay-
ment of tithes. Deities appeared and spoke to people in dreams. They also
conveyed messages through natural events such as earthquakes, the shapes
of the livers of sacriﬁced animals, and the changing positions of the plan-
ets, all these manifestations being objects of divination (Oppenheim 1964:
210–27).
Yoruba deities were conceptualized as existing in human form but were
only infrequently so portrayed (Frobenius 1913, 1: 196). Often more abstract

430
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
cult symbols hosted the presence of a god. The door to almost every Yoruba
household and the gates of most Yoruba towns had a shrine to the god Esu,
represented by a block of laterite or a crude clay statue. Esu was important
because he conveyed sacriﬁces to the other gods (Bascom 1969: 79). Living
animals, among them snakes and crocodiles imported from the coast and kept
in walled ponds, were also venerated as incarnations of deities (Ojo 1966a:
168). Yoruba gods communicated with humans by temporary spirit possession
during rituals, controlling the movement of their bodies and speaking through
their mouths. These human ‘horses’ or ‘mounts’ of deities were said to be
permanently altered by such episodes (Bascom 1969: 78). Costumed members
of the Egungun society provided vehicles that permitted the souls of the dead
to return temporarily to the human world by possessing their bodies.
In the Valley of Mexico deities were portrayed in human form in codices, and
distinctivehumanpersonalitieswereascribedtothemostprominentofthemin
myths and legends. Numerous local forms of deities had to be distinguished by
minute differences in their costumes, which dominated the portrayal of most
deities. Because deities represented sacred forces interacting with each other,
it was possible by adding a few ornaments to incorporate one god into another
without either deity’s losing its identity (Clendinnen 1991: 248). Earth deities
frequently incorporated reptilian and crocodilian body parts. The power of
deities entered into cult statues in temples, which appear to have been three-
dimensional renditions of the images represented in codices. These statues
played an important role in temple rituals. Sacred bundles containing portable
statues and other objects associated with deities were an important focus for
concentrating divine power (van Zantwijk 1985: 38).
As a result of hallucinogens and dance-induced ecstasy, people became pos-
sessed by deities, who spoke and acted through them. Such individuals tem-
porarily ceased to be themselves and became ‘mirrors’ of deities (Clendinnen
1991: 259). Deities were also drawn into the human world for solicitation and
invocation by means of ixiptlas, images made from amaranth dough, which
worshippers consumed, elaborately dressed images erected on pole frames,
and costumes worn by kings, priests, or less prestigious god impersonators
during religious ceremonies. Captives used as god impersonators were slain as
human sacriﬁces at the end of the ritual as a means of empowering the deity
they represented. While the purpose of ixiptlas was normally to draw deities
closer for more effective communication with human beings, the effect of a
king’s wearing the costumes of many high-ranking deities was to endow him
permanentlywiththeirpower(Clendinnen1991:249–53;Townsend1979:28).
Gods, like sorcerers and other powerful humans, could transform themselves
into animal shapes (nahualli), and therefore some animals were really deities

Conceptions of the Supernatural
431
travelling about the human realm (Clendinnen 1991: 55; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 364–71).
The Maya generally depicted deities in human form. Some deities had a
few animal features, such as square eyes or animal markings. Other supernat-
urals were portrayed as a combination of human and animal features or were
composed of parts of animals that lived in different environments. Still other
deities were shown as animals behaving like people, such as the rabbit scribes
who assisted the Lords of the Underworld (Schele and Miller 1986: 42–43).
Deities also manifested themselves in natural phenomena such as the sun,
stars, or rain. Some gods were portrayed in only one form, others in young,
old, and dead variants, in different anthropomorphic and zoomorphic versions,
and in different colour and directional forms. Deities were also represented
in the form of their animal co-essences or spirit familiars (way).
Kings and other humans were intermittently possessed by various deities
and appropriated their powers by wearing the costumes of these deities. This
behaviour involved the same principles as the Aztec use of ixiptlas (Houston
and Stuart 1996: 306; Taube 1992: 8–9). By means of appropriate costuming
and spirit possession, one person could become consubstantial with many
deities (Schele and Miller 1986: 66). Through painful forms of self-bleeding
and hallucinogens administered both orally and rectally, members of the royal
family entered into trance states that drew their divine ancestors back into the
human realm. Finally, cult images, at least some of them carved from wood,
kept in Maya temples served as receptacles of divine power. These images
appear to have been activated by re-enacting the circumstances that had led
to the birth of the deities they represented (Houston and Stuart 1996: 302–6).
Among the early Chinese, the character for Tian (sky), the Zhou deity who
replaced Shangdi as supreme god, appears to represent an anthropomorphic
ﬁgure, and Shangdi may have been conceived in human form as well (Eno
1990: 3). Ancestral souls were probably visualized in human form. The souls
of the dead were drawn into the bodies of ritual impersonators (shi), usually
their young grandchildren, so that they could participate in sacriﬁcial meals and
bless their living descendants (Allan 1991: 157; Creel 1937: 336). In contrast,
lineage ancestors and the spirits worshipped at the altars of the soil were from
an early period represented by inscribed tablets rather than by images (Granet
1958: 239–40; Laufer 1913). Various nature spirits may have been represented
by the birds, tigers, snakes, turtles, and taotie monsters cast on Shang ritual
vessels (Allan 1991: 130–72). Yet there appears to have been no more obvious
representation of gods in Shang elite art than there was of kings.
Andean conceptualizations of deity tended to be mainly aniconic and ab-
stract. While major deities were often represented anthropomorphically, most

432
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
deities were associated with natural objects (waka). Inti, the sun god, was
worshipped both in human form and as a solar disc. Wiraqucha, the creator
god, was represented by an anthropomorphic gold statue in his main temple
in Cuzco; in other cult centres he and other deities took the form of poles
covered with human clothing (Cobo 1990: 23–26). Deities appeared to hu-
mans, often in times of crisis, in the form of imageless radiance, and therefore
it was not always obvious which deity was being encountered. Deities could
also change their form: Inka legends reported that stone wakas had turned
into superhuman warriors when Cuzco was attacked by its enemies and be-
come stones again after the Inka had won the battle (MacCormack 1991:
287–89, 328–29). Every deity that was venerated, including dead kings, had
one or more oracle priests through whom the deity could regularly address
human beings (Gose 1996a). Gods also spoke to humans through dreams and
apparitions.
While most deities could, on special occasions, manifest themselves almost
anywhere and to anyone, especially in dreams and visions, in early civiliza-
tions they regularly did so only to priests and ofﬁcials at appropriate temples,
shrines, and cult places. Some deities were restricted to one cult centre. The
vast majority of Andean deities were each associated with a single dawning
place (pakarina) where they had ﬁrst appeared at the time of creation. Yet
the Inka rulers constructed temples for the worship of Inti, their ancestral sun
god, in provincial centres throughout their kingdom. These royal solar temples
symbolized the unity of the Inka state and the acceptance of Inka authority
in far-off regions. Major Egyptian deities such as Ptah, who was worshipped
as the creator god at Memphis, had modest ‘guest temples’ in major temple
complexes elsewhere in Egypt. In city-state systems the same major deities
or local variants of them were worshipped in many places. Tezcatlipoca and
Quetzalcoatl were venerated in various forms throughout highland Mexico,
often as the tutelary deities of different city-states. The Maya built large mor-
tuary temples in each of which a particular dead king was identiﬁed with a
local variant of a major cosmic deity.
The most important deities – the animators of major cosmic forces and the
patrons of states, large cities, and rulers – received offerings at major cult
centres. These temples were the earthly abodes of deities rather than places
of public worship. Deities of lesser importance had smaller cult centres that
were maintained and controlled by villages, corporate landowning groups, ex-
tended families, nuclear families, and voluntary ritual societies. Local leaders
or part-time priests ofﬁciated at smaller temples or at open-air shrines such
as those associated with Andean ayllus. In the Valley of Mexico each calpolli
maintained a temple for its tutelary deity, while every household had a shrine

Conceptions of the Supernatural
433
containing clay statues of maize goddesses and sometimes the cloth-wrapped
thigh bones of sacriﬁced prisoners who had been captured by family mem-
bers (Brumﬁel 1996). Ordinary Egyptian household shrines were a focus for
the veneration of dead ancestors as well as deities of fertility and childbirth,
such as Taweret and Bes, who did not have major temples anywhere in Egypt.
These cults sought to ensure the fertility and general well-being of the family
(Demar´ee 1983; Robins 1993: 75–76). Rituals for dead relatives were also per-
formed at their tombs or graves, located in cemeteries outside settlements. The
Chinese honoured ancestors in household shrines that varied in importance
and elaboration according to the antiquity of the patrilineal descent group
and hence the social status of the head of the household (Granet 1958: 246).
Mesopotamians honoured household and personal deities in their homes and
performed rituals for their dead ancestors, who were sometimes buried in
vaults under houses (Postgate 1992: 99–101).
In all early civilizations the universe appears to have been conceptualized as
a manifestation of supernatural power, which supplied it with life and activity.
The most potent manifestations of that energy were deities of varying degrees
of importance who pervaded different aspects of the natural world and made
them function. While there was considerable variation in the extent to which
the representations of deities were anthropomorphized, the idea of groups of
deities with human-like mental qualities animating the universe and in this
and other ways controlling human existence appears to have been shared by
all the early civilizations.
one or many?
Some anthropologists have maintained that in early civilizations all deities
were recognized as particular manifestations of a single god; others have ar-
gued that religions in early civilizations were polytheistic. This debate has
been labelled the problem of ‘the one and the many’ (Hornung 1982). The
claim that all gods are manifestations of a single deity was part of a belief
in ‘primitive monotheism’ advocated long ago by Christian anthropologists
of the Vienna school. In its most strident form, primitive monotheism main-
tained that all early peoples possessed the (divinely revealed?) knowledge of
a single god. Various forms of evidence have been cited in support of this
notion.
The ﬁrst type of evidence is belief in a single creator deity. The Egyptians
maintained that all things came into existence as the result of the activity of
an original creator god who gave rise to the other gods and to all else that
exists and, as the sun, re-created the universe each morning. The Aztec and

434
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
their neighbours maintained that all the gods were in some fashion emanations
of Ometeotl (The Lord and Lady of Two-ness), an undifferentiated form of
cosmic power that continued to exist in the highest celestial sphere. It was
Ometeotl who sustained life and sent each new child into the world (Le´on-
Portilla 1963: 84–106). While the initial ‘transformations’ of both the Egyptian
creator god and Ometeotl created multiple deities out of a single or dual one,
they do not appear to have altered or diminished the original divinity. In the
Heliopolitan creation myth, the Egyptian creator god, Atum, produced the
next generation of deities by mixing together his semen and spittle. Ometeotl
did so through a process of non-reductive duplication whereby cosmic power
manifested itself in individual forms in different spheres, creating time and
space. In both Egyptian and Valley of Mexico mythology, later generations
of deities were produced by sexual reproduction, a process that by its very
nature created new beings without altering existing ones. Both creator deities
continued to play an active role in the universe they had brought into existence.
The Yoruba believed that their supreme god, called Olorun (owner of
heaven) or Olodumare (one of superlative greatness?), created the other major
deities and all human souls, which could not exist without his continued sup-
port. While Olorun received sacriﬁces only through the gods he had created,
he heard people’s prayers, intervened directly in terrestrial affairs, and person-
ally determined the fate of each human being prior to that person’s rebirth.
Unlike the other gods, Olorun could not behave badly, and ultimately all the
other gods were accountable to him for their actions (Awolalu 1979: 1–20, 50;
K. Barber 1981: 729). Deities could, however, divide or be separated to form
new gods and be created by sexual reproduction, while humans could become
gods. Thus not all of them were direct manifestations of Olorun.
In the Andes Wiraqucha, whose name may have meant ‘ocean of fat’ or
‘boundless vitality’ and who was either a single creator and fertility god or a
complex of such deities, was believed to have vanished into the Paciﬁc Ocean
after fashioning the world and the ancestors of all people, animals, and plants.
Yet he continued to appear to Inka rulers at times of crisis and, as Pachakamaq
(creator/animator of the world), was a very inﬂuential lowland waka and oracle.
While various lowland myths stated that Pachakamaq had created the sun, the
Inka claimed that Inti, their solar deity, was Pachakamaq’s father. Wiraqucha
was the direct recipient of prayers but not usually of sacriﬁces, which, except
on special occasions, reached him only through the other gods. He also lacked
land and ﬂocks of his own. He appears to have been viewed as the main
deity of the lower half of the cosmos, while the sun was the principal deity
of the upper half (Cobo 1990: 23; MacCormack 1991: 59–61, 343, 350–51;
Sullivan 1985).

Conceptions of the Supernatural
435
While the role that the powerful Chinese celestial deity Shangdi played in
the creation of other gods is unknown (Eno 1990), he continued to control the
universe. Mesopotamian religious lore mentions a primordial female deity,
‘The Mother who Gave Birth to Earth and Heaven’, who may have been
the goddess Tiamat (Frankfort 1948: 283–84). Mesopotamian deities were
produced by successive generations of sexual reproduction beginning with
a mating between sea water (Tiamat) and fresh water (Apsu). The original
Mesopotamian creator gods were slain by their descendants, who represented
a more differentiated and active universe, leaving An as the oldest living god;
the younger gods used the corpses of their primordial ancestors to create the
current cosmos.
Although people in most early civilizations believed that all deities were in
some manner created or engendered by a single primordial deity or pair of
deities, there is no evidence that later gods were regarded merely as man-
ifestations of speciﬁc attributes of that deity. Whenever enough is known
about individual deities it is clear that, instead of representing selected at-
tributes of a single being, each deity had a complex nature that was complete
in itself. Each represented one or more of the conﬂicting forces that were
observed to be present in the natural and social realms. Primordial creator
deities did not always rule over younger gods, who were sometimes at odds
or even in open conﬂict with them. While the details of the creation of the
gods differed from one early civilization to another, they were usually seen
as having been produced in a way that did not diminish the substance of the
original deity.
A stronger argument that all the gods in each early civilization might be
manifestations of a single supernatural force has been found in the ways in
which many gods could absorb one another and turn into others. Both Egyp-
tian and Aztec solar deities defeated the stars each dawn and incorporated
their essences into their own being only to release them in the evening (Goebs
1998). The Egyptian sun god, Re, is described as devouring the other gods
every morning and vomiting up their bodies in the form of ﬁsh and their b3-
spirits in the form of birds every evening (Troy 1989: 131). While Egyptian
gods combined with or ‘inhabited’ each other without impairing their individ-
ual identities (Bonnet 1999 [1939]), Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba deities assumed
distinctive local or otherwise spatio-temporally restricted forms without los-
ing their generic identities. While these actions, which went beyond single
deities’ merely altering their appearance or entering the bodies of animals
or oracle priests, may indicate that all deities were believed to be manifesta-
tions of a single divine power, they do not constitute evidence that all deities
were manifestations of a single supernatural being. In early civilizations the

436
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
anthropomorphization of natural/supernatural forces does not appear to have
reached the point where people began to think of deities as multiple expres-
sions of a single god.
the moral order of the gods
There is no evidence that in any of the early civilizations, except perhaps
that of the Yoruba, people believed that a uniﬁed moral order pervaded the
universe. Among the Yoruba that order was associated with the overlordship
of the morally transcendent though not omniscient Olorun. Although it is
possible that this aspect of their religious beliefs reﬂected their long exposure
to Christianity and Islam, even within Olorun’s overarching moral order deities
competed with each other and championed opposing tendencies and causes.
The Aztec conceived of the universe as having a highly complex but unstable
structure within which major gods competed ruthlessly for power and control.
Their behaviour, determined by the roles they played in the functioning of the
cosmos, resembled that of the forces of nature more closely than it did human
interactions based on moral or ethical considerations. The Egyptian concept of
m3‘t, conventionally translated ‘truth’, ‘right’, or ‘justice’, referred to the fragile
natural order that kept the universe functioning and prevented it from lapsing
into disorder. It also designated the traditional order prevailing in the social
realm, which paralleled the order that the creator god had ﬁrst established
to control the cosmos. In both realms m3t was based on a balance between
opposites in which order prevailed over but could not eliminate disorder. This
delicate balance was seen as providing the conditions necessary to support life
(J. Allen 2000: 115–17). In the other early civilizations, relations among the
gods also largely reﬂected those obtaining in the natural world.
Only the Mesopotamians, at least by the time the creation epic Enuma
Elish was composed during the Old Babylonian period, saw relations amongst
the gods as governed by considerations that fundamentally resembled those
prevailing in human societies. The slaying of the primordial deity Tiamat and
her confederates by younger gods symbolized the triumph of social values
over older, natural ones. The deities descended from An were represented
as reluctantly having accepted one of their number to be their king in order
to ward off the threat of physical destruction posed by the primordial gods.
The original motto of the new regime was ‘safety and obedience’, meaning
‘security in return for obedience’. Following the destruction of the older gods,
this motto was replaced by ‘beneﬁts and obedience’, meaning ‘prosperity in
return for obedience’. After defeating the older deities, the new supreme god,
Marduk, refashioned the universe in a manner that rendered it beneﬁcial to his

Conceptions of the Supernatural
437
fellow deities while at the same time subjecting all that was in it to his personal
domination. Yet, while the Enuma Elish implies that the deities agreed to adopt
a centralized political regime for pragmatic, self-interested reasons, it does not
suggest that doing this made all of them of one mind (Jacobsen 1976: 173–80).
Whether the Mesopotamian gods were governed by a natural or a pragmatic
political order, their relations were not characterized by an overarching moral
order or even by a moral consensus.
In the early civilizations gods often fought with each other. In the Valley of
Mexico, the four sons or emanations of Ometeotl struggled with each other
to control the universe, with one of these gods and then another achieving
supremacy and brieﬂy presiding over a new cosmic order. Mexican gods also
wounded and killed each other (Caso 1958). Huitzilopochtli decapitated his
sister Coyolxauhqui when she tried to murder their mother, who had become
pregnant out of wedlock (Matos Moctezuma 1988: 39–42). The Egyptian god
Seth murdered his older brother Osiris to become king of Egypt and battled
his nephew Horus to keep that position. Rebellious subjects, deities as well
as humans, had driven the still earlier generations of Egyptian gods from the
earth when these gods had grown old and feeble (Meeks and Favard-Meeks
1996: 23–33). In Mesopotamia the older gods had attempted to destroy the
younger and more active generations of deities to silence the noise these gods
were making. Erishkegal, the Mesopotamian female deity of the underworld,
killed her sister Inanna, when Inanna attempted to usurp her realm (Jacobsen
1976: 55–57).
Deities also raped, seduced, and committed adultery with one another. The
Egyptian god Osiris fathered the god Anubis by his brother Seth’s wife, and
Seth in a display of sexual dominance sodomized his young nephew Horus.
The Mexican god Tezcatlipoca stole Xochiquetzal, the ﬁrst wife of Tlaloc, the
rain god (Caso 1958: 42). Both the Mesopotamian storm god Enlil and the
fertility god Enki seduced and raped various goddesses (Jacobsen 1976: 104,
112–13).
In addition, gods deceived, robbed, and betrayed each other. According to
one version of the Yoruba creation myth, when the god Orisala became too
drunk to carry out Olorun’s command to create the earth, the god Oduduwa
stole the equipment Olorun had given Orisala to perform this task and carried
out the work himself. This led to a ﬁght between Oduduwa and Orisala in which
various other deities took sides. Finally Olorun accorded Oduduwa the right
to rule the earth but bestowed on Orisala the privilege of fashioning bodies for
human babies (Bascom 1969: 10). The very existence of the Mesopotamian
deities was threatened when a rebel deity stole their charm of supremacy
(Oppenheim 1964: 269). The Egyptian goddess Isis created a poisonous snake

438
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and had it bite the sun god in order to force Re to tell her his secret name so that
she could use it to cure him. Re’s disclosing of his name constituted sharing his
power with Isis (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 98–99). The Mesopotamian
goddess Inanna, in a ﬁt of anger after she discovered that her husband, the
pastoral fertility god Dumuzi, had been carousing while she was trapped in the
underworld, condemned him to be her replacement there. A major ecological
disaster on earth was averted only when Dumuzi’s sister, the vineyard deity
Geshtinanna, agreed to alternate with her brother in the underworld for six
months of every year (Jacobsen 1976: 26–71). During a visit to Eridu, Inanna
stole various divine powers that were essential for the operation of the social
order and carried them off to her own city, Uruk (114–15). The Maya Hero
Twins used trickery and deceit to outwit and slay the gods of death and escape
from the underworld. When the Mesopotamian god Enlil decided to destroy
humanity for making too much noise, Enki, who disapproved of this policy,
secretly warned a human family what was about to happen and advised them
to build a large boat so that they might save themselves (120).
Deities were easily offended and capable of great severity in their dealings
with human beings. The Inka god Wiraqucha called down ﬁre upon people
living near Cuzco who had hurled stones at him while he was travelling through
the Andes (Rowe 1944: 316; Sullivan 1985), and the Egyptian sun god Re
ordered the ferocious lion goddess Sakhmet (identiﬁed with his ﬁery eye) to
devour humanity when their behaviour displeased him (Meeks and Favard-
Meeks 1996: 26). While, in these examples, the gods relented before everyone
involved was destroyed, their actions, like those of the forces of nature, killed
and injured innocent and guilty people alike. Moreover, while gods might
punish individuals, ethnic groups, or all humanity for immoral or disrespectful
behaviour, they attacked them for more trivial reasons. Mesopotamian kings
dreaded that some inadvertent mistake they made in performing rituals might
result in tutelary deities’ abandoning their city-states to their enemies. They
were also apprehensive that deities would quarrel with each other, bringing
undeserved misfortunes to their peoples (Postgate 1992: 263–69). Jacobsen
(1976: 120) describes Mesopotamian gods as treating humans in a selﬁsh,
ruthless, and unsubtle manner.
While the deities of the early civilizations possessed human-like personal-
ities, they often dealt with human beings in ways that seemed to be more
inherent in the natural world they animated than part of the social realm. In
many myths their behaviour was transparently that of natural forces: ﬂoods,
storms, droughts, and volcanic eruptions afﬂicted humanity without warning.
An attack launched by Enlil against a Mesopotamian city was described as
the approach of a devastating thunderstorm (Pritchard 1955: 455–63). The

Conceptions of the Supernatural
439
complex hierarchies of deities presiding over different sectors of the universe
also resembled the unequal but multiple and conﬂicting forces of nature to
a greater extent than they did the political organization of even heterarchical
city-states. Apart from the Mesopotamian gods, who at least in later times
explicitly recognized the authority of a single leader, various groups of deities
formed competing and often shifting factions. Even Mesopotamian deities
continued to struggle for power within the general political framework they
had established.
Paramount deities tended not to be the patron deities of states. Wiraqucha
was not the patron god of the Inka, nor was Olorun the chief deity of any Yoruba
city-state or Ometeotl the principal deity of any Mexican one. Powerful, active
deities tended to be associated with kingdoms and rulers, while less power-
ful ones were associated with smaller communities, less prestigious descent
groups, and individuals. The Inka kings recognized local deities as the gods of
conquered peoples but attempted to integrate regional and local deities into a
state pantheon by establishing asymmetrical kinship relations between these
deities and leading Inka ones (Silverblatt 1988b). In a totally different fashion,
in Egypt the deity of every provincial centre continued to be recognized as the
creator of the universe, while the king claimed to be the earthly incarnation,
son, and priest of each of these gods (Frankfort 1948: 41–42). The Shang rulers
claimed a unique relation to the god Shangdi, and the worship of Shangdi may
have been restricted to ancestral temples in royal palaces.
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, the chief executive of the gods was not
An, the father of the gods, but his son Enlil, the patron deity of the neutral
city-state of Nippur, who was later replaced by the Old Babylonian dynasty’s
patron deity, Marduk. Mesopotamian city-states were each presided over or
owned by one or, in the case of Uruk, two high-ranking deities. In the Valley
of Mexico each city-state especially honoured two gods, one of whom was its
patron or protector. The Maya linked their cities to local versions of major
deities from whom their royal families claimed descent. The chief ritual focus
of a Yoruba city-state was the king, whose clan claimed descent from Oduduwa
and other major deities.
Thus in some early civilizations either there was no paramount deity or
that deity was not associated with any one state or dynastic lineage. City-states
usually claimed a close association with one or more high-ranking deities, while
the rulers of territorial states either forged special relations with the deities of
the numerous localities they ruled or established the worship of a particular
dynastic god as the focus of a state cult. The cult of that god could either be
imposed on subject peoples or retained as a prerogative of the royal family. The
resemblances between the organization of the gods and the loose hierarchical

440
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
relations of natural forces appear to have been closer than those between the
organization of the gods and that of the human political realm.
the power of the gods
Whereas in monotheistic religions, deities are believed to be eternal and all-
powerful, the deities of early civilizations were born or created, died or were
killed, and sometimes grew old or lost power to other deities. Caution is, of
course, needed not to interpret these statements too literally. The Egyptians
referred to creating cult statues as giving birth (msı) to the gods. Although
the primary referent of msı was to a woman giving birth, the Egyptians also
used this verb to refer to creator gods’ bringing the sun or anything else into
existence by non-sexual means. The Maya also used the verb ‘to give birth’
(the upended frog glyph) to refer to acts that caused existing deities to man-
ifest themselves in the human realm (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 152; Schele and
Miller 1986: 183). The Egyptian gods who had ruled on earth at the begin-
ning of time slowly grew old and feeble and eventually withdrew into the
sky realm where they could rejuvenate themselves. The highland Mexicans
and the Maya believed that the sun grew old and died each day and was re-
juvenated each night in the underworld. After the Egyptian god Osiris (the
elder Horus) was murdered, he remained conﬁned to the underworld but was
reborn on earth as his son Horus or as the sun god Re (Meeks and Favard-
Meeks 1996: 32–33). Classic Maya deities were born on speciﬁc days, some of
the most important close to but not precisely at the start of the most recent
long-count cycle in 3114 b.c. These gods may have died and been reborn re-
peatedly at various points in the much longer cycles of Maya time (Schele and
Miller 1986: 48).
The notion of cycles of death and renewal of the gods, which paralleled or
were extrapolations of various natural cycles, afﬁrmed rather than denied the
collective power of the gods. Nevertheless, at least the peoples in the Valley of
Mexico, the Maya, the Egyptians, and the Inka appear to have believed that at
some time in the future the existing gods would perish and the cosmos would
lapse into disorder, either to begin a new cycle of existence or to cease to exist
forever. The Aztecs and their neighbours believed that if the sun god were
not regularly nourished with human blood the universe would quickly dissolve
into chaos.
Major Egyptian deities, instead of being all-powerful and self-reliant, were
protected and served by retinues of supernatural guards and retainers. Be-
cause they shared power, no deity was omnipotent. Re suffered from severe
pain and illness as a result of being bitten by a serpent. Even semi-transcendent

Conceptions of the Supernatural
441
deities such as Olorun or Ometeotl had to carry out their works through
subordinate deities. The Inka observed that their solar god, the most pow-
erful deity in the upper world, could not prevent himself from being covered
by clouds, which, because of their connection with rain, were presumably as-
sociated with Wiraqucha, the principal deity of the lower realm (Cobo 1979:
134–35).
Gods could also be indecisive and cowardly. The Egyptian tribunal of deities
that was charged with deciding whether Horus or Seth should rule Egypt was,
like many a village court, unwilling to render a decision for fear of offending
one of the contestants and his supporters (Lichtheim 1976: 214–23). At the
most recent re-creation of the universe, a major Aztec god hesitated to sacri-
ﬁce himself for the purpose, provoking a minor god to cast himself into the
divine hearth in his place (Le´on-Portilla 1963: 44–45; Townsend 1979: 53).
Gods were also capable of short-sighted and injudicious behaviour that they
later regretted. After the ﬂood, the Mesopotamian gods who had ordered the
destruction of humanity grew hungry and began to regret that there were no
humans left to provide food for them (Pritchard 1955: 95).
Deities were also not omniscient. They cheated and deceived one another,
and sometimes even humans outwitted them. The Mesopotamians believed
that temporarily appointing a substitute to replace a king who had angered the
gods would divert their anger to a socially insigniﬁcant victim (Bott´ero 1992:
139–53). It was also widely believed that protective amulets and incantations
could prevent deities from learning about displeasing things people had done
or render them incapable of harming individuals. The Egyptians believed that,
armed with the right spells, the dead could conceal from the gods knowledge
of major wrongdoings they had committed during their lifetimes (Pinch 1994:
61–160).
Thus, while deities were believed to live longer and be more powerful than
human beings and to affect their lives in crucial ways, people perceived far
fewer differences between themselves and the gods than the adherents of
modern monotheistic religions. Deities were not thought to be omniscient or
omnipotent and were rarely believed to be changeless or eternal. As super-
natural powers animating the natural world, they were caught up in cycles of
growth and decay that often seemed unlikely to continue forever. While they
possessed great powers, humans could use spells to deceive them, inﬂuence
their behaviour, and appropriate their powers to a limited extent and for vary-
ing periods of time. The gods thus reﬂected human characteristics, which had
been projected onto a natural order that humans found difﬁcult to control
and very threatening. The main precondition for this transposition of ideas
from the social to the natural realm was recognizing the vast powers inherent

442
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
in nature, the speciﬁc impacts these powers had on human beings, and the
relative autonomy from one another of various sorts of natural forces.
religion and social life
The deities of early civilizations were viewed as supernatural beings who ani-
mated (or were) the natural world and therefore exerted great power over hu-
mans. Gods had mental faculties and gendered personalities that resembled
those of human beings, but they could transform themselves, move rapidly
about the earth, and pass between it and the realms above and below in ways
that human beings could emulate only in dreams and trances.
In early civilizations as in earlier small-scale societies, the natural, super-
natural, and social realms were not categorically distinguished. Nature was
believed to be impregnated with supernatural powers that possessed human-
like intelligence and motivations. This was not an analytical failure but reﬂected
a particular ontological position. People living in early civilizations acted on
the world technologically as far as they were able, but their technology, most
crucially their agricultural and transport technology, was rudimentary, and they
remained heavily dependent on the vagaries of the natural environment. When
their technology was insufﬁcient, they sought to control natural phenomena in
the same way they tried to inﬂuence the behaviour of powerful human beings.
In doing this, they applied to the natural realm what appears to have been
humanity’s oldest and most highly developed skill: understanding of social be-
haviour (Mithen 1996). It was, however, a skill that could appear effective
only to people who believed that nature was controlled by forces that behaved
more or less as humans did. Where technology did not sufﬁce to control na-
ture, people sought to make nature conform to their purposes as they would
have done other people: by persuasion, magic, and spells. What they did not
perceive was that the non-human world, both animate and inanimate, oper-
ated on fundamentally different principles. Major insights into this distinction
were not achieved until the ﬁrst millennium b.c. The religious beliefs of early
civilizations were therefore products of a different set of analytical categories
from those that scientists in modern societies use. They were not the results
of a defective or ‘primitive’ intelligence or of an inability to understand causal
relations.
The principal difference between the religious beliefs of early civilizations
and those of still earlier, more egalitarian societies was that the various forces
controlling nature had come to be viewed as more unequal in power and
more hierarchized as human society itself had acquired these characteristics.
Yet it was not believed that nature totally resembled states. In Mesopotamian

Conceptions of the Supernatural
443
society, at least by the Old Babylonian period, supernatural forces had sworn
obedience to a single divine leader. In other early civilizations either there was
no single supreme deity or such a deity was not concerned with dominating
the others. This reﬂected a perception of the cosmos as composed of forces
that, while unequal, were not arranged in a single, all-embracing hierarchy.
The views of the cosmos that prevailed in early civilizations call into question
the suggestion that early civilizations were the ﬁrst societies in human history
to insulate themselves from the natural world (Renfrew 1972: 13). Because
the divine was seen as manifesting itself in the natural world, people sought
not to be separated from nature but rather to establish good relations with the
supernatural powers inherent in nature that could help to ensure their well-
being. Under these circumstances, a desire to be insulated from the natural
world was inconceivable. People living in early civilizations not only felt less
cut off from nature by a massive intervening technology than we do but actively
sought to insert themselves, as individuals and societies, into the natural order
which they believed was simultaneously a supernatural one.
As society expanded and kinship declined in importance as a factor unifying
social life, religion replaced kinship as a source of concepts for analysing and
discussing the social order. Myths concerning a supernaturally animated cos-
mos permitted a detailed analysis of ideas and strategies that could be used to
promote, sustain, and change the sociocultural order as well as to criticize spe-
ciﬁc policies. Such religious understandings supported the political claims of
the upper classes by identifying them with the organic powers of reproduction
and the hierarchies that were believed to be inherent in a cosmic order that
was simultaneously natural and divine (Bauer 1996: 327). Having interpreted
nature in terms of familiar social categories, the leaders of early civilizations
used the understanding they derived from this operation to justify the unequal
social order they had created.

20 Cosmology and Cosmogony
I
n early civilizations ideas about the structure and origin of the universe
were articulated in the form of myths or sacred narratives. Such an ap-
proach was inevitable given that the universe was believed to be animated and
controlled by supernatural forces. Because of this, it is impossible to divorce
the investigation of ancient cosmologies from the study of religious beliefs.
John Baines (1991b) has suggested that the ancient Egyptians did not record
myths systematically because myths and dogmas were not as central to Egyp-
tian religion as cults and rituals. Inadequate recording and preservation of
myths are serious problems in the study of all early civilizations. Yet myths that
are reasonably well recorded also tend to be highly variable. Within early civ-
ilizations, beliefs relating to the structure and creation of the universe varied
from one period and from one state, city, cult centre, and family to another.
Adherence to alternative versions reﬂected not only local traditions but also
rivalries, factionalism, and resistance to centralization. Rationalized corpuses
of mythology were developed for literary purposes only after myths had ceased
to have major religious and political signiﬁcance. Much of the seeming unity
of modern versions of Greek and Roman myths is the product of harmoniza-
tion that occurred during the Renaissance (Grant 1973). To compare concepts
relating to cosmology and cosmogony in different early civilizations, it is nec-
essary to focus not on the surface detail but on the basic structures of myths.
While the shape and size of the earth were ﬁrst correctly approximated by
the Greek astronomer, Eratosthenes of Cyrene, in the third century b.c., as-
tronomical knowledge has expanded rapidly since the invention of the Galilean
telescope in the seventeenth century a.d., creating a vast divergence between
ancient and modern understandings. People in early civilizations believed both
the earth and the cosmos to be very small by modern standards. Each early
civilization was thought to be located at the centre of both the terrestrial plane
and the universe and regarded as cosmologically privileged in its relations with
444

Cosmology and Cosmogony
445
the forces that had created the universe. The cosmography of early civilizations
was not only anthropocentric but also ethnocentric (M. Wright 1995).
In city-state systems, every capital city claimed a privileged position in the
cosmos. In the Valley of Mexico, however, by 1519 few people would have
openly disputed the hegemonic city of Tenochtitlan’s claim that it was the
centre of the world (D. Carrasco 1987). In early Mesopotamia a privileged
position was accorded to Nippur, a centrally located cult centre that avoided
direct involvement in the wars that pitted other Mesopotamian city-states
against one other (Postgate 1992: 33–34). The Yoruba believed Ife to be the
place where the world was created, the world’s ﬁrst city, and their religious
and cultural centre. The Maya seem to have recognized four major cities (can
caanal, ‘the four on high’) as playing special roles in relation to the four quarters
of their civilization. The four cities varied from one period and perhaps one
city-state to another (Marcus 1993: 149–52).
Much of the research on the views that people in early civilizations had of
the universe since the 1950s has been strongly inﬂuenced by the publications
of Mircea Eliade (1954), a specialist on Siberian shamanism. Eliade maintains
that all early humans sought to understand the workings of the supernatural in
relation to an imagined primal event that inaugurated reality and determined
humanity’s situation in the cosmos. Early religious rituals attempted to realize
the presence of the divine spirit (numen) by returning to a moment when
time did not yet exist and experiencing the original act of creation. The most
important and enduring representation of the sacred was an axis mundi in
the form of a centrally located mountain or tree that connected the terrestrial
world with supernatural realms located both above and below it. Around this
central axis the world was laid out in four directions. Eliade argued that this
cosmic plan inﬂuenced the location and layout of cities, temples, palaces, and
houses, each of which was intended to be a microcosm of the universe. His
concepts have been applied to the interpretation of Hindu temple plans and
Chinese and Roman urban conﬁgurations (Wheatley 1971: 418). While vertical
and quadripartite arrangements seem to recur frequently in conceptions of
the earth and the universe in early civilizations, the widespread inﬂuence of
Eliade’s theories may have encouraged the interpretation of fragmentary data
in ways that exaggerate the extent of cross-cultural uniformity of ideas relating
to cosmology. His ideas may have become self-fulﬁlling.
While the notion of a central vertical axis was strongly marked in the Valley
of Mexico and in Maya and Mesopotamian culture and seems to have been
present in early China and among the Yoruba, it was not evident among the
Inka or in ancient Egypt. Yet the symbolic importance that the Inka assigned to
verticality, Egyptian preoccupation with the circumpolar region of the sky, and

446
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the ethnocentric belief that every early civilization was located at the centre
of the universe can all too easily – and perhaps deceptively – be construed
as referring to such a cosmic axis. Although it is often proposed that Chinese
and Mesoamerican cosmological concepts were derived from a common set
of shamanic beliefs of Siberian origin that were carried to the New World by
the earliest Palaeo-Indian settlers, the resemblances between Chinese beliefs
and those prevailing among the Indians of the southeastern United States
seem to be more detailed than are those between Shang China and highland
Mesoamerica. Both the Chinese and the Indians of the eastern United States
believed that the underworld was a realm of raw life-forces while the sky world
wasoneofmorecontrolled,intellectualpowers.Contrariwise,thepeopleliving
in the Valley of Mexico viewed the underworld as a place of sterility, death, and
disappearance (Allan 1991; B. Smith 1996: 311–16). The theory of Siberian
origins also fails to account for the notable differences between Mexican and
Peruvian cosmologies, which were presumably based on ideas brought to the
New World at the same time. Much more systematic testing of the applicability
of Eliade’s ideas to hunter-gatherer and other prestate societies around the
world is needed before they can be employed to infer the cosmological beliefs
of early civilizations. In order to make my data base as independent as possible
of Eliade’s inﬂuence, I have sought to use information collected before as well
as since the 1950s. This will help to test the general applicability of Eliade’s
ideas.
More speciﬁc conceptual problems beset the application of Eliade’s views.
Directionality usually refers to a quadripartite division of the earth’s surface.
Sometimes, however, it indicates the cardinal directions, as, for example, when
the sloping entrance to an Old Kingdom Egyptian pyramid points due north
and the pyramid’s mortuary temple faces due east. In other instances, it refers
to a quartering of the horizon, with the centre of each quarter facing one of
the cardinal directions. Among some modern Maya, the words glossed as ‘east’
and ‘west’ actually refer to those segments of the horizon where the sun rises
and sets in the course of a year, while those glossed ‘north’ and ‘south’ refer
to the remaining portions of the horizon, where the sun never rises or sets
(Watanabe 1983). It is probably more difﬁcult to control for emic variation
in the sphere of religious and cosmological beliefs than in any other sector of
early civilizations.
The earth, the realm of living human beings, was generally conceptualized
in early civilizations as a ﬂat surface (rather than a globe or curving surface),
square or circular in outline and only a few thousand kilometres across. It was
assumed to be surrounded by the ocean, which at its outer extremity became
one with the higher and lower supernatural realms. Above the earth was the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
447
realm of the sky, where deities generally associated with life and cosmic order
dwelt. The sky realm was often supposed to be supported above the earth by
gods, trees, or mountains located at the four corners of the world. Beneath the
ground was another realm inhabited by supernatural powers. Sometimes that
realm was associated with moisture and life, but more often it was associated
with death, albeit a death from which new life might arise. The main points
of communication between the upper, middle, and lower worlds were located
at their common centre and four corners. Contact occurred at or through
hills, sacred trees, caves, tombs, and temples. Within this generic conceptual
framework, individual early civilizations elaborated distinctive versions of the
cosmos.
The Aztec and their neighbours believed the earth (cemanahuatl) to be a
disc or square surrounded by four petals or quadrants (nauhcampa) set in the
midst of sea water that was charged with supernatural power (teoatl, ilhuica-
atl) (D. Carrasco 1999: 104; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 58–60). The saline waters of
Lake Texcoco were believed to be sea water rising up from under the ground
(Dur´an 1971: 168), and their presence made Tenochtitlan, on an island in the
middle of that lake, a microcosm of the whole earth. This connection with the
sea was emphasized by the sea sand, seashells, and other marine fauna buried
in caches in Tenochtitlan’s main temple platform (Broda 1987: 99–100).
The terrestrial plane was divided into quadrants. The east was associated
with the daily birth and the west with the daily demise of the sun, while the
north was associated with the sun’s right hand and the south with his left hand
as he travelled west across the sky. The north, which was the source of cold,
dry winds, tended, like the west, to be associated with death, while the more
clement south and east were associated with life. The east was identiﬁed with
maleness and the west with femaleness. Each of the four quadrants had its own
emblematic colour, tree, bird, type of wind, deity, and supernatural powers.
The colour symbolism that was associated with the quadrants and the centre
was not, however, constant. In one commonly used system, east was associated
with red, north with black, west with white, south with blue, and the centre
with green (Caso 1958: 10; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 57). However, east was also
associated with yellow, north with red or white, west with blue-green or black,
south with white, and the centre with black or red (Aguilera 1989: 132; Berdan
1982: 123; D. Carrasco 1987: 140).
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that there were thirteen sky
levels above the earth, each inhabited by different deities. The lower levels
were the realms of the moon, stars, sun, and comets. Above them were skies of
variouscolours,whilethetoptwolevelsconstitutedtherealmofthecreatorgod
Ometeotl (Caso 1958: 64–65). Directly beneath the mountains, fertility deities

448
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
lived in caves ﬁlled with rain-producing clouds, streams, trees, and vegetation.
The most important of these paradises, located at the southern edge of the
world, was Tlalocan, the home of the rain god Tlaloc. At the northern edge of
the world, openings led to the nine levels of Mictlan, the underworld. Mictlan
was a cold, dry, dangerous place where the souls of the dead descended from
one level to another until those that survived the journey experienced personal
extinction in the lowest. The underworld was ruled by Mictlantecuhtli and
Mictlancihuatl (the Lord and Lady of the Underworld), who were counterparts
ofifnotthesameasOmeteotl(Le´on-Portilla1963:109).Eachnightthedeador
jaguar sun passed through the underworld, illuminating it before being reborn
as the eagle or daytime sun (Caso 1958: 12–13). The Mexicans believed that at
the four corners of the world cosmic energy, which provided rain, sunlight, and
plant life, ﬂowed up through caves from the fertile parts of the underworld
and down from the skies and then travelled across the surface of the earth
before returning to its source at the centre. For the Aztec, the centre was
the main temple at Tenochtitlan, the most important and spiritually powerful
building in their world (Broda 1987: 122; D. Carrasco 1990: 67; Caso 1958:
56–64; Matos Moctezuma 1988: 123–35).
Many Maya beliefs about the structure of the universe were derived from
the same Mesoamerican sources as those in the Valley of Mexico. The Maya
pictured a terrestrial world that consisted of a centre surrounded by four quad-
rants and a primordial sea. East and west were associated with the birth and
death of the sun, north with the sky realm, and south with the underworld.
There were thirteen sky realms above the terrestrial plane and nine under-
worlds beneath it. The underworld was a dark, watery (or underwater) locality
with its own black water ‘sky’. These realms were vertically separated by a
cosmic tree located at the centre of the universe with its roots in the under-
world and its crown in the sky. The Classic Maya often depicted the sky as a
double-headed serpent, their words for ‘snake’ (kan) and ‘sky’ (ka’an) being
near-homophones. The earth was pictured as a cayman or turtle resting in wa-
ter or as a two-headed monster (kawak). Both the sky and the earth monster
had one living head and one dead one.
The Maya assigned the colour red to the east, white to the north, black to
the west, yellow to the south, and blue-green to the centre. Each quadrant
had distinctive trees and gods that kept the earth and sky separated. The
north, the principal direction from which rains came, was associated with life.
Supernatural powers were able to pass from one level of the universe to another
through mountains, caves, sinkholes, lakes, and oceans, as well as up and down
the world tree and through the bodies of vision serpents that the upper classes
conjured up by bleeding themselves and using hallucinogens. Temples were

Cosmology and Cosmogony
449
identiﬁed with the trees, hills, and caves which facilitated communication
between the terrestrial and other realms. The Maya may have regarded the
night sky as the underworld, which rotated so that it became visible to the
terrestrial world after sunset. The sun rose as a young man from the underworld
each day and grew old as he crossed the sky (Freidel and Schele 1988b; Reents-
Budet 1998: 78–79; Schele and Miller 1986: 42–47; Sharer 1996: 153–57). The
Maya associated the underworld with death and decay, which were a source
of fertility and regeneration. The elderly Lords of Death ruled a malodorous
realm of rot and disease but one from which major deities and the souls of
resourceful rulers were able to escape, at least temporarily, by transforming
themselves into the sun, moon, and planets (Schele and Miller 1986: 42, 54).
The Shang and Western Zhou may have conceptualized the terrestrial plane
as a square with a square spirit world adjacent to each side. Each spirit world
was the home of a different wind and rain, and all of these were surrounded by
the ocean (Allan 1991: 75, 173). The Shang viewed the terrestrial plane as con-
stituting a central area (zhong shang) surrounded by four lands (si tu) named
for the cardinal directions. David Keightley (2000) suggests that the east-west
axis,associatedwiththesun,mayhavebeenregardedastheparamountoneand
east as the principal point of the compass. North was the direction of cold and
the dead and south the direction of warmth and the living. The Shang viewed
themselves as occupying the centre of the earth and surrounded on all four
sides by barbarians. In Zhou times these peoples were identiﬁed generically
as the Rong to the west, the Di to the north, the Yi to the east, and the Man to
the south. The Rong and the Di were nomadic peoples (Creel 1970: 197–212).
Above the square of the earth was a circular sky world, perhaps composed of
nine levels, and below the earth were the Yellow Springs, a moist underworld,
perhaps also with nine levels (Allan 1991: 30). This triple-level universe was
also conceptualized as a turtle, its upper shell the sky world and its plastron
the terrestrial world, swimming in a cosmic sea (104). At the centre of this
universe grew the gianmu, or ﬁxed mulberry tree, which had nine branches
in the sky world and nine roots in the underworld. Shang royal capitals were
described as the pole (ji), or centre, of the four quarters (76).
The early Chinese appear to have distinguished between celestial spirits, in-
cluding Shangdi and the royal ancestors, who collectively may have embodied
the spirit force (shen) that shaped and ordered the universe, and underworld
deities who embodied the primal energies (qi, feng), associated with winds and
sexual arousal, that animated the cosmos (Lewis 1990: 213–15). It has been
suggested that the later culture hero Huangdi (the Yellow Emperor) was orig-
inally the ruler of the underworld and hence the underworld counterpart of
Shangdi. While the celestial realm was associated with birds, the underworld

450
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
was associated with dragons (Allan 1991: 65–66, 170). Ten suns were distin-
guished, each equated with one of the ten sequential days of the Shang ritual
calendar. A close association was established between these suns and deceased
Shang rulers, each posthumously named after one of the ten days. Every day
nine suns, perhaps in the form of birds, stayed in the underworld while the
remaining one travelled across the sky. The sun rose from the ocean and as-
cended into the sky by means of the cosmic mulberry tree before once again
plunging into the sea and the underworld (Allan 1991: 50, 172–83; Granet
1958 [1930]: 203; Keightley 2000).
The Mesopotamians imagined the visible universe to consist of two parts,
the curved vault of the sky (an) and the ﬂat disc of the earth (ki), which long
ago had been forced apart by the air (lil) (Huot 1989: 73). In some early myths
these two units had grown through the accumulation of primeval silts; in others
they were the body of Tiamat, a primeval cosmic deity that had been torn in
two. The surface of the earth had been shaped by the gods, who had dug
river channels and raised mountains prior to creating human beings. Southern
Mesopotamia was thought to be located at the centre of the terrestrial plane
and hence to be the place that had the most effective contact with the gods. It
appears to have been assigned to the southern quadrant (ubda) of the world,
the other quadrants containing Shubur and Hamazi to the east, Martu, the
Amorite country, to the west, and Uri to the north (Kramer 1963: 284–85).
Above the earth were the air and the sky world, where the major cosmic
deities lived. The earth rested on sweet water (apsu), which in turn overlay
and was surrounded by the heavier salt water of the ocean (tamtu).
Beneath the earth was a cavernous underworld (eretsu): a dry, dark place
containing the city of the dead, which was surrounded by seven walls. Here
lived the gods of the underworld, the spirits of disease, and the souls of the
dead. The sun travelled through the underworld from west to east each night,
brieﬂy bringing light to various parts of it. The moon visited the underworld
once a month at new moon to judge the dead. Various deities associated with
crops, animal care, and fertility also lived part of each year on earth but had
to spend the rest of it in the underworld. Beneath the underworld, a counter-
sky was sometimes envisioned (Bott´ero 1992: 273–74; Jacobsen 1976: 168–79).
According to some Babylonian cosmologies, there were three sky realms above
the earth inhabited by different groups of deities. These combined with the
earth, the sweet water, and the realm of the dead to form a six-layered universe
(Lambert 1975: 58–60). Beyond the ordered universe was a limitless celestial
ocean.
The Inka distinguished an upper or sky world (hanan pacha) ruled by the
sun and associated with sovereignty, the surface of the terrestrial world (cay

Cosmology and Cosmogony
451
pacha), which was the abode of living human beings, and a lower realm (hurin
or ucu pacha) composed of the sea and what lay beneath the earth. This lower
realm was associated with night and the creator god Wiraqucha. The Inka also
thought of the Andean highlands as constituting an upper (hanan) moiety,
associated with the sky world, and of the coastal plain as constituting a lower
(hurin) moiety, associated with the sea and fertility (Classen 1993: 31–33;
MacCormack 1991: 310).
Cuzco was venerated as the centre of the terrestrial world and the major
focus of spiritual power in the Inka kingdom. In the region surrounding it
more than three hundred wakas were located along forty-one or forty-two ce-
ques (siqi), or lines of spiritual force, that radiated from the Qorikancha, the
main temple of the sun. Different social groups were responsible for maintain-
ing each of these wakas (Bauer 1998; Cobo 1990: 51–84; I. Farrington 1992;
Zuidema 1964). The Cuzco area in turn was surrounded by four divisions
(suyu) that extended to the frontiers of the Inka kingdom, which was called
tawantinsuyu (land of the four parts). These quarters not only constituted
the largest administrative districts of the Inka state but also were associated
with different ecological zones: the northwest (chinchasuyu) with the northern
highlands, the southwest (cuntisuyu) with the Paciﬁc coast, the southeast (col-
lasuyu) with the Lake Titicaca area and the Atacama Desert, and the northeast
(antisuyu) with the Amazonian tropical forest (Kendall 1973: 54). The Inka’s
two ritual directions were east and west; there were no Quechua words for
north or south (Rowe 1944: 300).
The Inka believed the cosmos to be a combination of two sets of reciprocal
forces in a creative equilibrium. The ﬁrst set was characterized by structure,
maleness, light, clarity, dryness, rock or earth, fertility, and right-handedness
and the second by ﬂuidity, femaleness, darkness, obscurity, moisture, water,
fecundity, and left-handedness. Yet water, which was generally conceptualized
as female, was also viewed as semen and hence male, while soil, which was
impregnated by water, was often regarded as female. The moon, which was
always female, was associated with the male sky realm (Classen 1993). Repro-
duction was a process brought about by water’s combining with dry, stable,
and enduring earth or rock. High altitudes, including mountain peaks and
the sky, were associated with maleness and low-lying regions, including fertile
mountain valleys, with femaleness. Life was thought to be sustained by water
rising through underground channels from the Paciﬁc Ocean to the highlands,
from where it ﬂowed over the earth in the form of rivers back to its source,
or, alternatively, transported to the highlands by a celestial llama or the Milky
Way and released there as rain. The movement of water into the highlands
maintained the equilibrium of the cosmic order by preventing the ocean from

452
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
rising ever higher and ﬂooding the whole earth. The sun was believed to rise
out of Lake Titicaca and sink into the Paciﬁc Ocean, from where it too made its
way back into the highlands through underground channels. The Inka viewed
death as the separation of the dry and wet aspects of living creatures. While
the moist life-force returned to lakes and rivers and ﬁnally to the ocean, the
dry forces shaping life survived as wakas and mallquis, the dried remains of
living things, which were connected with the world inside the earth (Classen
1993: 11–25; Gose 1993: 494–502; Salomon 1991: 15–16; Sherbondy 1992).
The Egyptians viewed the universe as a region of light, life, and ordered
activity that had been created and was sustained within Nun (nw, nnw), a lim-
itless ocean of dark, inert, undifferentiated, and lifeless water that was alien
and unknown even to the gods. The earth (t3) was pictured as a ﬂat surface
or the upturned, reclining body of the earth god Geb and the sky (pt) as
a ﬂat plate made of bronze or meteoric iron held up by four deities or the
downward-facing body of the sky goddess, Nut, who was variously pictured
as a woman arched over the earth or a cow standing above it. Geb and Nut
were separated by their son Shu, who represented air or sunlight. Beneath the
earth was the underworld (dw3t), which consisted of caverns that extended
from the western horizon back to the eastern one. Alternatively, the under-
world was identiﬁed with the dark sky that extended below the horizon. Below
the underworld stretched the feminine portion or counterpart of Nun (nnwt)
( J. Allen 1988: 3–7).
The Egyptians conceived of the universe as being organized along two main
axes: an east-west solar axis and a north-south Nile one. The sun god was
believed to grow old as he travelled across the sky each day. In the evening
he was swallowed by Nut and rejuvenated as he passed through her body
to be reborn the next morning in the east. Alternatively, the sun sank into
the underworld and travelled east through it, defeating the forces of disorder
and being rejuvenated as he did so, before rising victorious from the eastern
horizon the next morning. The Nile River’s life-giving waters were believed to
well up from the primeval waters in the vicinity of the cataracts and ﬂow north
until they reentered the primeval ocean when they reached the Mediterranean
Sea. Through endless repetitions of cycles, the sun and the Nile River renewed
themselves and provided the necessities of life for the Egyptians.
The east and south were regions that symbolized life and rebirth, while
the west and north symbolized both death and the possibility of survival after
death. This survival was associated with the Field of Reeds (sh˘
t ı3rw), a fertile
realm of the god Osiris located near the setting place of the sun, and the Field
of Offerings (sh˘
t h
• tp), which was associated with the northern circumpolar
stars. The Egyptians interpreted the ecliptic (h˘
3-channel, ‘winding channel’)

Cosmology and Cosmogony
453
as a river in the sky along which the sun, moon, and planets travelled in their
boats. At least in later times, this river was also believed to provide water in the
form of rain to foreign lands. Other Egyptologists have associated the Field
of Reeds and the Field of Offerings with the portions of the sky located south
and north of the ecliptic (Goebs 1998: 10–11).
While the cosmos continued to sustain and renew itself, it constantly had
to resist the forces of primeval inertia and disorder (ısft) which assailed the
gods and threatened the terrestrial realm in the form of deserts, sandstorms,
low Niles, rainstorms, night-time, weak rulers, and death. Every night the
serpent that personiﬁed disorder sought to destroy the weakened sun, every
year drought attempted to overwhelm the fertility of the Nile Valley, and over
time kings grew older and less competent to rule. The efforts of the solar
creator god to renew himself and ensure his eternal youth maintained the
delicate balance between the order of the universe and the disorder of the
primeval ocean that the creator god had established at the time of creation (sp
tpy) (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 197–98).
The Yoruba compared the realm of the gods, or the upper spirit world (orun),
and the earth to the two halves of a calabash, with the sky set over an earth
that was concave downwards. The earth in turn was surrounded by the ocean
(Ojo 1966a: 196). The sky was associated with Ifa, the god of certainty and
balance, who alone knew the will of the creator god Olorun, and the earth with
Esu, the god of uncertainty and disorder (R. Armstrong 1981: 75–76). Yoruba
deities climbed up and down between the upper spirit world and the earth
along iron chains that hung from the sky or, like the winds, passed between the
two realms at the gates of the earth, which were located at the four cardinal
directions. The sun, moon, and Venus, the only star that the Yoruba identiﬁed
individually, all travelled some distance below the dome of the sky. The sun was
believed to recross the sky from west to east at midnight (Ojo 1966a: 196–200).
The people of Benin drew a similar distinction between the spirit world (eriui)
and the visible world (agbo). The path between these worlds ran through or
across the ocean, which surrounded the visible world and was the source of its
fertility (Bradbury 1957: 52–54).
Like the Aztec, the Yoruba divided the surface of the earth into four seg-
ments, which were identiﬁed in relation to the motion of the sun: sunrise,
sunset, and the areas to the right and left of the sun as it passed across the sky
each day. The east-west axis was regarded as the primary one, the north-south
axis as secondary. Noon and midnight, when the sun traversed the zenith, were
both regarded as times of special importance and concern. The Yoruba did not
venerate the sun, and, while women prayed to the moon for children, they
offered no sacriﬁces to it (Ojo 1966a: 174, 198). Each city ideally had gates

454
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that faced the four quarters. In the centre of a town or by each of its gates was a
mound dedicated to the four-headed god Olori Merin. Babies were sacriﬁced
to these mounds every three months (Lucas 1948: 166; Ojo 1966a: 200). Yoruba
divination correlated speciﬁc deities and coloured substances with particular
directions. The east was associated with the trickster deity Esu and with sulfur,
the north with Ogun, the god of iron, and with redwood, the west with Sango,
the god of lightning, and with charcoal, and the south with the creator god
Orisala and with chalk. In Ilesa, a special annual cycle of sacriﬁces was made
to Esu in June, Ogun in September, Sango in December, and Orisala in March
(Frobenius 1913, 1: 254–59). The Yoruba area was thought to be composed of
four parts, each divided into four kingdoms. These were the sixteen kingdoms
that had been assigned to the immediate male descendants of Oduduwa, the
god who created the world (Ojo 1966a: 200).
The cosmological models propounded by the early civilizations have striking
similarities. Those between the Egyptian and the Mesopotamian model may
reﬂect shared beliefs with a single origin somewhere in the Middle East. Those
among the various Mesoamerican models have obvious historical connections,
although the timing of the development and spread of many religious beliefs
remains uncertain. The similarities between Mesoamerican and Chinese cos-
mologies have tentatively been attributed to shared connections with Siberian
shamanism. These particular explanations do not, however, account for the
worldwide distribution of many traits. The shared features at least partly re-
ﬂect the way in which people living in early civilizations would have interpreted
the natural world that was familiar to them in the light of their belief that such
a world was sustained and animated by supernatural powers. As Alan Sokal
and Jean Bricmont (1998: 183 n. 255) observe, ‘All beliefs, even mythical ones,
are constrained, at least in part, by the phenomena to which they refer’. The
best-informed individuals in early civilizations knew about lands many hun-
dreds of kilometres from their own but had no detailed information about
regions that were more than a few thousand kilometres away. They tended to
think of the terrestrial world as being a relatively ﬂat plane only a few thousand
kilometres across. All early civilizations were located close to seas or oceans;
therefore it was inferred that salt water encircled the whole earth. Above the
terrestrial plane was the sky, which was ﬁlled with moving, hence living, ce-
lestial bodies. Most cosmographies posited some form of counterpart of the
sky located under the earth. Especially in civilizations that interred the dead,
this underworld was equated with death and decay and populated with the
deities, spirits, and souls of the dead. Because the surface of the earth pro-
vided food for humans, it was often concluded that the underworld was a place
of regeneration, where death gave rise to new life. The Yoruba’s dual division

Cosmology and Cosmogony
455
of the cosmos into a purely supernatural sky realm and a terrestrial realm
appears to be an exception to this tri-level scheme, but they acknowledged a
third cosmically signiﬁcant level: the sea. Their view of the universe appears to
have been more analogous to the Chinese image of the sky and earth as equiv-
alent to the carapace and plastron of a turtle ﬂoating on a cosmic sea. The
Maya and Aztec viewed the earth as a saurian monster ﬂoating on a primordial
ocean.
The peopling of the cosmos with deities who animated (or were) the natu-
ral world and supplied it with order, light, moisture, fertility, and well-being
accords with notions about the fundamental nature of the supernatural shared
by the people living in these civilizations. The adverse manner in which nat-
ural forces often affected humans also encouraged the belief that the deities
who controlled nature were not primarily concerned with human welfare and
might under certain circumstances seek to harm human beings.
The belief that spirits and supernatural forces moved from one level of
the cosmos to another encouraged symbolic elaboration. The widespread idea
that the sun returned from west to east either below the earth or above the
sky accorded with a widely shared belief that both earth and sky were opaque
bodiesthatwouldrendersuchmovementsinvisible.Itisalsonotsurprisingthat
an east-west axis, which corresponds to the visible movement of the sun, was
generally privileged over a north-south axis. By contrast, the Andean emphasis
on the symbolic meaning of verticality in the terrestrial world and the Maya
portrayal of the underworld as a place of rank decay, as opposed to the Aztec,
Mesopotamian, and Egyptian views of it as a dry, etiolated realm, reﬂected
major differences in the speciﬁc ecological settings in which such views were
formulated.
It is more difﬁcult to explain the widespread notion of a vertical central axis
and quadripartition among the early civilizations. These concepts appear to
have been present in many small-scale societies and ultimately may have been
grounded in the coordinates that any upright primate would have required to
monitor the natural environment. The human body itself would have suggested
a vertical axis, while, given the limited range of clear vision, scanning in four
directions (front, back, and to each side) would have been necessary to secure
the visual coverage required to detect game, as well as animal predators and
other dangers. Out of these perceptual foundations may have evolved the
tendencies found in early and later preindustrial civilizations to draw complex
analogies between the human body and the cosmos (Classen 1993; L´opez
Austin 1988).
Without minimizing signiﬁcant variations in cosmography from one early
civilization to another, many similarities can be attributed to parallel analyses

456
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of the natural world by people who viewed the universe from generally similar
perspectives, including similar views of the supernatural. Such an explanation
also helps to account for the greater similarity of views about the terrestrial
plane, which were controlled to a greater degree by direct observation, than of
ideasconcerningtheskyworldortheunderworld.Thisconclusionaccordswith
the materialist belief that observations of the natural world play a signiﬁcant
role in the development of some religious concepts ( J. Furst 1995: 174).
cosmogony
All early civilizations sought to understand when and how the universe had
come into being and how long it might last. Since it was believed to be ani-
mated by supernatural powers, these questions were studied mythologically.
Because people in early civilizations saw themselves as following collective pat-
terns of behaviour that the gods had established when they created the world,
cosmogonic speculations were intimately concerned with society as well as the
natural world.
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that the whole of creation
had evolved from Ometeotl, the bisexual deity living beyond the skies who
represented the source of everything that ever was or ever would be in the
universe. Ometeotl combined maleness and femaleness, day and night, and
all the other complementary and contradictory qualities that made up the
universe. At the time of creation, when darkness still prevailed, Ometeotl
channelled energy (sometimes speciﬁed as ﬁre) to produce four male deities
who constructed the temporal and spatial framework of the universe. These
were the Red Tezcatlipoca (the agricultural fertility god Xipe Totec) of the east,
the Black Tezcatlipoca (Tezcatlipoca, the god of kingship, who could see all)
of the north, the White Tezcatlipoca (Quetzalcoatl) of the west, and the Blue
Tezcatlipoca of the south, with whom the Aztec identiﬁed their patron deity
Huitzilopochtli. Huehueteotl, the Old God, or Xiuhtecuhtli, the Old Fire God,
identiﬁed with Ometeotl, presided over the central axis of the universe. The
four Tezcatlipocas created the calendar, the upper sky worlds, the earth, the
ocean, the realms of the dead, the other deities, and the heavenly bodies
(Heyden 1989: 38–39; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 33–34). In some myths they split
in two a female cayman or earth monster ﬂoating on the primeval sea in order
to create from her body the earth and the sky (Clendinnen 1991: 177).
The sky world and the underworld remained stable, but the terrestrial level
was periodically subject to violent transformations (Clendinnen 1991: 222).
There had been four successive ages, each lasting from six to thirteen ﬁfty-
two-year calendar cycles, during which a different Tezcatlipoca constituted the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
457
dominant cosmic force. Each successive age was associated with a different
element: earth, wind, ﬁre, and water. Each age was better organized than
the one before, but at the end of each the sun of that era failed, a violent
cataclysm disrupted the world order, and the human creatures of that period
either perished or were turned into animals (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 4). At the
beginning of the present era, in a.d. 883, the gods assembled at the ruins
of Teotihuacan to raise the sky, which had fallen to earth at the end of the
previous era, and renew the earth for a fourth time. Here the god Nanahuatzin
immolated himself to become the ﬁfth and apparently ﬁnal sun, and one by
one the other gods hurled themselves into the cosmic ﬁre, where they were
consumed, to ensure that the new sun had sufﬁcient life-force to move across
the sky. As a consequence of this action the cosmos and the gods were renewed
(Le´on-Portilla 1963: 33–48).
The Aztec and neighbouring peoples believed that the new era, identiﬁed
as that of their patron god, Huitzilopochtli, would come to an end at the
termination of one of their ﬁfty-two-year calendar rounds. The world would
be destroyed by earthquakes, and supernatural monsters would kill all human
beings. It is unclear whether this era was thought likely to be of as short
duration as previous ones or whether, because of the superior harmonization
of space and time that had been achieved when it was created, it could be
expected to last longer. The Aztec believed that by nourishing the sun with
human blood the duration of this cosmic order could be extended (Caso 1958:
93–94; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 54–61).
Unlike the Aztec, whose longest year count covered only one ﬁfty-two-
year cycle, the Maya had a calendar that used multiples of twenty-year cycles
to stretch the counting of days backward and forward over immensely long
periods. The Maya equated various cyclical conﬁgurations of their calendar
with particular controlling deities and believed that the coincidence of the
same supernatural forces at different points in time caused human history to
repeat itself. In the sixteenth century they believed that their era had begun in
3114 b.c. and would come to an end in a.d. 2012 and that the world had been
destroyed, and the sky again raised and the terrestrial realm re-created, at least
three times since the beginning of the universe (Schele and Miller 1986: 16).
Both the Classic and the historical Maya thought that the gods brought
the universe into being at a cosmic hearth that they identiﬁed with the three
brightest stars of the constellation Orion. Yet there is growing evidence that
the idea of relatively rapid cycles of cosmic creation and destruction may have
been introduced to the Maya from central Mexico after the Classic period.
While several major Classic-period deities were born or reborn shortly before
or after 3114 b.c., there is no indication that that particular year marked the

458
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
beginning of a new creation for the Classic Maya (Bassie-Sweet 1991: 251).
Classic Maya inscriptions referring to anniversaries of royal successions that
would occur as late as a.d. 4772 have been interpreted as evidence that the
Classic Maya likewise did not believe the present world order would come
to an end in a.d. 2012 (Reents-Budet 1998: 78; Schele and Mathews 1998:
106–7, 341).
Such ﬁndings call into question signiﬁcant beliefs that have been attributed
totheClassicMayaconcerningthecreationandhistoryoftheworld.Ithasbeen
suggested that they viewed creation as a never-ending pattern of birth, death,
and rebirth involving the sowing of cosmic seeds that became celestial bodies,
plants, trees, humans, and the dead living in the underworld (D. Carrasco
1990: 100–101). Yet they appear to have believed that the fates of deities and
of human individuals and collectivities were predictable from arrays of cosmic
forces and planetary motions that could be linked to particular calendrical
cycles. They also may have believed that individual gods and other beings had
predetermined beginnings and endings that recurred as a result of similar
alignments of cosmic forces. Adopting this interpretation creates far greater
differences between Aztec and Classic Maya beliefs about cosmological history
than were formerly envisaged.
The surviving fragments of Sumerian myths suggest that in the beginning,
the wind and storm god, Enlil, separated the sky and the earth, while the god
Enki, noted for his cleverness, organized the world much like a large estate. He
arranged the land, mountains, marshes, and seas, each with their own deities,
put gods in charge of agricultural production, and appointed Utu, the sun god,
to look after boundaries. Prior to the creation of human beings, the igigi, a
lower order of deities, had to labour to produce food for all the gods. In the
course of this labour they dug out the beds of the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers
(Bott´ero 1992: 222; Jacobsen 1976: 85).
In the later, more detailed, Babylonian creation narrative, Enuma Elish, the
universe began with a watery waste in which the female salt water, Tiamat,
and the male fresh water, Apsu, were commingled. These two engendered
silt, which in turn gave rise to time, the horizon, and heaven (an) and earth
(ki), the latter probably in the form of two conjoined discs. The god An mated
with various goddesses who gave birth to the historical pantheon of deities that
controlled the sky, air, earth, sea, and underworld. By impregnating Ki, An gave
rise to vegetation. In alternative versions An, the sky, was described as both
male (Anum) and female (Antum) and as constituting a married couple who
became the ancestors of the gods ( Jacobsen 1976: 95, 167–69). The creation
of the various generations of gods was followed by a series of conﬂicts between
Apsu and Tiamat, on the one hand, and the younger gods, on the other, in the

Cosmology and Cosmogony
459
course of which the older gods were killed in battle and Enki’s son, Marduk,
was recognized ﬁrst as the champion of the younger gods and then as their
king. Marduk cut Tiamat’s body in two and used it to (re-?)create the sky and
earth. Next he reorganized the cosmos, created human beings, and assigned
administrative tasks to each of the gods. In each of these narratives, creation
and cosmic change were accomplished by divine utterances, the same means
by which kings and ofﬁcials commanded things to be done in the human sphere
( Jacobsen 1976: 170–88; Kramer 1963: 115).
The cosmic order created by the god An and his descendants was transmitted
to the people of Mesopotamia as a model for their society in the form of
over one hundred supernatural enabling powers (mes) that directed both the
operation of the universe and orderly social life among human beings, taking
the form of rules, institutions, actions, and symbols (Kramer 1963: 166; Maisels
1990: 281; 1999: 173). The Mesopotamians asserted that royal rule lasted for
241,200 years from the time when it descended from the sky world until the
ﬂood, after which the human life-span was shortened to its current length. The
ﬁrst dynasty after the ﬂood, that of the city of Kish, lasted for 24,510 years.
After that dynasty, recorded history began (Huot 1989: 231).
It is unclear to what extent the Mesopotamians considered the earth and
the universe perishable. Their endurance and the lives of the gods themselves
appear to have depended upon the gods’ carefully guarding the sources of their
power (Oppenheim 1964: 269). The Mesopotamians believed that the gods
decreed the fates of individual humans and city-states at an assembly held
annually in the temple of Enlil in Nippur, over which the god An presided
( Jacobsen 1976: 188). If a tutelary deity abandoned his or her city or his or
her support was overruled by the other gods, that city would be destroyed
by its enemies. Such a catastrophe could be averted, if at all, only by a pious
ruler who was able to divine the wishes of the gods and knew how to placate
them. The constant threats that Mesopotamians faced as a result of natural
catastrophes, intercity warfare, and foreign invasions were reﬂected in their
pessimistic view of the way in which the gods managed the universe.
The Yoruba believed that in the beginning the earth was a primeval sea or
marsh and Olorun and the other deities lived in the sky world. According to
accounts that were associated with different city-states, the creation of the
terrestrial world was carried out, on Olorun’s orders, either by Orisala or by
Oduduwa, who descended from the sky world for that purpose. Oduduwa
reached the ground at the place where his sacred grove was later located
at Ife. He brought with him a supernatural chicken that had been supplied
by Olorun, and this chicken created the earth by scratching up soil from the
bottomoftheswamp.OduduwabecametheﬁrstrulerofIfe,andhisimmediate

460
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
descendants established the ﬁrst sixteen Yoruba monarchies (Bascom 1969: 10;
Awolalu 1979: 12–13).
There is no indication that the Yoruba believed either the gods or the nat-
ural order to be threatened with destruction. While Olorun determined the
destinies of individual humans and deities could harm as well as assist people,
communities, and the natural world, deities did not periodically determine
the fate of city-states, as Mesopotamians believed their gods did. Because they
were ruled by descendants of Oduduwa, Yoruba states were expressions of the
cosmic order. Through divination and worship, the Yoruba sought to minimize
supernatural disruptions in both the natural and the political realm.
The best-documented cosmogonies of a territorial state are the ancient
Egyptian ones. The Egyptians referred to the creation of the universe as ‘the
time of Re’ (rk r) or ‘the time of the gods’ (rk ntrw) (J. Allen 2000: 126). The
universe had begun as the result of movement or life stirring within the cosmic
sea of non-existence. While each major cult centre had its own creation myth,
all of them agreed that a primeval deity or deities had produced the gods and
in the course of doing so had ordered the universe and all that inhabited it.
In Heliopolis this creator was identiﬁed as the sun god Atum (ﬁnisher), who
shaped the universe after he appeared upon a mound (st wrt, ‘great seat/place’)
that had emerged in the primeval sea and slain or repelled the serpent of non-
order. A bisexual though physically male-appearing deity, Atum masturbated
and then combined his own semen and spittle to create the god Shu (sunlight)
and the goddess Tefnut (moisture), who was also identiﬁed as the goddess
Ma et (cosmic order). They in turn engendered the earth god, Geb, and the sky
goddess, Nut, whose four children were Osiris (or Horus the Elder) and Seth
and their sister-wives Isis and Nephthys. Osiris represented the fertility of the
Nile Valley, Seth the sterility of the desert. The ﬁrst generations of male gods
(Atum, Shu, Geb) successively ruled on earth for a long time, but eventually,
as each of them grew older and less able to manage things, disorders broke out
which the younger gods had to quell. At that point each older god ascended
to the sky world, where he was able to renew his youthful vigour by passing,
like the sun, through cosmic cycles of death and rebirth. Osiris’s murder by his
brother Seth was the ﬁrst death among the major gods, although not necessarily
the ﬁrst death in the terrestrial sphere. Following a brief revival on earth,
Osiris was consigned to the eternal changelessness of the realms of the dead.
At the same time he was reborn as his posthumously conceived son, Horus the
Younger. Thus the two forms of survival, through endless renewal (nh
• h
• ) and
total changelessness (dt), associated with mummiﬁcation and dryness, were
established. With the eventual accession to the throne of Egypt of Osiris’s
son Horus, modern conditions were achieved. One king after another aged,

Cosmology and Cosmogony
461
died, and became identiﬁed with the god Osiris while leaving behind a son
or incarnation to rule over the whole terrestrial world (J. Allen 2000: 143–45;
Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 13–32).
In an alternative Memphite version of creation, that city’s creator god, Ptah,
who was equated with the primeval mound, brought the other gods, includ-
ing the sun, into existence and created the universe and social order by for-
mulating concepts in his heart and making them realities by means of his
divine utterances (h
• w) ( J. Allen 2000: 171–73; Lichtheim 1973: 54–55). At
Hermopolis the sun was caused to emerge from the primeval waters by four
pairs of male and female deities who represented various attributes of non-
existence: inertness, formlessness, darkness, and hiddenness ( J. Allen 2000:
126–27).
The Egyptians believed that the universe was constantly threatened by the
forces of cosmic disorder, but they were conﬁdent that, so long as the proper
ritualswereperformed,itwaslikelytoendureformillionsofyears.Therenewal
of the universe was essential to protect not only life on earth but also the gods
from the ravages of time. Ultimately, they believed, the universe would come
to an end and merge into the creator god, who in turn would be absorbed into
the primeval waters (Hornung 1982: 163).
In the ethnically and socially diverse Andean highlands, many different cre-
ation myths appear to have coexisted. Branches of the Inka royal family main-
tained that either one or many Wiraquchas or the lowland deity Pachakamaq
had created the universe (MacCormack 1991: 350–51). Wiraqucha, who seems
to have been eternal, was associated with the sea, which was viewed as the ul-
timate source of a major ingredient of life. When Wiraqucha ﬁrst created the
earth and sky, all remained dark. At that time he created stone giants whom he
decided not to bring to life. Then he created smaller humans, later to turn some
of them back into stones and drown the rest in a great ﬂood. Finally, at Lake
Titicaca, he created the sun, moon, and stars. The sun, which was associated
with the sky, ﬁre, light, and mountains, was the opposite of Wiraqucha, who
represented earth, water, darkness, the coast, and the sea. Both were viewed
as essential to support crops and animal life. In some traditions, Wiraqucha
was the father and mother of the sun and moon, who produced the morn-
ing and evening stars and they in turn Lord Earth (Camac Pacha) or Mother
Earth (Pacha Mama) and Lady Ocean (Mama Cocha) (Classen 1993: 19–25).
Wiraqucha also reshaped the landscape and provided it with everything that
humans would need to survive. When creation was ﬁnished, Wiraqucha and
two assistants made their way from Lake Titicaca north to Ecuador, where
they disappeared into the Paciﬁc Ocean (Demarest 1981; Gose 1993: 490–91;
Kendall 1973: 182–89; Rowe 1944: 315–16; 1960; Sullivan 1985).

462
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Spanish recorded that the Inka believed that the cosmic order periodi-
cally disintegrated or was overturned. According to one variant of these myths,
ﬁve successive worlds had been created, each one lasting between eight hun-
dred and twenty-eight hundred years. Every creation had its own sun, and suc-
cessive creations were separated by major episodes that were called pachakuti
(world reversals or earthquakes). According to another version, each sun lasted
one thousand years and signiﬁcant changes occurred every ﬁve hundred years,
the rulers at such times being called Pachakutiq. The Inka Pachakutiq was
said to be the ninth ruler of that name, and his reign was asserted to have
marked the beginning of the ﬁfth world (Kendall 1973: 201; Zuidema 1964:
219–34). The upheavals separating different epochs might be cosmologically
traumatic. Sometimes the terrestrial world was ﬂooded when water ceased to
be drawn from the ocean into the highlands; sometimes the surface of the
earth was turned over and the realms of the living and the dead were reversed.
The rapid expansion of the Inka state was another kind of upheaval. It has
been suggested, however, that all these myths may have resulted from Span-
ish scholars’ inadvertently superimposing European or Mexican concepts on
poorly understood Andean myths (Zuidema 1992: 39; Duviols 1989). Thomas
Zuidema (1964: 219–20) argues that in Peru the various worlds or cosmic
periods existed both simultaneously and consecutively. We must therefore in-
terpret this material with extreme caution. There is no evidence concerning
what the Inka believed would be the ultimate fate of creation.
In early civilizations there was much more variation in speculation about the
age of the universe, how it was created, and how it might end than there was
about the structure of the universe. This is scarcely surprising, since much less
empirical evidence was available to constrain thinking about these historical
issues. It is often assumed that in most ancient cosmogonies an initial period in
which there were no gods or only one was followed by an age in which multiple
deities emerged and created the basic structure of the universe and then by the
present era, in which human beings live on earth (Meeks and Favard-Meeks
1996; M. Wright 1995). This scheme does not do justice to the complexity of
the cosmogonies associated with early civilizations.
While each early civilization evolved its own general narrative about the
creation of the universe, there was considerable variation in these accounts
within both city-state systems and territorial states. In city-state systems much
of this variation was from one city-state to another, each state having its own
learned elite and its own traditions. In territorial states regional variation re-
ﬂected the limited control that central governments exerted over intellectual
life in large kingdoms. In all early civilizations, variations were associated with
political factions within the upper class.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
463
The Aztec, Yoruba, and Inka appear to have regarded deities such as Ome-
teotl,Olorun,andWiraquchaasuncreated.TheEgyptiansandMesopotamians
believed that the universe had evolved out of some sort of watery, motionless,
limitless, and eternal uniformity. The Mesopotamians calculated that this had
happened about three hundred thousand years ago, while the Egyptians also
believed that the universe had been created many thousands of years in the
past. Yet all but a short period of Egyptian cosmological history represented a
time when gods had ruled on earth, and most of Mesopotamian history was a
mythical time when humans lived far longer than they have done since. The
Aztec seem to have believed that the universe had existed in any form for only
a few thousand years and that the present creation was only a little over seven
hundred years old. In most Yoruba states ﬁfty reigns or fewer separated kings
recorded in the nineteenth century from the god Oduduwa, who had created
the earth and become the ﬁrst king (Lloyd 1960: 223). The suggestion that the
Inka believed the universe to be about forty-ﬁve hundred years old is highly
suspect.
There was a general tendency in early civilizations to view creation as a
time of superior power and authority, when the gods had established a model
cosmic and social order that later human rulers strove to copy as best they could
(Maisels 1990: 280). Creation time was often believed to continue alongside
historical time. In Egypt and the Valley of Mexico, the daily rising of the sun
repeated the act of creation; among the Maya, rulers’ souls’ escaping from the
underworld in stellar forms replicated the Hero Twins’ rescuing themselves
from the forces of death.
It is unclear how long most early civilizations expected the present cos-
mic order would endure. The Egyptians believed that, provided their kings
performed the proper rituals, their universe would last for a very long time
but not forever, while the Aztec feared that the Fifth Sun and perhaps the
entire universe might collapse at the completion of any ﬁfty-two-year calendar
cycle. The Inka may have believed that the world experienced a destructive
upheaval every millennium or less and the Classic Maya that the universe
would be destroyed and re-created approximately every ﬁve thousand years,
but neither of these beliefs can be attributed to them with certainty. The
Mesopotamians doubted that individual cities would endure for long periods,
given the ﬁckleness of the gods, but surviving myths reveal nothing about the
end of the universe; nor do those of the Yoruba. Whatever they believed about
cosmic cycles, the Maya appear to have had similar doubts about the long-term
survival of cities and other political institutions as a consequence of their belief
in cyclicity and the cosmically predetermined fortunes of all things. All early
civilizations viewed the cosmos as an ordered system in which everything had

464
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a clearly deﬁned function and was interrelated to everything else. Yet no one
explicitly believed this orderly arrangement to be eternal.
Some early civilizations associated the creation of the cosmic order with
gods that existed prior to and independently of time and space. This was the
case with Ometeotl, Olorun, and probably Wiraqucha. The Egyptians viewed
creator gods such as Atum or Ptah as a potential for order that existed in the
primeval ocean but did not come into being until order had differentiated
itself from disorder. The Mesopotamians likewise identiﬁed the earliest gods
as engendering powers within a cosmic ocean, but the gods to which they gave
birth had to slay them before they could order the universe in its present form.
Maya cycles suggest a sense of some kind of overarching, impersonal fate, and
this sense was also present in the cosmogonies of the Valley of Mexico.
While the deities in early civilizations were always gendered, the gender of
creatordeitiesvaried.Someofthem,suchasOlorun,wereclearlymale.Others,
such as Atum and Wiraqucha, appeared to be male but were described as bisex-
ual, indicating that they embodied, at least potentially, the whole of creation.
The Aztec conceptualized their deity Ometeotl as a balanced combination of
male and female forces. The Mesopotamians believed that a primordial pair
of male and female deities engendered the other gods but ascribed a more
prominent role to the female. They also may have conceived of an ultimate
mother of the gods, while An, the sky god, was sometimes said to take both
male and female forms. The younger and more active deities that replaced
Tiamat and Apsu were invariably governed by male deities.
Creation myths thus combined a limited set of general ideas about what
might have existed before the current cosmos or world order (a creator god?
disorder? eternal cycles?) with a belief in the gendered nature of the gods
(the creator gods being male, female, both, or bisexual). The aggregate result
among the early civilizations was a limited but randomly distributed set of
speculations about the origins and history of the cosmos. Similarities between
Mesopotamian and Egyptian creation myths that were not shared by any other
early civilizations, such as their belief in an ordered universe proceeding out
of a watery uniformity, and the Aztec, Maya, and possibly Inka emphasis on
periodic transﬁgurations of the cosmos may result from speciﬁc historical links
among these societies. There is no obvious connection between the type of
creation myth and whether it is associated with city-states or territorial ones.
This suggests that the primary aim of cosmogonies was to account for the
origins and history of natural phenomena rather than to link the speciﬁcs of
these phenomena to political issues. This is a conclusion that runs counter to
the current emphasis on trying to establish the social role of creation myths in
early civilizations (van Zantwijk 1985; Zuidema 1990).

Cosmology and Cosmogony
465
We must, however, consider a possible objection to this conclusion. Thorkild
Jacobsen long ago suggested that the instability of the Mesopotamian environ-
ment was reﬂected in its inhabitants’ fear of changes in divine favour, while the
greater ecological stability of Egypt encouraged the conviction that disorder
could be resisted for a long time (Frankfort et al. 1949: 137–40). More recent
research conﬁrms that serious problems were indeed encountered in culti-
vating southern Mesopotamia, but the punishments that the gods regularly
meted out to human groups were devastating military defeats, foreign inva-
sions, and epidemics, the major ecological disaster – the great ﬂood – being
a unique event. At the same time, both long-term and short-term variations
in the height of the Nile ﬂood presented greater ecological challenges than
Jacobsen and his colleagues recognized (Butzer 1976). Egyptian cosmology
appears to have incorporated a recognition of these ecological problems into
its interpretation of the universe as an unstable equilibrium between the forces
of order, which among other things ensured agricultural prosperity, and the
forces of disorder, which threatened the viability of the universe. This sug-
gests that the cosmic insecurity of the Mespotamians may have reﬂected to a
much greater degree the political instability of their city-state system, while
the Egyptians’ optimism reﬂected the stable political order that their territorial
state was able to maintain over long periods (Trigger 1979).
If this is so, it might be hypothesized that city-state systems would have
attributed greater instability to the cosmic order than territorial states. The
city-state systems in the Valley of Mexico had an even greater sense of cosmic
insecurity and pessimism than the Mesopotamian ones. As in Mesopotamia,
hegemonic relations among city-states were fragile and subject to dramatic
reversals. Yet the Valley of Mexico suffered from volcanic eruptions and disas-
trous crop failures caused by periodic droughts and the region’s susceptibility
to frosts. While the vast extension of chinampa agriculture and the imposition
of extensive tribute in foodstuffs on areas surrounding the Valley of Mexico had
considerably alleviated the ecological threat by the late ﬁfteenth century, these
solutions were both ecologically and politically fragile. Thus it is impossible to
estimate to what extent cosmological pessimism in the Valley of Mexico and
Mesopotamia reﬂected ecological or political problems or a combination of
the two.
Not enough is known about Classic Maya beliefs to measure either their
sense of ecological instability or the extent to which they interpreted polit-
ical reversals as deliberate divine interventions as distinguished from cycli-
cal, astrologically predictable realignments of cosmological forces. There is
general agreement that, as population density increased in the Late Clas-
sic period, Maya agriculture was adversely affected by deforestation and soil

466
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
erosion on hillsides (Fash 1991: 170–81). Yoruba city-states experienced swift
reversals in their political fortunes, but they do not appear to have linked
these reversals to cosmic instability. As in Egypt and Mesopotamia, kingship
was viewed as the continuation of patterns established when the world was
created.
The correlation is no clearer with territorial states. The Egyptians believed
that the cosmic order could be maintained over vast periods. This belief also
implied that the political order that the gods had established for Egypt and the
world at the time of creation would endure despite minor perturbations. But
neither the cosmic nor the political order could be taken for granted; both had
to be maintained by kings performing the correct rituals. The situation is more
uncertain for China and Peru. The Shang appear to have regarded their regime
as a symbolic reversal of the previous mythical (or at least mythologized) Xia
Dynasty. While they associated themselves with ﬁre, birds, sun, life, and light,
they associated their predecessors with the reverse qualities: water, dragons,
moon, death, and darkness (Allan 1991: 17–18). This suggests that changes in
ruling families or the conquest of one territorial state by another may already
have been associated with notions of cosmic reversal. We do not, however, have
enough information to determine how stable the Shang believed either their
environment or the supernatural order was. The much later Chinese concept
of the Mandate of Heaven (tianming), which was adumbrated at the beginning
of the Zhou Dynasty, reconciled periodic political upheavals with a belief in
cosmic and ultimately political stability by blaming political change on the
misconduct of rulers. Such misconduct, by angering Heaven, led to ecological
disasters, uprisings, and eventually the overthrow of bad governments.
In highland Peru it may have been believed that the cosmos underwent
major changes, if not destruction and re-creation, every ﬁve hundred or
one thousand years. This suggests a sense of cosmic instability approximating
that found in the Valley of Mexico. Such a sense of instability would not have
been inappropriate in a region subject to severe earthquakes, El Ni˜no episodes,
and climatic marginality at high altitudes. Yet it is uncertain whether cosmic
cyclicity was an indigenous Andean concept or invented by early Spanish schol-
ars. Even if this view were indigenous, given the brief dominance of the Inka
state over much of the Andean region it would be impossible to be certain
whether this view was associated with earlier territorial states, such as the
Chimu kingdom on the north coast of Peru or Tiwanaku and Wari in the
southern highlands, or with the rivalrous chiefdoms that had prevailed until
the time of Inka rule in the central highlands.
Thus there is not enough evidence to associate belief in cosmic instabil-
ity with city-state systems and belief in cosmic stability with territorial states.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
467
Despite varying degrees of optimism and pessimism, all early civilizations en-
tertained doubts about the powers of their deities to control the universe
and about the unequivocal willingness of these deities to help human beings.
Like the inhabitants of all complex societies, those who lived in early civiliza-
tions appear to have been aware of the devastating impacts of both ecological
and political calamities and projected these fears into the supernatural realm.
Views of cosmic instability may have reﬂected both political and ecological
concerns. In at least some cases, however, they may also have represented
the views of earlier and quite different societies persisting under altered cir-
cumstances. It is therefore not surprising that, on the whole, these views ap-
pear to reﬂect concerns more about ecological instabilities than about political
organization.
cosmograms
The realm of the gods was the main reference point for maintaining political
orderinearlycivilizations.Egyptiankingswerebelievedtocontinuearulership
that had been established by the creator gods before they retreated to the
sky world. Mesopotamian myths asserted that kingship and its paraphernalia
descended to earth from the kingdom that the younger gods had established
in the sky realm. The Yoruba supreme god Olorun, who lived in the sky world,
was king of all the gods, and the world-creating god Oduduwa was the common
ancestor and prototype of Yoruba kings. The Inka regarded their ruler as the
earthly incarnation of Inti, the chief deity of the sky world, and the Shang
kings may have claimed to be descendants of the supreme sky deity Shangdi.
Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba kings sought to incorporate into their own persons
the powers of one or more major deities.
Wilfred Lambert (1975: 49) has pointed out that in ancient Mesopotamia
no clear distinction was drawn between the world of nature and the prod-
ucts of human beings. At the time of creation the gods brought cities into
existence, just as they produced rivers and mountains. Mesopotamian temples
were viewed as mountains (kur) which connected the sky and terrestrial realms
(Mander 1999). They bore names such as ‘House of the Universe’ (´eˇs´arra) and
‘House That Is the Bond of the Sky and the Earth’ (´eduranki) (George 1993:
80, 145). In Egypt the god Ptah created cities in the course of fashioning the
natural world (Lichtheim 1973: 55). Such understandings encouraged efforts
to strengthen the symbolic alignments between social and political organi-
zation, on the one hand, and supernatural powers, on the other, by creating
earthly structures and community plans that duplicated those existing in the
realm of the gods.

468
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Efforts to relate the terrestrial realm more closely to that of the gods often
took the form of aligning public buildings and tombs with solar, lunar, or stellar
rising and setting points. The main axes of at least some Egyptian temples were
oriented to the rising or setting positions of the sun, moon, or particular stars
on certain days of the year (R. Wilkinson 2000: 36–37). The sides of Egyptian
pyramids faced the cardinal directions. Features of Maya building complexes
were aligned with a series of rising points of the sun or particular planets (Harri-
son 1999: 53–55). From earliest Shang times, the entrances to major buildings
faced away from the malign supernatural inﬂuences coming from the north,
including the cold north winds of winter. Later Chinese scholars believed that
Zhou altars to the soil god were regularly faced with earth of an appropriate
directional colour: the east with blue-green, the north with black, the west
with white, the south with red, and their summit with yellow. This, however,
may have been a late Zhou innovation (Creel 1970: 370; Wheatley 1971: 434).
Beyond this, buildings were created to be cosmograms – miniature repli-
cas of the universe. The Aztec interpreted their Great Temple, which they
believed stood at the centre of the cosmos, as such a microcosm. Its three
tapered tiers, each with four sides, and top platform represented the thirteen
levels of the sky world, its supporting platform the earth, and its founda-
tions the underworld. Its northern half, dedicated to the rain god Tlaloc, was
Tonacatepetl, ‘the Hill of Sustenance’, and its southern half was Coatepec Hill,
where Huitzilopochtli had defeated his sister and brothers shortly after he was
born. These two sacred hills joined together symbolized the portals of Mictlan,
the realm of the dead (Broda, Carrasco, and Matos Moctezuma 1987; Matos
Moctezuma 1988: 123–45).
Maya temples represented sacred mountains or the cosmic tree that facili-
tated human communication with the sky world and the underworld. Classic
Maya urban building complexes often had a ritual area to the north, consisting
of pyramid temples erected over the burials of former rulers, and a palace
complex to the south, with a ball court between. The funerary temples, which
reached the highest elevation, symbolized the sky world, the palace complex
represented the human realm and the underworld, and the ball court was be-
lieved to be a major point of communication with the underworld (Ashmore
1989: 273–74). Shang royal graves, which had four ramps descending to a cen-
tral wooden chamber, also appear to have been cosmograms (Allan 1991: 88).
In Egypt most major urban temples were constructed along east-west axes.
From early Shang times or even before, royal palaces contained important rit-
ual structures. Yoruba palaces were of great ritual importance but, while they
were divided into outer, semi-public and inner, private sections, they did not
exhibit any standard, ritually signiﬁcant layout.

Cosmology and Cosmogony
469
It is frequently maintained that entire cities were planned as cosmograms.
Dav´ıd Carrasco (1989: 9) asserts that all Mesoamerican cities exhibited such
plans. Tenochtitlan was laid out, much as nearby Teotihuacan had been over
a millennium earlier, with a major ritual and governing complex at the cen-
tre that was approached by avenues coming from the four cardinal direc-
tions. Tenochtitlan’s layout, which is said to have been dictated by the god
Huitzilopochtli (Dur´an 1964: 32), made it a duplicate of Aztalan, the mythical
city where the Aztec claimed to have originated, and of Tollan, the city that
had been ruled by the god Quetzalcoatl and from which the Aztec nobility
and artistic skills were thought to have been derived (Gillespie 1989: 178–79).
It is uncertain, however, to what extent other communities, large and small,
in the Valley of Mexico physically approximated such an ideal. Texcoco, the
second-largest city, does not appear to have implemented such a plan.
The Inka capital, Cuzco, was laid out with four roads extending from Cusi-
pata, its main square, to the four quarters of the kingdom. The adjacent Cusi-
pata and Wakapata squares were covered with a layer of sand brought from the
Paciﬁc coast to honour the god Wiraqucha. This sand symbolized the life-giving
waters of the ocean which the gods continuously transported to the highlands.
Like most highland communities, Cuzco was physically divided into upper and
lower moieties. Curiously, the principal temple of the sun god, who was the
chief deity of the upper moiety, was located in Lower Cuzco, while the shrine
of Wiraqucha, the chief deity associated with the lower moiety, was located
in Upper Cuzco. The city as a whole was said to represent a puma, with the
fortress and ritual complex of Saqsawaman being its head. The ceque system
turned the surrounding Cuzco Valley into a vast ritual area (Classen 1993:
100–106; Hyslop 1990: 29–65; Sherbondy 1992: 61–62; Zuidema 1964).
David O’Connor (1989) has postulated that, at least in the New Kingdom,
royal Egyptian cities were laid out along a north-south axis, associated with
the king, and an east-west axis, associated with the sun god. Where the two
axes met in the centre of the city were located the main temple and, just
north of its western entrance, the ofﬁcial palace where the king appeared as
the earthly representative of the creator god. Royal residential palaces were
located on the outskirts of such cities. From these the king approached the
centre of the city as the sun god approached it from the eastern horizon each
morning. Such a plan duplicated the solar and Nile axes that structured the
terrestrial and sky realms. Barry Kemp and Salvatore Garﬁ(1993: 78–79)
argue, however, that too much symbolism is being read into these urban plans.
Recent efforts to assign complex religious meanings to the distribution of cult
centres throughout Egypt and Nubia (O’Connor 1998) are even more weakly
supported. Efforts to impute celestial patterns to the relative locations of Old

470
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Kingdom pyramids (Bauval and Gilbert 1994) have been received with great
scepticism.
There is no evidence for a symbolic layout of early Chinese urban centres,
but this may be the result of inadequate data. Mesopotamian and Yoruba cities
appear to have been functionally arranged, although G. J. A. Ojo (1966a: 200)
argues that, for cosmological reasons, Yoruba cities had central cult places and
city gates arranged in fours or multiples of four. Maya city plans are highly
diverse and may not have had any generic cosmic signiﬁcance, although indi-
vidual buildings and building complexes clearly did.
The desire to create cosmograms does not appear to have been as obvious or
widespread in early civilizations as Eliade and his followers have maintained.
Tenochtitlan was a city with a central temple that represented the vertical axis
uniting heaven, earth, and the underworld and a clear layout of streets and
districts representing the four quarters. In other cases, individual temples,
palaces, or complexes of such buildings served as cosmic symbols connecting
the vertical realms and oriented to the four quarters. Certain general ideas
about the nature of the cosmos that Eliade noted may be very old and widely
shared, but it has not been established how widespread were the more speciﬁc
beliefs that he postulated as universals. His general ideas seem to have been
applied too dogmatically and in some cases without sufﬁcient local warrant to
the physical layout of structures. This does not mean that the broader range
of culturally speciﬁc meanings that were assigned to topographic features did
not play an important role in determining the location and shaping the layout
of urban centres or that, as the Inka ‘new Cuzcos’ illustrate, such meanings
were not read into existing topographic or built features (Brady and Ashmore
1999; Richards 1999; van de Guchte 1999).
the civilization in the universe
All early civilizations visualized the earth and the cosmos as being much smaller
than they are now perceived to be and the cosmos as consisting of two or more
vertically arranged and intercommunicating levels. Above, and usually below,
the terrestrial plane were realms that were occupied exclusively by deities
and by the dead. The terrestrial plane, which was the abode of living humans
but was also constituted and animated by supernatural power, was ﬂat and
round or square in outline and extended to an encircling ocean. Every early
civilization believed itself to be located in the centre of the terrestrial plane
and to enjoy a privileged location in relation to the gods and the rest of the
universe. There was a tendency to view the terrestrial plane as divided into
four quarters related to the cardinal directions or the course of the sun across

Cosmology and Cosmogony
471
the sky. The main connections between the terrestrial and supernatural realms
were found at the extremities and the centre of the world.
It appears likely that many of these similarities resulted from attempts by
people living in early civilizations to explain observable natural phenomena in
light of their understanding of the supernatural forces that animated (or were)
the universe. Widespread vertical and quadripartite divisions of the cosmos
may have been derived from still older belief systems inﬂuenced by widely
shared individual orientations to the environment.
Theories of cosmogony displayed considerably more variation. There was
much less agreement about what had preceded the creation of the universe,
how stable the terrestrial and cosmic orders were, and what the ultimate fate
of the universe might be. This greater variety reﬂected the lesser degree of
constraint by direct observation and hence the greater scope for culturally
guided speculation. People in all early civilizations appear to have doubted
the ability or willingness of supernatural powers to maintain the cosmos or
to treat human beings in a consistently friendly manner. They were aware of
the potentially devastating effects of political and ecological breakdown and of
ecological disasters and generally attributed these failures to interventions by
supernatural beings. Yet beliefs about the stability of the natural environment
and the human realm varied considerably, and there is no correspondence
between political stability and belief in cosmic stability. The most probable ex-
planation is that, because people living in early civilizations did not distinguish
the natural, supernatural, and social realms, all cosmogonies were attempting
to understand what we regard as the physical and social realms simultaneously.

21 Cult
I
n early civilizations’ relation with the supernatural, cult or ritual predom-
inated over other forms of devotion (C. Bell 1992). The central feature of
these cults was sacriﬁce, which has been described, along with prayer, as one
of the two ‘fundamental acts of worship’ (Faherty 1974: 128), and prayer and
sacriﬁce were closely linked. The Roman writer Sallust, although living at a
time when deities were viewed both more transcendentally and more scepti-
cally than in early civilizations, still described prayer accompanied by sacriﬁce
as animated words – prayer supplying meaning to sacriﬁce and sacriﬁce giving
power to prayer (Lewis 1990: 3).
Sacriﬁce has been deﬁned as ‘a religious rite in which an object is offered
to a divinity in order to establish, maintain, or restore a right relationship of
man to the sacred order’ (Faherty 1974: 128). The offering transferred the
life-force or power of the object from humans to the supernatural, which for
early civilizations meant the forces that activated the natural world.
Anthropologists have long discussed the origins and meaning of sacriﬁce.
Edward B. Tylor described it as gifts that fearful humans gave to their deities to
win their favour or placate their hostility. William Robertson Smith argued that
it constituted a form of communion of a society with its deities that involved
eating the gods’ totem, or earthly manifestation. James Frazer saw it as a
technique for rejuvenating deities and ensuring the continuity of the cosmos,
Marcel Mauss as a means to ensure that power continued to ﬂow both ways
between human beings and the gods. Gerardus van der Leeuw interpreted
sacriﬁce as a way to open a source of supernatural beneﬁts for humankind.
Valerio Valeri (1985) argued that most offerings simultaneously symbolized
and were seen as a part of the deity, the donor, and the ofﬁciant and thus
created, rather than merely reﬂected or reinforced, a relationship among them.
These explanations capture aspects of sacriﬁce in various societies, but each is
speciﬁc and partial in its coverage.
472

Cult
473
Numerous intentions were ascribed to sacriﬁce by those who practised it.
Their goals included to propitiate the gods or avert their anger, to purify
wrongdoers or taboo breakers, to establish communication with a deity, to
express gratitude for a divine favour already received, to strengthen a request
for a favour being requested, to seek protection for worshippers against their
human enemies or from evil powers, to cure epidemics, to avoid war or famine,
and to replenish the earth (Ajisafe 1924: 92; Faherty 1974: 132–33; Awolalu
1979: 137, 144). The Yoruba and Aztec believed that one of the tasks per-
formed by human sacriﬁces was to transmit messages, including requests for
help, to deities or dead ancestors (Caso 1958: 72; Connah 1987: 145; Soustelle
1961: 99).
The most important function of sacriﬁce in early civilizations and the one
that integrated most of the more speciﬁc meanings ascribed to it was to re-
turn energy or life to its divine source, thereby rejuvenating the power of that
source to animate nature and assist humans. A Roman priest said to the deity
to whom he was offering a sacriﬁce, ‘Be thou increased (macte) by this offer-
ing’. Sacriﬁce was the impetus that ensured the continuing reciprocal ﬂow of
divine life-force between its source and its various manifestations in the terres-
trial realm (Faherty 1974: 128). In transcendental religions such as Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam, where the omnipotence of a single god renders that
god’s existence totally independent of his creation, sacriﬁce becomes merely
a token of individual or collective human gratitude for the deity’s favours. In
early civilizations, individual deities were not viewed as being sufﬁciently pow-
erful to render them independent of human support. On the contrary, deities
and humans were regarded as depending on each other. Because most anthro-
pologists believe that religious concepts are shaped wholly by cultural factors
and thus expect them to exhibit considerable cross-cultural variation, the pos-
sibility that all early civilizations shared a belief in the dependence of deities
and human beings on one another is unexpected and requires veriﬁcation and
explanation.
gods as providers
In all early civilizations it was believed that deities had created the universe and
kept it functioning. As the powers which animated and controlled nature, they
supplied (or were) the energy or life that permitted the universe, including
human beings, to exist and sustain itself. They were regarded as the source of
the light, warmth, activity, nourishment, and fertility that humans required to
live and reproduce themselves. Since humans depended on the natural world
for their survival, they also depended on the gods. Agriculture was not simply

474
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the principal source of nourishment and livelihood but also the primary means
by which the gods sustained human life. The gods not only fed humans but in
some instances were viewed as the food humans ate.
But why did deities sustain human life and at what cost to themselves? The
Egyptian ‘Instruction Offered to King Merikare’, which dates from the First
Intermediate Period, suggests that the creator god fashioned the universe for
the sake of human beings, that he shone as the sun in the sky for them, and that
he provided them with food and leaders who could maintain order amongst
them (Lichtheim 1973: 106). This work, which superﬁcially appears to have
anticipated a transcendental, post-axial view of the universe, reﬂected the ‘solar
theology’ of the Old Kingdom, which celebrated the creative power of the sun
god. Yet, while the statement that human beings were the creator god’s ‘cattle’
may be construed as a metaphorical reference to a transcendental deity’s loving
care for humans, it may instead indicate the sun god’s dependence on humans
for his nourishment. Elsewhere it is made clear that the Egyptian creator god
brought the universe into existence primarily in order to have a realm in which
he and the other gods could exist. The sun’s daily trip across the sky not only
beneﬁted human beings but also allowed the creator god to remain vigorous
by passing through ceaseless cycles of death and regeneration (Meeks and
Favard-Meeks 1996: 79, 197–98).
In most early civilizations the gods kept the universe functioning pri-
marily to ensure their own survival and well-being. Humans existed in the
Mesopotamian universe to provide services – labour and sacriﬁce – for the gods
that signiﬁcantly improved the quality of their lives (Jacobsen 1976: 117–18).
In Mesoamerica, where the concept of religious sacriﬁce was elaborated to an
exceptional degree, it was believed that the gods periodically sacriﬁced their
own or each other’s lives to ensure the continuity of the universe and facilitate
the survival of humanity. As we have seen, the Aztec claimed that the Fifth
Sun had been enabled to move across the sky by the gods’ casting themselves
into a cosmic ﬁre and that, still earlier, by splitting the female Earth Monster
into two parts to form the earth and sky, the gods had made it possible for her
to bring forth all the life on earth (Clendinnen 1991: 177). The Aztec believed
that plants and animals ﬂourished mainly because the gods sacriﬁced their own
lives to support them (Berdan 1982: 186). Each autumn the sun god died and
descended into the underworld to marry the Earth Goddess, who gave birth
the following spring to the maize god – the sun reborn in a different aspect.
Human sacriﬁces were interpreted not simply as offerings to the sun but as
embodiments of divine power, representing the gods’ sacriﬁcing themselves to
renew the world (Broda 1987: 70, 75). The Maya likewise believed that their
deities sacriﬁced themselves so that the world might be renewed and human

Cult
475
beings live. Humans were made from maize, which was the ﬂesh of the gods
and contained divine soul power or life-force that was sacriﬁced for humans’
beneﬁt at harvest time. This power passed from maize into human bodies,
where it became particularly concentrated in human blood (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 195; Miller 1986: 19). Thus humans depended on the gods
for their survival.
The Pyramid Texts suggest that the Egyptian sun god nourished and em-
powered himself each morning by slaughtering and consuming the multitude
of stars, thereby appropriating their power. As he crossed the sky, creating and
sustaining terrestrial life with his energy, he grew older and weaker, and his re-
maining power was dispersed again each evening (Goebs 1998). In Egypt and
Mesopotamia myths also associated the death and rebirth of the gods with the
agricultural cycle. Inanna’s essential role in ensuring the agricultural fertility of
the earth required that, when she was executed by her sister, the god Enki had
to send spirits to the underworld to revive her and secure her release in return
for the conﬁnement of various other agricultural deities in the underworld for
several months of each year (Jacobsen 1976: 55–61). The Egyptians believed
that crops sprouted from the body of Geb or Osiris when it was moistened by
the Nile ﬂood, which represented the god’s own power of fertility. The murder
of Osiris by his brother Seth was represented as part of an ongoing struggle
between cosmic order and disorder, while the annual cycle of Nile ﬂoods and
crop growth constituted the cycle by which Osiris renewed himself (Frankfort
1948: 190–97). Whether the gods were represented as deliberately sacriﬁcing
themselves or not, their cycles of life, death, and rebirth sustained the universe
upon which, ultimately, all humans depended.
nourishing the gods
In all the early civilizations human beings offered nourishment to the gods in
the form of sacriﬁces. Sacriﬁces took the form of killing animals or human be-
ings, offering meat, vegetables, and alcoholic or non-alchoholic beverages, and
presenting inedible materials believed to contain special supernatural powers.
The Inka offered lumps of gold and silver or images made from these metals
to the gods, and the Egyptians offered unworked metals and semiprecious
stones, all these substances being considered especially rich in cosmic en-
ergy (Daumas 1979; MacCormack 1991: 150; Rowe 1944: 307). The Inka
offered thorny oyster (mullu) shells from the Paciﬁc Ocean, whole or pow-
dered, to springs and rivers in the highlands (Gose 1993). The Maya believed
that burning incense, made from tree resin, provided deities with an espe-
cially potent form of divine energy (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 204).

476
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Inka burned large amounts of fancy cloth as offerings, thus releasing for
the gods the energy that had gone into making it (Murra 1962). Worshippers
in Mesopotamia and elsewhere donated goods to temples as thanks offerings
to gods (Postgate 1992: 135), but it is not clear whether they were also viewed
as sacriﬁces that would have helped to sustain and empower the gods.
Sacriﬁces were made to the gods by individuals or groups. Some were made
at regular intervals (daily, weekly, or yearly), others on special occasions to
expiate sins, thank the gods, or celebrate life-cycle events. In general, the upper
classes made more lavish offerings and sometimes sacriﬁced to more important
deities than the lower classes. While Aztec commoners offered quails, tortillas,
green maize, and ﬂowers to the gods, nobles and rich merchants offered human
captives, cacao beans, exotic bird feathers, and jade (Clendinnen 1991: 243).
Sacriﬁces offered by the king on behalf of the whole nation were the most
costly and elaborate of all. While, especially in Mesoamerica, human sacriﬁce
was represented as an honour for the victim, upper-class adults rarely if ever
freely volunteered themselves. Human victims were mostly prisoners of war,
criminals, strangers, and children.
Erik Hornung (1982: 203) has suggested that the Egyptian gods were tran-
scendental – that they did not need either cult or offerings for their own well-
being and therefore offerings were merely tokens of gratitude. New Kingdom
texts suggest, however, that, when the gods ceased to receive offerings in the
reign of King Akhenaton, they abandoned Egypt, which resulted in military
defeats and other disasters (Baines 1995a: 28–29). Other Egyptologists assert
that the Egyptians believed that their deities needed human support in or-
der to survive and that the main purpose of temple offerings was to preserve
the universe (Daumas 1979: 705; Quirke 1992: 70–103). In particular, the
gods required sustenance in the form of food (Silverman 1991: 28–29). Sac-
riﬁcial offerings returned to Egyptian deities the energy they had expended
on the creation and maintenance of the universe. The more offerings a deity
received, the more powerful that deity became. Consequently, the most vital
concern of the Egyptian gods was the apportioning of their offerings (Meeks
and Favard-Meeks 1996: 37, 102, 123). Food offerings were also essential to
maintain the life-force of dead humans, who were regarded as gods. Offerings
to deceased rulers were a major focus of Old Kingdom religious ritual.
Offerings were essential features of daily Egyptian temple and mortuary
cults. Animals were killed in temple abattoirs, and it appears to have been the
presentation of their ﬂesh to the gods rather than the act of slaughtering them
that constituted the offering. The Egyptians believed that gods entered or were
drawn into their cult images three times each day to consume the supernatural
energyfromtheirfoodofferings.Inthemorningtheseimageswerealsowashed

Cult
477
and dressed by their priests. These rituals, performed in the most secluded
part of the temple, were essential for maintaining the cosmic order (Robins
1993: 157). Food was regarded as possessing magical power as well as creative
energy which made it the essence of life or being (Goebs 1998: 280–81). The
term for ‘cosmic order’ was etymologically closely related to m3w, which
meant ‘offerings’, just as h
• w, which referred to the divine power of creative
utterance, was identical with or similar to a word that meant ‘life-sustaining
nourishment’ (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 103). Evidence suggests that
human sacriﬁce was performed in cultic settings in Early Dynastic times, but
in later periods the only manifestation of it may have been the infrequent
slaying of enemy leaders as apparent offerings to the gods (Gardiner 1961:
199–200; R. Wilkinson 2000: 265–67). Statues of bound enemies or written
lists of such people appear to have served as substitutes for living individuals
in the execration rituals that were performed during the Middle Kingdom to
drain the king’s enemies of power (Posener 1940).
Mesopotamians believed that all human beings were the servants of the
gods. It was their duty to grow food, weave clothes, build earthly residences,
cook, and clean for their deities. Gods needed food in order to function ef-
fectively, and this was provided by their temple staff in the form of two meals
each day (Oppenheim 1964: 188–91; Postgate 1992: 119–20). Without these
offerings, the gods would have grown malnourished and ceased to function
effectively. The legend of the ﬂood recounted that, after water covered the
earth, offerings ceased and the gods grew hungry and began to repent their
destruction of humanity. When the water receded and the one surviving fam-
ily, led by Utnapishtim, emerged from its boat and offered a burnt sacriﬁce,
the deities crowded ‘like ﬂies’ around the rising smoke, which transmitted to
them for the ﬁrst time in many days the spiritual power of food produced by
humans. Because of this, the gods forgave Enki for having surreptitiously res-
cued a few humans who could continue to serve them (Jacobsen 1976: 120).
A later, perhaps facetious Mesopotamian text suggested that, if sacriﬁces were
withheld from a neglectful personal deity, that deity could be forced to beg for
food as a hungry dog does from its master (Bott´ero 1992: 255–58).
The food and drink that were offered to Mesopotamian gods resembled what
was consumed by humans. As in Egypt, animals were slaughtered on temple
premises, but there is no indication that the killing of the animal, as opposed
to the offering of meat, was regarded as sacriﬁce. Some animal sacriﬁces were
burned. There is no evidence of human sacriﬁce, except perhaps the killing of
lower-class individuals temporarily substituting for a monarch who feared that
the gods might be seeking to destroy him. In serving the gods, priests acted
as their household servants, the king as their chief steward, and commoners

478
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
as their estate workers (Bott´ero 1992: 223–25). The Mesopotamians appear to
have believed that the gods collectively could survive without human assistance
and had done so prior to the creation of humanity. That, however, would have
required them to grow and prepare their own food, which meant that their
standard of living and position in the cosmos would have been considerably
lower than it was after the creation of humanity. The spirits of dead humans
received sacriﬁces, usually together with the deities that were worshipped by
individual households (Bott´ero 1992: 279–82).
Sacriﬁce was ubiquitous among the Yoruba. Most personal prayers were
accompanied by modest offerings (Awolalu 1979: 108). If devotees depended
upon gods for protection and support, gods depended upon devotees to feed
them, glorify them, and keep secret the ritual knowledge that was required to
serve them. This knowledge could be rendered ineffectual or even harmful if
it were divulged to unauthorized humans (Apter 1992: 223; K. Barber 1981:
738). Offerings were normally made to individual deities every four days and
at special annual festivals. The more offerings a deity received, the greater
became his or her power and willingness to help humans (Armstrong 1981: 71;
R.Thompson1976:P/1).Cultsnourisheddeitiesinreturnforpast,present,and
anticipated favours (Apter 1992: 98, 184). Sacriﬁce was part of a cycle in which
life was exchanged for life, making death essential for prolonging and renewing
life. Worshippers did not hesitate to coerce deities by threatening to transfer
their devotions and material support to other, more generous gods (Apter 1992:
223; K. Barber 1981: 737–38). The routine goal of cults was, however, to feed
and empower deities so that they could renew the cosmos and promote the
welfare of the groups and individuals who worshipped them (Apter 1992: 124).
Ogun, the god of iron, consumed the ﬂesh of sacriﬁced dogs and, in return for
this nourishment, supplied the iron tools that made agriculture and therefore
human life possible (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 171).
Yams, kola nuts, palm wine, palm oil, and cowrie-shell money were routine
offerings. More elaborate sacriﬁces included ﬁsh, chickens, sheep, goats, and
cows. The most prestigious and awe-inspiring offerings were human beings:
prisoners of war, slaves, children, and condemned criminals or strangers sup-
plied by the king. Human beings were sacriﬁced infrequently and usually only
a few at a time. The major exceptions occurred during critical phases of wars,
when divine assistance became particularly important (Awolalu 1979: 188–89).
At Ife choice human victims from Ijesa were thought to be preferred by the
gods because of their powerful physiques and phlegmatic natures (S. Johnson
1921: 21). Some human victims were venerated and accorded great honours
prior to their deaths and were believed to become gods afterwards. Others
were assured that their life-forces would be reborn to a higher social position

Cult
479
in a subsequent life (Lucas 1948: 215–17). Victims were often gagged before
being sacriﬁced so they could not curse their executioners (Willett 1967: 49).
Because in many Yoruba rituals the victim represented the sacriﬁcer, in offer-
ing human lives to the gods the king was symbolically offering a substitute for
himself (Apter 1992: 111). The archaeological discovery of forty-one female
skeletons thrown into a pit at Benin City indicates that human sacriﬁces were
made there as early as the thirteenth century a.d. (Connah 1975: 49–66). The
bodies of human and animal sacriﬁces were often left to decay before a symbol
of the deity for whom they had been killed or disposed of in the forest. It was
the life-force and blood of these victims that was offered to the gods.
Individual Yoruba deities had favourite offerings and rejected others. Ogun
preferred dogs and palm wine, Sango rams, and Esu fowls. Orisala liked snails,
whose juices were associated with calmness and easing pain (Awolalu 1979:
163–64). Libations were offered everywhere to the god of the soil to thank him
for the harvest (Ojo 1966a: 168). It was regarded as improper to offer palm
wine to Orisala because it was drunkenness that had caused him to ignore
Olorun’s order to create the world (Awolalu 1979: 164). Particular sacriﬁces
were considered appropriate for speciﬁc requests: dogs for longevity, eggs to
prevent losses, a ram, sheep, and cock together for victory, and a wild hog to
counteract plots (Lucas 1948: 208). The appropriateness of each sacriﬁce was
conﬁrmed by divination prior to its being made, and the sacriﬁce’s efﬁcacy was
veriﬁed by divination afterward (Awolalu 1979: 162–81).
The Yoruba also made sacriﬁces to the dead. Prior to human burials, the
blood of sacriﬁced animals was poured or sprinkled on corpses, especially
those of notable people, in order to strengthen their souls (Ajisafe 1924: 80–81;
K. Barber 1991: 314). Extended families regularly presented food offerings to
their dead ancestors. Some spirits of the dead, including those of a few human
sacriﬁces, became gods and received their own offerings.
The Inka regarded sacriﬁce as the principal focus of religion (Rowe 1944:
305). Its function was to nourish the gods. Smoke rising from burnt offerings
sustained the sun god and gave him the strength to stay young and continue
moving. Without offerings, wakas grew hungry, disconsolate, and ineffectual
(Cobo 1990: 114; MacCormack 1991: 304, 306). Religious sacriﬁces ensured
the continuing circulation of life-giving supernatural energy through the uni-
verse (Aveni 1989: 303; Salomon 1991: 16). The term hucha designated sac-
riﬁcial relations between human beings and the sun and upper world gener-
ally; cuyac designated sacriﬁcial relations with Wiraqucha and the lower world
(Dover 1992: 9). The Inka sacriﬁced male llamas, guinea pigs, birds, and animal
fat but not dogs to their deities. They also offered them cooked vegetables, fer-
mented drinks, cocoa, cloth, and metal. The gods preferred food and alcoholic

480
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
beverages made from maize ﬂour. Libations, sometimes further empowered
by being mixed with powdered seashells, were poured into basins, holes in the
ground, and springs. Other offerings were burned. White llamas were sacri-
ﬁced to the sun, brown ones to Wiraqucha, and parti-coloured ones to Illapa,
the thunder god. In Cuzco, three or four llamas were offered to the sun each
day; their throats were cut in the square in front of the Qorikancha and their
bodies burned on an open altar in the square (Rowe 1944: 306–7).
The most valuable offerings were human lives. When new provinces were
conquered, the Inka sacriﬁced some of the best-looking people of that region
as a thanks offering to the sun. The rest of the human sacriﬁces were children
selected to become chosen women and yanakuna. These sacriﬁces had to be
without any physical blemish. The children were feasted and made intoxicated
and then were strangled, had their throats cut or their hearts removed, or were
buried alive. Human sacriﬁces were offered to the gods during public crises
such as famines, pestilence, military defeats, or the illness of the king (Rowe
1944: 306). They were restricted to major temples and government-sponsored
rituals (Kendall 1973: 196–97). Some children of subordinate rulers who were
chosen for sacriﬁce became objects of veneration and sources of oracles after
their bodies were returned to their birthplaces for burial (Silverblatt 1988b).
The blood of animal sacriﬁces nourished the gods and was daubed on the
faces of worshippers, young men being initiated into adult status, sacred and
royal statues, buildings, and mummies in order to strengthen them. Only the
mummies and statues of Inka rulers and the images of gods were daubed
with human blood (MacCormack 1991: 112–13). Sacriﬁces were also made to
dead ancestors to nourish them so that they could better sustain their living
descendants.
The Shang and Western Zhou Chinese offered sacriﬁces to sustain nature
deities and the souls of their dead ancestors. Deities depended on these offer-
ings to maintain their strength, and powerful deities required more sacriﬁces
than minor ones (Allan 1991: 124; Keightley 1978b: 213; Li Boqian 1999).
Provisioning lavish sacriﬁces was one of the main occupations of the upper
classes and a primary justiﬁcation for both warfare and hunting. Hunting and
warfare had a shared vocabulary, including the word huo, which meant both
‘booty’ and ‘sacriﬁcial victim’. The main reason for hunting was said to be to
provide victims for sacriﬁce (Lewis 1990: 17–21).
The offerings made to Shang royal ancestors and to nature deities consisted
of grains, millet-ale libations, animals, and human beings (Keightley 1978b:
213). Animals that were routinely sacriﬁced included dogs, pigs, wild boars,
sheep, and cattle; birds and horses were less common. The humans appear to
have been mainly prisoners of war, with the Qiang, a western herding people,

Cult
481
being favoured victims. The burial of whole army units, including chariot
crews, during foundation rituals for the palaces built at Anyang appears to
have involved the sacriﬁce of royal retainers (Keightley 1969: 374).
Royal sacriﬁces frequently consisted of combinations of several species of
animals together with human victims. A total of one to ten victims was normally
sacriﬁced, but occasionally several hundred were killed at one time. It was
divined in advance what sacriﬁces speciﬁc gods or ancestors wished. Libations
and blood were poured on the ground, and the bodies of animal and human
victimswereburned,buried,drowned,ordismembered.Deitieswerebelieved
to drink the blood of slaughtered victims, and the large-scale killing of animals
and humans was a central feature of royal sacriﬁcial rites (Creel 1937: 197–206;
Lewis 1990: 20). The heads or ears of human enemies killed in battle were
presented at temples to feed ancestral spirits and deities. Shang kings appear
to have offered the most elaborate sacriﬁces to their more remote and more
powerful ancestors, even though they relied more heavily on their immediate
ancestors to act as intermediaries on their behalf (Keightley 1978b: 218). The
royal ancestors depended on food transmitted to them through sacriﬁces and
could punish failure to deliver these sacriﬁces by harming their descendants
or afﬂicting the Shang kingdom with poor crops, costly wars, military defeats,
and plagues (Creel 1937: 175).
The Maya believed that the gods depended on human beings to care for
and nurture them and renew their powers (D. Carrasco 1990: 107; Schele
and Miller 1986: 176). The Maya’s principal cosmic task was to keep the su-
pernatural realm working by nourishing the gods (Hendrickson 1989: 129;
Schele and Freidel 1990: 65). This was construed as part of a contractual obli-
gation between human beings and the gods in which each side provided the
other with the divine power that they required to survive (Freidel, Schele,
and Parker 1993: 195). Throughout Mesoamerica, sacriﬁce was regarded as a
form of debt repayment, with humans returning to the gods the cosmic energy
that the gods had expended to provide them with food, make them fertile, and
enable humanity to endure (D. Carrasco 1990: 49, 107).
Freidel, Schele, and Parker (1993: 195) point to the central role that meals
and offerings played in Maya religious life. The gods were offered incense
and a wide selection of foods, but their preferred nourishment was human
ﬂesh and blood (Baudez 1994: 275–76). Individual humans were killed, and
living humans drew blood from their ear lobes, tongues, and other parts of
their bodies and presented it to the gods on strings or pieces of paper (Schele
1984). Maya were expected to offer their own blood to the gods at frequent
intervals throughout their lives. The most potent offering was the blood of a
king or one of his close relatives, and the most prized human sacriﬁce was a

482
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
captured ruler. A royal prisoner was often kept alive for a long period awaiting
a special occasion such as the formal designation of a king’s heir. Kings and
their close female relatives shed copious amounts of blood in painful ways that
caused them to enter into trance states during which they communicated with
their ancestors and with major deities. These offerings were regarded as an
especially effective way to nourish the gods and reinforce the cosmic cycles on
which the well-being of all things depended (Schele and Miller 1986: 71).
The Aztec and other peoples in the Valley of Mexico believed that their
gods were starved for life-giving forces and required constant sacriﬁces to re-
vive them and sustain the cosmic order (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 377). Sacriﬁce
was the means by which human beings could return to the gods the energy that
these deities had expended to keep the world and individual humans function-
ing (Townsend 1992: 136, 154). If this did not occur, the earth would become
infertile, the power of the sun would fail, the cosmos would disintegrate, and
supernatural forces of disorder, terror, and destruction would be unleashed
against humanity. The Aztec made offerings of cooked food and objects made
of precious substances, but it was human blood and ﬂesh that best nourished
and animated the gods (B. Brown 1984; D. Carrasco 1999; Caso 1958: 12, 96;
Clendinnen 1991: 320; Davies 1984; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 376–77; Soustelle
1961: 97).
While some nourishment for the gods was provided by warriors slain in bat-
tle, the most valued and abundant source was human sacriﬁce. The majority of
those killed were captive warriors, and the primary aim of warfare was to obtain
such captives. Prisoners offered to Huitzilopochtli were referred to as ‘stars’,
an allusion to the star brothers that the sun had slain and consumed at the
time of his birth and at the dawn of every day thereafter (Caso 1958: 93). Male
and female slaves of foreign origin and local children born on inauspicious
days or possessed of inauspicious physical traits were also slain. Warriors were
differentially valued as human sacriﬁces according to how closely their culture
resembled that of the peoples living in the Valley of Mexico. The unconquered
Tlaxcalans, living to the east of the Valley of Mexico, were regarded as particu-
larly choice offerings. Victims were despatched in many different ways: heart
excision, decapitation, drowning, burning, and combinations of these methods.
Different techniques were thought appropriate for particular deities (Dur´an
1971).
While it is often suggested that the blood of human sacriﬁces nourished
sky deities and their ﬂesh animated earth deities, the Earth Mother was de-
scribed as crying for human blood and unable to produce crops unless she was
drenched with it (Clendinnen 1991: 183, 195). Sacriﬁced children were be-
lieved to become tepictoton, spirits who empowered the rain and fertility god,

Cult
483
Tlaloc (Broda 1987: 73). The Aztec sacriﬁced the largest number of prisoners
to their patron solar deity, Huitzilopochtli, in the belief that their blood and
hearts would sustain the sun and delay the end of the present creation. This
belief provided an ideological justiﬁcation for the wars that had created and
sustainedtheAztectributarysystem,representingAztecaggressionasaltruistic
and self-sacriﬁcing (Soustelle 1961: 96–101). In addition to human sacriﬁces,
from earliest childhood the Aztec often collected their own blood on bark
cloth or paper which they burned to transmit its life-giving power to the gods
(Clendinnen 1991: 74).
Because human ﬂesh and blood were formed from corn, which was a ter-
restrial manifestation of the gods’ life-force, the sacriﬁce of human life to feed
the gods was a potent means of sustaining the cosmic cycle on which every-
one depended. As among the Maya, such sacriﬁce was construed as a form
of debt repayment (nextlaoaliztli) (D. Carrasco 1990: 49; Clendinnen 1991:
74–75, 208–9). Human sacriﬁcial victims were referred to as ‘tortillas for the
gods’, and their ﬂesh was regarded as equivalent to the maize ﬂour from which
tortillas were made. Thus human sacriﬁces were regarded as equivalent to the
deity to whom they were offered (Soustelle 1961: 98) and eating the ﬂesh of a
sacriﬁcial victim as the same as eating the ﬂesh of a god (Caso 1958: 75).
As the Aztec state grew more powerful, slaves and prisoners of war were
increasingly used as foci for manifestations of the gods. Unlike other human
ixiptlas, slaves and prisoners were sacriﬁced after their representations had
run their cycle and were believed to be suffused with the power of the deity
to whom, through sacriﬁce, this power was returned. Sometimes priests wore
the ﬂayed skins of such sacriﬁces, thus turning themselves into ixiptlas. They
might also dress as the god to whom they were making a human sacriﬁce and
thus temporarily invest themselves with that god’s power; here a terrestrial
manifestation of a god was sacriﬁcing another manifestation of that god to
the deity itself (Clendinnen 1991: 249). Some of the more prominent ixiptlas
enjoyed comfortable and honoured, if circumscribed, lives during the period,
sometimes as long as a year, that led up to their being killed. Prisoners or slaves
were supposed to look forward with pleasure to dying in this manner and were
often made to consume alcoholic beverages or mind-altering hallucinogens
just before their deaths to ensure they behaved appropriately.
In all early civilizations sacriﬁce channelled energy back into the supernat-
ural realm to sustain and animate deities, propitiate them, and make certain
they continued to have the power to maintain the natural and social realms. It
was believed that, without ensuring the continuing power and goodwill of the
gods, crops would cease to grow, women would become barren, and people
would sicken and die. G. F. Il’yin and Igor Diakonoff (1991: 378) note that

484
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
in Vedic India ‘because it was believed that the world exists and that people
thrive only thanks to the gods, and because the gods live by sacriﬁcial offerings,
sacriﬁces were the main duty of believers’. While individuals and society as a
whole depended on the strength and goodwill of the gods, the gods depended
no less on the material support of human beings.
In all the early civilizations gods supplied human physical needs, but farm-
ers ultimately provided the food, services, and human lives that were essential
for the well-being or even the survival of the gods. Thus they played the same
role in relation to the gods as they did in relation to upper-class humans; they
supplied food and labour in return for order. The labour of the lower classes
ensured the well-being not only of the upper classes but also of individual
deities and the universe. This belief differed radically from that of modern
transcendental religions, whose deities require no human support. It also dif-
fered from the religious beliefs of early small-scale societies, which perceived
humans as depending far more on the supernatural forces that animated nature
than those forces depended on human beings.
significance of human sacrifice
One of the most important differences among early civilizations in sacriﬁcing to
the gods was the extent to which human beings were viewed as the primary or
most valuable offerings. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, human sacriﬁce appears
to have been rare even in the earliest periods and soon all but disappeared. In
the ﬁve other early civilizations, human sacriﬁces were a regular occurrence,
although their number and frequency varied.
In Andean myths humans and llamas were regarded as interchangeable
(MacCormack 1991: 171). If animal and human sacriﬁces had generally been
viewed as equivalent, it could be hypothesized that human sacriﬁces would
have been more common in those early civilizations that had the fewest do-
mestic animals, and this might explain the heavy emphasis on human sacriﬁce
in Mesoamerica. It does not, however, explain why there was a strong empha-
sis on human sacriﬁce in Shang China and Inka Peru, where large numbers
of domestic animals were also sacriﬁced, or its restrained practice among the
Yoruba, who kept fewer domestic animals.
It is frequently suggested that human sacriﬁce was common in warlike soci-
eties where there was little need for extra labour, human sacriﬁce being a way
of disposing of prisoners of war. While this might account for the frequency
of human sacriﬁce in the Valley of Mexico, with its high population density, or
among the Shang Chinese, who seem to have resorted to territorial expansion
to keep their population density low, it does not explain the situation in Early

Cult
485
Dynastic Mesopotamia, where large numbers of male prisoners appear to have
been slaughtered but not sacriﬁced. Nor does it account for the Inka, who ei-
ther killed or freed prisoners of war and collected most human sacriﬁces from
among their subject population’s children. The evidence also does not sug-
gest that large-scale human sacriﬁce was widely used to intimidate enslaved
captives, although such intimidation might provide a functional explanation
for the regular but limited sacriﬁce of slaves among the Yoruba. The threat of
human sacriﬁce was not employed to intimidate the large numbers of foreign
captives that the ancient Egyptians sought to incorporate into their society.
I do not have enough evidence to test the hypothesis that human sacriﬁce
was more commonly employed as an instrument of social control in the for-
mative periods of early civilizations than it was after more effective techniques
had been developed (Childe 1945). There is, however, no cyclical correlation
in any early civilization between political weakness and frequency of human
sacriﬁce. Once human sacriﬁce ceased to be practised in an early civilization,
it does not appear to have recurred as a normative practice. Human sacriﬁce
died out in China during the Zhou period and was never as common among
the Zhou as it had been among the Shang. It also declined rapidly soon after the
formation of the Egyptian state and (in the form of retainer sacriﬁce) after the
Early Dynastic period in Mesopotamia. In contrast, it had a long history in West
Africa, Mesoamerica, and Peru. In Mesoamerica the incidence of human sac-
riﬁce appears to have increased in at least some states that acquired hegemonic
status, whose greater power permitted fuller realization of a cultural ideal. It
is also highly probable that the Aztec used large-scale prisoner sacriﬁce to in-
timidate subject peoples over whom their political control was tenuous. There
were cults in the valley, associated with the worship of Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin,
the ruler of the ancient city of Tollan, that questioned the value of human
sacriﬁce and promoted alternative ways to nourish the gods. While this move-
ment may have enjoyed some royal patronage at Texcoco, even there it never
seriously challenged the ubiquitous belief that large-scale human sacriﬁce was
required to sustain the universe (D. Carrasco 1990: 63).
There is thus no simple functional explanation of human sacriﬁce. The vari-
ations in its occurrence appear to be largely cultural. The Maya and Aztec,
who emphasized human sacriﬁce and blood-letting, were part of a common
Mesoamerican tradition, while the Egyptians and Mesopotamians, whose cul-
tures had roots in a Middle Eastern Neolithic tradition, placed special empha-
sis on animal sacriﬁce. Nevertheless, all seven early civilizations in this sample
shared the belief that living creatures were particularly suitable for nourish-
ing the gods, and ﬁve of them (only two of which lacked domestic animals)
identiﬁed human beings as the most valued offerings.

486
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ritual intermediaries
In all early civilizations kings and members of the upper classes claimed a spe-
cial role as mediators between the terrestrial realm and the gods. It was through
their intervention that the energy on which the gods, and hence the universe
and all human beings, depended for their survival was channelled from the
human realm back into the supernatural one. Ordinary people had contact
with the supernatural through household and local cults, prayer, divination,
visions, dreams, and spirit possession. Many minor deities concerned with var-
ious aspects of human well-being were accessible to everyone. Individual fam-
ilies, craft associations, landowning groups, and villages had their protective
deities or ancestor spirits. All these groups offered sacriﬁces to tutelary spirits,
and these sacriﬁces made these groups minor energy-recycling units mediating
between the human and the supernatural world. Kings, high-ranking ofﬁcials,
and major institutions tended to monopolize communication with the more
powerful supernatural forces because their wealth and power enabled them to
make more lavish offerings. The ability to maintain contact with the gods was
the most important source of political authority. As a later Chinese tale put it,
in former times ﬁrst shamans and then everyone could communicate with the
spirit world, but eventually only rulers could do so (K. Chang 1983: 44–45).
In Egypt kings had established, at least by the Middle Kingdom and possibly
much earlier (Seidlmayer 1996), that only they could sponsor the sacriﬁces
that nourished the creator gods and related deities in temples throughout
Egypt. This claim was based on the belief that the king was the son or earthly
manifestation of each creator deity; the king’s offering sacriﬁces to the gods
was equated with sons’ making offerings to their deceased fathers. (In reality,
the king’s role was delegated to numerous priests who presented offerings to
the gods each day in his name.) When the king offered food to the gods, he was
symbolically offering them both provisions and cosmic order (m3t signifying
both) (Silverman 1991: 64–67; Shafer 1997b: 23–25). Kings also claimed the
ultimate right to provision the souls of the dead, all of whom were classiﬁed as
gods.
Mesopotamian kings were responsible for ensuring that offerings were reg-
ularly made to their city’s patron deity and, more generally, to any god or
goddess who had a temple in the city-state. Economic prosperity and social
harmony constituted evidence that a king enjoyed the favour of his city’s prin-
cipal deities. Some rulers had been priests before they became kings, but in
any case they served as religious leaders. They could personally make offerings
on behalf of their city-state and its people to any god and were responsible for
overseeing the construction and repair of temples and ensuring that temple

Cult
487
estates were managed properly. Kings also presented gifts of land, captives,
and valuable ornaments to temples and frequently implied that they sought
to accumulate riches to adorn temples rather than for their own gloriﬁcation.
Mesopotamian kings played key roles in certain religious rites, such as the
New Year festival and the puriﬁcation of armies before battles. The staff of
each temple offered sacriﬁces to its deity or deities every day. Yet, despite
competition between palace and temples, a king’s ultimate responsibility for
ensuring that a city’s gods were well served and his ultimate dependence on
their favour set him apart from and above other men (Postgate 1972; 1992:
262–65).
Among the Yoruba, every residential compound had shrines to one or more
tutelary deities whose worship was directed by the compound’s headman. The
patron deities of the patrilineages of quarter and ward leaders were publicly
worshipped by these ofﬁcials and their followers. In addition to revering family
and local deities, individuals were free to worship whatever gods they chose.
The Yoruba king had special relations with the patron deity or deities of his
royal lineage, whose shrines were located close to or within the outer com-
pound of the royal palace. He also exercised ultimate authority over every cult
performed within his kingdom and had the ﬁnal say in all religious matters.
The king authorized community festivals and was represented by an Ifa priest,
relative, or palace ofﬁcial at all public sacriﬁcial rites (Apter 1992: 21; K. Barber
1981: 730; Bascom 1969: 34). His sacriﬁces and the annual festivals he sanc-
tioned assured the stability and good fortune of his kingdom (Apter 1992: 183;
Awolalu 1979: 17). Richard Bradbury’s (1973: 74) description of the king of
Benin as a living vehicle for the mystical forces that ensured the vitality of his
kingdom applies equally to Yoruba rulers. Kings personally compounded se-
cret ‘medicines’ that promoted the collective welfare of their subjects (Bascom
1969: 37). As did the gods, they accepted sacriﬁces that were offered to them
by individuals and groups so that the gift of life might be given to these people
in return (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 97). In Oyo, the centrally organized
cult of Sango expressed and reinforced the authority of Oyo’s living ruler. At
the royal shrine the senior priests initiated all the king’s bodyguards, ofﬁcial
messengers, and agents into the Sango cult. The ability to be possessed by
Sango provided them with a temporary supply of supernatural power that ex-
ceeded that of tributary kings and could be used, when necessary, for dealing
with such rulers (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 152). Thus, even in this highly
decentralized society, kings played the principal role in guiding the rituals that
empowered the gods.
In the Valley of Mexico, kings were endowed with divine power which made
them the spiritual leaders of their nations. They were expected to watch the

488
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
earth and sky for supernatural signs, offer appropriate sacriﬁces, visit shrines,
and ensure that priests performed their duties properly (Townsend 1979: 42).
In April or May each year, the Aztec king visited the shrine on Mount Tlaloc,
located on the eastern ﬂank of the Valley of Mexico, to call forth rain from
the mountain. Dressed as the god Tlaloc, he entered the long entrance to
the temple carrying food and the blood of a sacriﬁced child as offerings to
its deities. The rituals he performed fertilized the womb of the earth, calling
forth its life. In performing these rituals he was not simply a suppliant but, as
a manifestation of Tlaloc, was believed to play an active role in changing the
seasons (Townsend 1992: 132–36). The king was also regarded as the surrogate
of the Old Fire God, Xiuhtecuhtli (Ometeotl), and therefore as the father and
mother of his people (Heyden 1989: 38–39). At the same time, rejuvenating
the gods and sustaining the cosmic order were activities that upper-class males
and ennobled warriors regarded as their collective prerogative (D. Carrasco
1990: 23). Lords wore or sponsored the wearing of the attire of deities at
festivals. These costumes drew the deities into closer contact with humans
and helped humans to forge more intimate and beneﬁcial relations with them
(Townsend 1992: 22).
The Inka ruler and his queen were the supreme mediators between their
people and the supernatural forces of the sky and the lower world. The Inka
king maintained the cosmic order (Bauer 1996: 333; Classen 1993: 110–11;
Silverblatt 1987: 54). He could replace any priest as the chief worshipper or
oracle medium of a god. State sacriﬁces were offered to all deities in the name
of the king, except those to the creator god Wiraqucha, which were made on
behalf of other deities and possibly paid for by those gods’ foundations (Rowe
1944: 305).
The Chinese nobility was, according to Mark Lewis (1990: 28), set apart
from the general population by the key role it played in sacriﬁcial rites. The
nobles’ wealth and privileged access to the rewards of warfare and hunting
enabled them to conduct more elaborate rituals than commoners (Allan 1991:
124). Their authority was manifested and reinforced by their ability to nourish
and sustain in a spectacular manner the souls of their ancestors and the na-
ture gods who fed them and their followers. Only altars of the soil that were
patronized by rulers were nourished by the blood of military captives and con-
demned criminals (Lewis 1990: 17, 254). The connection between political
power and religious ritual was strengthened by the Chinese belief that an-
cestral souls would accept sacriﬁces only from their most senior direct living
male descendant (21). This meant that higher-ranking nobles had access to
more ancient and therefore more powerful souls. Only the king, through the
mediation of his royal ancestors, could communicate with the supreme sky

Cult
489
god Shangdi (Chao 1972: 143–44). Winning Shangdi’s favour and keeping the
universe functioning properly required not only sacriﬁces but ritually correct
behaviour (Keightley 1978b: 213–15).
The Maya believed that their kings played a crucial role as both sacriﬁcers
and victims in nourishing the gods, thus ensuring that the earth would remain
fruitful and the cosmos would survive (Baudez 1994: 280; Houston and Stuart
1996; Schele and Miller 1986: 17, 104, 301). Rulers mediated between the
different levels of the cosmos and drew deities and divine power into the
human world (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 224). They communicated by
means of elaborate rituals with the gods and the souls of the dead (Schele and
Miller1986:104).Theirbloodsacriﬁcesre-enactedthecreationofthegodsand
of the world order and strengthened both (Tate 1992: 101). Through the king’s
association with ‘God K’, who appears to have been the ancestor of all royal
lineages, life-sustaining essences were able to ﬂow from Maya communities
into the supernatural realm. Waging war provided royal and noble victims for
sacriﬁcial rituals, and this, combined with the personal blood-letting practised
by rulers and nobles, gave the upper classes an especially important role in
nourishing the gods and sustaining the cosmic order. Both rulers and gods
sacriﬁced themselves so that life could continue (Miller 1986: 19).
The principal religious role of kings in all early civilizations was to mediate
between the human realm and that of the gods, either directly or through
royal ancestors who in some instances were also major nature deities. Kings
ensured a continuous ﬂow of energy from the human world to the gods and
from the gods back to the human realm. For Egyptian, Inka, and Aztec rulers
to claim that, without their support, the cosmic order would collapse was not a
metaphorical boast or an ideologically driven exaggeration but a statement of
profound conviction about how the universe functioned (Silverman 1991: 67).
Even in Egypt and Mesopotamia, where it appears to have been believed that
the gods might survive the cutting off of a ﬂow of energy back into their realm,
it was thought that the universe, and in particular the human realm, would be
severely harmed by such a disruption. No such belief appears to have existed
in earlier, more egalitarian societies, and there is no reason to believe that
it diffused from one early civilization to another, except within Mesoamerica
and perhaps between Mesopotamia and Egypt. How could such a belief in the
central role played by kings and the upper classes in maintaining the cosmic
order have originated independently in at least ﬁve and perhaps seven early
civilizations?
In all the early civilizations, the gods and kings, assisted by the upper
classes, played similar managerial roles in relation to the cosmos and soci-
ety respectively. Commoners seem to have tacitly acknowledged that, without

490
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the domestic peace and order and the defence against foreign attack that the
state provided, everyday life would have been far worse for them. Taxes and
labour were the material compensation that commoners paid to the upper
classes for these beneﬁts. It was therefore easy for people in these civilizations
to imagine all human beings performing the same role in relation to the gods
that farmers and labourers performed for the upper classes. Sacriﬁce was the
equivalent of paying taxes or tribute to the supernatural. Just as the upper
classes could not possess the power they did without the surplus food turned
over to them as taxes, so the gods could not survive without sacriﬁces. It was
by the king that offerings were transmitted to provision the major gods so that
they could continue to sustain the universe.
Individual rulers were manifestly inferior in power to the major gods. They
lived no longer than other humans, even if the ofﬁce they held was regarded
as immortal, yet they were pivotal for maintaining the cosmic order. They
alone could discern the will of the gods and ensure that the gods’ needs were
supplied. Kings thus performed dual functions as guarantors of a hierarchical
society and sustainers of the supernatural order on which both nature and
society depended. Because kings mediated between the human world and the
gods, they and their ofﬁce partook to varying degrees of the attributes of both
worlds. Yet farmers and manual labourers were also recognized as playing a
vital role in feeding the gods and therefore in maintaining the universe. Rulers
and deities depended for their survival and well-being on the labour of farmers
no less than farmers depended for an ordered, habitable, and fruitful universe
on the upper classes and the gods. The three groups were linked by a pragmatic
interdependence.
religion as political constitution
Many anthropologists have treated the religions of early civilizations as theoc-
racies, maintaining that the upper classes used assertions of supernatural sup-
port to enhance their authority and frighten the lower classes into obeying
them (Conrad and Demarest 1984; Godelier 1986; Steward 1949; L. White
1949). Instead, however, we ﬁnd a view of cosmic processes in which farm-
ers produced food to sustain themselves, the upper classes, and the gods, the
gods sustained an environment in which crops could be grown, and the up-
per classes maintained order, which permitted populations to produce food,
and played a key role in channelling energy back into the supernatural realm
through sacriﬁce.
In recent discussions of changing views of the supernatural as societies
grew more complex, some anthropologists have argued that in hunter-gatherer

Cult
491
societies nature and the spirits that animate it are believed to provide food
unconditionally to humans as a parent does to children (Bird-David 1990).
Others have pointed out that in these societies nature embraces malevolent as
well as benevolent powers and suggested that addressing nature as parents is
more likely to be an appeal for favourable treatment than the expression of a
belief that it is inevitably generous and caring (Ingold 1996: 151). The Cree of
northern Quebec regard humans as only one among many forms of personhood
that make up the cosmos and believe that good relations between hunters and
animal spirits, usually expressed in terms of kinship, cause animals to sacriﬁce
their lives to feed humans (Feit 1978; Tanner 1979). Human and animal spirits
vary in individual power, and it is this difference which determines the nature
of the personal relations they establish with each other. Cultivators living in
small-scale societies are said to have viewed the environment and the spirits
animating it not as indulgent parents but as demanding ancestors or elders
who yielded the necessities of life only in return for favours rendered (Ingold
1996: 123). In early civilizations, in contrast, nature spirits were thought to
behave like kings. The cosmos was conceptualized as a kingdom, but it was a
kingdom in which the powers of the upper classes were based more on the
consent of the governed and less on the exercise of coercion than in many later
preindustrial societies. Early civilizations stressed not only the dependence
of farmers on kings and gods but also the dependence of gods and kings on
farmers.
The religious beliefs of early civilizations have been interpreted as straight-
forward justiﬁcations of an unequal social order. Were religious beliefs simply
another means of intimidating ordinary people, as Leslie White (1959: 303–28)
used to maintain? The notion that ideological claims made by ruling groups
went uncontested by commoners seems highly dubious (Gailey 1987). Many
groups living in the Inka kingdom had been conquered only a generation or two
earlier, and factional conﬂicts among the ruling class discouraged any mono-
lithic understanding of the nature of Inka power (Patterson 1991). There is no
reason to believe that commoners were inevitably or even habitually duped by
the religious claims of their rulers.
Early civilizations were, in theory at least, absolute monarchies. They had
no political equivalent of modern constitutions or bills enumerating the rights
of the governed. The same ‘Instructions Addressed to King Merikare’ that
deﬁned the role of the Egyptian king as upholding the cosmic order advised
the king to suppress troublemakers and curb the common people (Lichtheim
1973: 99). The Aztec king Mochtezuma II’s execution of potential opponents of
his legislation to restrict government ofﬁces to men whose parents were both
members of the hereditary nobility was praised as evidence of his power and

492
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
determination rather than condemned as unjust. In early civilizations there was
no way to criticize the behaviour of a superior overtly without also challenging
his power.
Segments of Yoruba society could, however, criticize the actions and preten-
sions of their kings and other leaders in seemingly non-political contexts. Dur-
ing major religious festivals, the king, townspeople, ofﬁcials, and lineages all as-
serted their respective rights vis-`a-vis one another and questioned claims made
by others by means of praise songs and ritual performances. Such behaviour
permitted political struggles to be waged without directly challenging the ac-
tions or authority of the monarch, thus preserving a precarious balance be-
tween centripetal and centrifugal tendencies (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996).
The common features of religious beliefs in early civilizations seem to have
been responses to similar political and economic problems faced by all these
societies. By recognizing farmers as the producers of most of the goods and
services on which not only the upper classes but also the gods depended, these
beliefs empowered subordinates. Abuse of power by kings, nobles, or ofﬁcials
could not be protested directly without inviting retribution, but such behavior
could be criticized and opposed indirectly on religious grounds. The Greek
historian Herodotus reported that Khufu and Khafre, the builders of the two
largest Egyptian pyramids at Giza, were remembered as tyrants who had ig-
nored the worship of the gods and oppressed the people, while their successor,
Menkaure, who had constructed a much smaller pyramid, was celebrated as a
good and generous king. This story appears to have roots in beliefs about these
kings that were already current during the Middle Kingdom and may reﬂect
Old Kingdom views. If the ﬁrst two rulers pushed their persistent demands on
the economy to the point where their behaviour began to threaten the unity
of Egypt, Menkaure made a timely adjustment after which no ruler except
perhaps Akhenaton in the New Kingdom ever again tried to monopolize the
wealth of Egypt for his own purposes in this way. Yet opposition to the policies
of Khufu and Khafre seems to have been overtly focused not on their treatment
of people but on their treatment of the gods. Relations between the king and
local groups or their leaders were expressed in religious rather than political
terms, the key issue being how carefully kings attended to the needs of the
gods on whose well-being the cosmic order depended.
Similarly, no human was permitted to criticize the behaviour or policies of
the Inka ruler directly, but objections to his policies could be expressed by
his royal ancestors and by wakas throughout the kingdom speaking through
their oracle priests. On a number of occasions each year, the king encountered
all the mummiﬁed bodies of his royal ancestors and publicly conversed with
them through their attendant priests. Every year the king had portable wakas

Cult
493
brought to Cuzco from all parts of the kingdom so that he might question them.
Children of local rulers who had been sacriﬁced by the king and whose bodies
had been returned to their birthplaces for burial established oracular links
between the king and regions where such ties had not existed previously. By
consulting these oracles, the king in effect sounded the opinions of his subjects
to help him decide if proposed policies would work. While oracles dared to
criticize the king and to predict bad outcomes for his policies, kings exercised
some reciprocal control over wakas by monitoring the accuracy and usefulness
of their pronouncements and altering the amount of material support that
they received from the central government. Wakas that seriously displeased
the king or aligned themselves with rival factions of the royal family might be
decommissioned (Gose 1996).
In Mesopotamia, the expansion of temple estates may have been partly a
response to the growth of royal authority. Community elders, lineages, and
individuals whose power was threatened by increasing centralization appear
to have sought closer association with temples, which consequently increased
in wealth and power as royal authority grew (Yoffee 1991: 301). By the Early
Dynastic period, Egyptian kings were building larger temples and providing
more offerings for deities of provinces whose leaders had conspicuously sup-
ported the emerging central government while at the same time subverting
the authority of all hereditary local leaders (Seidlmayer 1996). Similarly, as
Aztec kings became more powerful they honoured calpolli gods with grants of
land and shares of foreign tribute but curtailed the political power of calpolli
leaders.
Thus in early civilizations the struggle to protect local and individual rights
of subjects against increasing exploitation by kings, government ofﬁcials, and
individual members of the upper classes was conducted primarily in a religious
idiom. Misbehaviour by the upper classes was believed to infringe ﬁrst and
foremost on the rights of local deities. Undue appropriation of resources by
kings and members of the upper classes for their own use endangered the
cosmicorderbyrestrictingorthreateningthefoodsupplyofthegods.Religious
concepts thus supplied a constitution phrased in terms that were intelligible
to people in early civilizations. These concepts did not overtly control or limit
the powers of the king or the upper classes but assigned mutual responsibility
to workers, the upper classes, and deities for promoting their common welfare
and ensuring their joint survival.
Such beliefs exerted moral pressure on farmers to produce food surpluses
to feed the upper classes, who regulated the political order and sacriﬁced to
the major deities that sustained the cosmic order. They also stressed the need
for rulers and administrators to keep ordinary people moderately prosperous

494
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and healthy. The gods had a vested interest in maintaining a cosmos in which
enough energy was returned to them to ensure their survival and well-being.
Far from being theocracies, the early civilizations were societies in which
checks and balances were preserved and ordinary people were understood to
have de facto rights. These ideas were expressed in a form that was appropriate
for political discourse in societies in which religious concepts had replaced
kinship as the principal way of understanding society and the universe. The
development of such ideas explains why early civilizations were considerably
more stable than the early state societies which had preceded them.

22 Priests, Festivals, and the Politics
of the Supernatural
T
o possess the detailed esoteric knowledge necessary to perform the
religious rituals that were patronized by the upper classes in early civ-
ilizations required considerable training. In many instances such knowledge,
including rituals, prayers, hymns, incantations, and divination formulae, was
the prerogative of priests, who were expected to manage the technical details
of human relations with the supernatural. In early civilizations or still earlier
smaller-scale societies, a shaman or sorcerer might learn how to relate to the
supernatural from ecstatic experiences or by seeking personal instruction from
a experienced master of these arts. Most individuals became part of a corporate
priesthood by receiving formal instruction in a religious school or apprenticing
with a religious cult or institution.
One of the fantasies that many religious scholars have propagated concern-
ing early civilizations is that they were characterized by struggles for power
between priests and secular authorities. The extensive nineteenth-century his-
toricalliteratureconcerningcompetitionforpoliticalsupremacybetweenkings
and popes in medieval Europe convinced many anthropologists that such con-
ﬂicts characterized most complex premodern societies (L. White 1949: 233–
81). To evaluate such relations objectively, it is necessary to examine the train-
ing, lifestyle, organization, and roles of priests in speciﬁc early civilizations.
Each city-state in the Valley of Mexico had its own religious institutions, and
every major deity possessed its own temple or temples. All the larger temples
had their own priests (tlamacazqui), who lived in special residences adjacent to
the temple while they were on duty. Calpolli temples were tended by part-time
priests (quacilli) (Soustelle 1961: 41, 51–52).
The king was the spiritual leader of his city-state and the symbolic head of its
priesthood, and he presided in person over many major rituals. In Tenochtitlan,
the two highest-ranking clergy were the high priests (quequetzalcoa) of the
main gods, Tlaloc and Huitzilopochtli. Appointed by the king and his council,
495

496
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
they appear not only to have been in charge of the cults of these two deities
but also to have exercised some kind of supervisory control over all public cults
and priests in the city-state.
Under the two high priests was an overseer of all state-sponsored cults
(mexicatl teohuatzin). Some Spanish writers stated that this individual super-
vised worship throughout the Aztec tributary system; more likely, among his
various duties was tending the cult images of foreign deities that the Aztec
kept in a special temple in the central religious complex of Tenochtitlan. These
images were hostages for the good behaviour of their worshippers and the
proper veneration of the images of the god Huitzilopochtli, which the Aztec
required to be installed alongside local deities in the main temples of trib-
utary states. The overseer had two assistants: one responsible for ritual and
the other for supervising the education of priests. There was also a treasurer
(tlaquimiloltecuhtli), who managed temple property, including the land en-
dowed for the support of state religious cults (Soustelle 1961: 52–53; Townsend
1992: 194).
Each temple had its own chief priest or priests and other clergy, whose
number varied according to the importance of the temple and its deities.
Eight or nine of the temples that were part of the central religious complex
at Tenochtitlan had residences where priests lived while they were on duty.
While chief priests seem invariably to have been male, temples dedicated
to goddesses as well as to some male gods, such as Mixcoatl, had numerous
female priests. Some priests served at temples on a long-term basis, rising
from the rank of tlamacazton (novitiate) to tlamacazqui (regular priest) and
sometimes to tlamamacac (high-ranking priest). Others worked on a rotational
basis, usually for months or weeks, or dedicated themselves to a temple for
a brief but ﬁxed period in the hope of being cured of illness or gaining di-
vine favour. More than ﬁve thousand people were reported to have served
in the central religious complex at Tenochtitlan. In addition to their cult du-
ties, highly trained full-time priests directed Aztec artistic and intellectual
life. Priestly specialists also served their communities as diviners, vision inter-
preters, fortune-tellers, and calendricists (Berdan 1982: 10, 63, 130–33; Caso
1958: 82–84, 89; Dur´an 1971: 133–34; Soustelle 1961: 50–56; Townsend 1979:
61–62; 1992: 193–94).
Some Aztec children were consecrated by their parents to become priests
(Berdan 1982: 130), and others, occasionally commoners who displayed spe-
cial aptitude for a priestly career, were selected by religious ofﬁcials. All male
priests were trained in the schools normally reserved for the sons of no-
bles, which were controlled by one of the members of the Council of Four.
Priestly training was rigorous. In addition to learning esoteric knowledge, good

