Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
497
manners, and self-restraint, students had to fast, bleed themselves, and stay
awake all night to keep watch and perform rituals. Their mistakes were pun-
ished by beating them, stabbing them with maguey spikes, or throwing them
into the lake. Successful students were enrolled as novitiate priests about the
age of ﬁfteen (Caso 1958: 86–87).
Priests are described as wearing their hair uncut, unwashed, and often mat-
ted with blood, with their ears shredded as a result of frequent blood-letting.
While on duty they observed frequent fasts and watches and led an austere life
that left them gaunt (Clendinnen 1991: 128–29; Townsend 1992: 192). Both
students and priests were executed if they did not refrain from sexual activity.
Priests could retire from full-time service of the gods whenever they wished
to marry; high-ranking priests were married and even polygamous but had to
refrain from sexual activity while they lived and served in the temples. During
certain major festivals, all Aztec were forbidden to engage in sexual activity or
to wash their heads to strengthen their supernatural powers. The gods were
believed to punish with illness anyone who violated these prohibitions (L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 306–7). Priests who became intoxicated were executed (Berdan
1982: 97–98).
It has been claimed that Aztec men were trained to be priests while women
wereregardedaspriestsbynature (Clendinnen 1991:207).Yetsomedaughters
of nobles were trained to be priests, partly in the cuicacalli, where all girls and
boys were taught ritual songs and dances, but also in temples, where they spent
a year around the age of twelve learning to cook and clean for the cult images
and the priests. The ecclesiastical training of women was not, however, as long
or as rigorous as that of men. Female priests were required to remain celibate
so long as they served the gods. Most of them left the priesthood at a relatively
young age to marry (Berdan 1982: 88; Caso 1958: 83).
InMesopotamiathetemplesineachcity-statewerecontrolledbylocalrulers
or hegemons to varying degrees at different times, but for the most part each
large temple functioned independently of the rest. Ekur, the temple of Enlil in
Nippur, served as a pan-southern-Mesopotamian religious meeting-place, but
its priests did not control other temples. Temples possessed estates of vary-
ing sizes, and their staff was divided into administrative, cultic, and domestic
personnel. The chief administrator of the temple and its estate was called the
sanga. His position was a full-time one, well remunerated and frequently in-
herited. A single sanga might be in charge of several temples. Under him were
various high-ranking ofﬁcials who bore titles such as iˇsˇsakku (farm steward),
pa ´e (temple overseer), and idu (doorkeeper). These ofﬁcials supervised agri-
cultural labourers, collected rents from tenant farmers, managed commercial
transactions, and guarded temple property (R. Harris 1975: 154–88).

498
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
While kings could personally sacriﬁce to any deity, the most prestigious
religious ofﬁcial in a major temple, such as one belonging to the patron deity
of a city-state, was the en, a title often translated as ‘high priest or priestess’.
Where the deity was male, the en was usually female, and where the deity
was female the en was male. The en lived in the gipar, a palace-like structure
within the temple enclosure, and appears to have been regarded as a spouse
of the deity (Oates 1978: 476). In Ur, the high priest of the moon god, Nannar,
was often the daughter of a hegemonic ruler (Lerner 1986: 66–68).
A regular priest, called the gudu (Akkadian piˇsiˇsu) of the god he served,
offered sacriﬁces and organized festivals. The highest-ranking priests were
called gudapsu (hairy priests), perhaps because they did not cut their hair;
several of them often served in a large temple at one time. Regular priests’ po-
sitions were not necessarily full-time jobs; a particular ofﬁce might be divided
into twelve-day allotments (isqum), each held in turn by a different person
over the course of a year. During Early Dynastic times, libation priests, who
directly tended the needs of a temple’s resident deity, were depicted as naked
or wearing only loincloths, while the offering-bearers who accompanied them
were fully clothed. In the Akkadian period priests were distinguished by having
their heads shaved (Furlong 1987: 266–76; R. Harris 1975: 168–71; Postgate
1992: 128).
Also attached to temples were diviners (barum), dream-interpreters, various
types of omen-readers, and ecstatics, who determined the meaning of differ-
ent forms of divine communications (R. Harris 1975: 176, 188; Postgate 1992:
132). In addition to their regular temple duties, priests and diviners offered sac-
riﬁces for ordinary people, interpreted their dreams, made prognostications,
administered oaths, participated in legal hearings, and assisted with burial
rituals (Postgate 1992: 125). The fees charged for such services belonged ei-
ther to the priests or to their temple. Other ritualists included professional
musicians, praise-singers (nar/narum), and lamentation-singers (gala/kalum)
of various ranks (Crawford 1991: 162; R. Harris 1975: 172–75), who were be-
lieved capable of activating divine power and eliciting divine favour (Jacobsen
1976: 15).
Apart from female en priests, the most important women associated with
religious activities in Old Babylonian times were the naditum (fallow women).
Apparently treated as daughters-in-law of a temple’s resident god, they cleaned
the interior of the temple and presented special food offerings (piqittu) on
festival days. They were often daughters of wealthy men, and each lived with
her servants in relative luxury in her own house, located within a walled en-
closure (gagum) attached to a temple. They were not, however, allowed to
marry, have children, or alienate family property. Other women, who could

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
499
marry but not have children, played a role in the cults of female deities
(R. Harris 1975: 188–200, 305–12; Jacobsen 1970: 185; Postgate 1992: 97–
98, 131–32). Also associated with temples were lower-class women known as
qadistu (consecrated ones), istaritu (devotees of Ishtar), and harimtu (ones
set apart). They appear to have been, perhaps in addition to having other
occupations, prostitutes who modelled their behaviour on that of the god-
dess Inanna (Ishtar), and their sexual promiscuity was believed to promote
the fertility and prosperity of the land. Associations of male prostitutes per-
formed homosexual acts (asakku) that were not practised by the gods but
entertained the fertility goddess Inanna (Bott´ero 1992: 189–92; Lerner 1986:
128–31).
Non-priestly temple staff included snake-charmers, bee-keepers, and acro-
bats, whose jobs may have been to protect, provision, and entertain deities,
cooks who prepared offerings, and sweepers who kept the outer temple build-
ings clean. At least some of these tasks were performed by different people
working in rotation throughout the year (Postgate 1992: 125–27).
Yoruba religious practices were less centralized than were those of the Valley
of Mexico or Mesopotamia. Instead of being focused on temples and con-
trolled by hierarchical organizations of priests, they were associated with a
large number of cults dedicated to the worship of particular deities or sets of
deities. Individuals joined one or more cults as a result of family afﬁliation,
unusual experiences, special physical characteristics, or personal preferences.
A deity might torment a person until he or she agreed to worship that deity.
Hunchbacks, cripples, dwarfs, albinos, and people born in a caul were believed
destined to become worshippers of Orisala, the god who fashioned people in
the womb. Each cult had one or more shrines located within or close to a com-
munity and its own praise chants, songs, rhythms, dances, musical instruments,
insignia, symbols, scar patterns, myths, taboos, and sacriﬁcial foods (Bascom
1969: 81, 97). Initiation into each of these cults could take up to several months
and involved seclusion in shrines, the learning of esoteric rituals, the shaving
of heads, and sometimes spirit possession by the deity (Bascom 1969: 77–78).
Failure to serve a deity once initiated was supernaturally punished. Individual
performance and social status played signiﬁcant roles in determining vertical
mobility within such cults.
Some religious cults were important instruments of social control. The
Ogboni society, which focused on the worship of the earth god, had as its
primary mission to root out and destroy evil and corruption. Its members, who
were mostly town and palace ofﬁcials, collected debts for others, settled blood
disputes, acted as judges, and executed criminals. The Oro society, which wor-
shipped a deity associated with the god of medicine, disposed of witches and

500
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
sorcerers and executed kings who refused to obey orders to commit suicide.
The Egungun society, which was concerned with limiting the powers of death,
also executed witches. Membership in these three societies remained secret, as
did many of their rituals (Ajisafe 1924: 90–93; Bascom 1944; 1969: 31, 92–93;
R. Thompson 1976: 6/1–6/4).
The majority of religious cults had as their aim the worship of speciﬁc deities,
from whom particular beneﬁts were expected. The high god Olorun was ex-
ceptional in having no cult; he was believed to beneﬁt from the offerings made
to all the other deities. Images of the god Esu received frequent offerings in
every household and in public places but he had no priests of his own. One
of his duties was to convey the spiritual power of sacriﬁces to the deities who
were their intended beneﬁciaries.
All other cults had their own local priests, although most of these ofﬁces were
part-time ones. Priests were believed to be especially endowed with the power
of the god they worshipped (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 90). Both men
and women became priests. Although most priestly ofﬁces tended to be hered-
itary (Lucas 1948: 183), qualifying for them required varying degrees of train-
ing, usually in the form of an apprenticeship. Priests and their assistants had
to prepare for sacriﬁcing by prayer, fasting, and observing appropriate taboos
(Awolalu 1979: 170).
Families, lineages, and quarters each worshipped speciﬁc deities or groups
of deities, with their political leaders serving as the hereditary priests of their
cults. Leading ofﬁcials often headed cults that played a key role in commu-
nitywide religious festivals (Awolalu 1979: 113). In many Yoruba states, for-
mer royal lineages that had been dethroned by newcomers or the leaders of
kin groups that claimed to have lived in an area before there was any king
were acknowledged to have special priestly powers (Pemberton and Afolayan
1996: 38).
Cults whose membership cut across lineage organizations were headed by
priests (aworo) who had achieved their positions as a result of outstanding
service in the cult or divine designation. Such priests ofﬁciated at rituals per-
formed every four days and at various annual festivals, offered sacriﬁces, led
devotions, announced their deities’ will, and guarded and maintained shrines
(ile orisa, ojubo) and objects of worship. Divination played a major role in de-
termining what sacriﬁces were required to propitiate speciﬁc deities (Awolalu
1979: 111–13). Priests who served Ore, the god of hunting, atoned for acts of
incest, those of Orisala buried women who had died while pregnant, and those
of Sango puriﬁed houses that had been hit by lightning, which was a certain
sign that Sango was angry with the people who lived in them (Bascom 1969:
80–84). In Ife, special otu priests, attached to the palace, disposed of sacriﬁces

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
501
made within the palace grounds and conducted installation ceremonies for the
king and the city’s leading ofﬁcials (Bascom 1969: 38).
The most highly trained and revered priests were the diviners (babalawo),
attached to the cult of Ifa (Orunmile), the god of divination. Ifa transmitted
requests for sacriﬁces and other messages from the gods, including Olorun,
to human beings. While Ifa divination was usually performed using sixteen
palm nuts, a priest had to have memorized over one thousand verses and
learned their meanings to be able to interpret the 256 resulting combinations.
This knowledge, which has been described as an encyclopedic compendium
of every aspect of Yoruba thought and was kept highly secret, was acquired
during an apprenticeship lasting many years (Abimbola 1973; Bascom 1969:
70–71, 80; Lucas 1948: 72). Diviners determined the causes of illnesses and
misfortunes and identiﬁed possible solutions. Their services were eagerly
sought after, making it proverbial that ‘a babalawo never starves’ (Lucas 1948:
72). The central Ifa shrine was at Ife, where its deity had ﬁrst descended to
earth, but the cult had branches throughout the Yoruba region.
The centre of the cult of Sango was at his shrine in Koso, which was con-
trolled by the king of Oyo. Its operation was supervised by the otun iwefa, the
Oyo royal eunuch in charge of religious matters. Many important ofﬁces in the
cult were held by members of high-ranking Oyo lineages. Priests for provin-
cial branches of the Sango cult were trained by the mogba (senior priests)
at the Koso shrine (Apter 1992: 24–25; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 152).
At Benin sacriﬁcial rites in honour of dead kings were performed by special
priests from Ihoghe who claimed that their ancestors had accompanied the
founder of the royal lineage from Ife to Benin (Bradbury 1957: 55).
While the Maya had priests in the sixteenth century a.d., no evidence of
priests has been found in either Maya art or surviving texts for the Classic
period (Coe 1993: 184). Only kings and members of the royal family are de-
picted presenting offerings to deities. This may have been, as it was in Egypt,
an iconographic convention stressing the crucial role claimed by the king in
communicating with the gods and making offerings to them. Many ofﬁcials,
even if they only acted as substitutes for the king, must have been needed to
manage the numerous temples and carry out the rituals associated with them.
It is unknown whether these duties were performed by priests or by secular
deputies for the king and whether such responsibilities occupied individuals
full-time or only part-time.
In Egypt all cults for both the gods and the dead were performed in the
king’s name, but the only Old Kingdom temples that were fully managed by the
central government appear to have been royal funerary chapels, the main tem-
ples in Memphis and nearby Heliopolis, and some Fifth Dynasty sun temples

502
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
at Saqqara that were associated with royal funerary cults. Priests, craft workers,
and farmers working for funerary temples were granted various exemptions
from taxes and corv´ee labour in the Old Kingdom. Kings supplied cult statues
to provincial temples and may have arranged for provincial government ofﬁ-
cials to ﬁnance the daily operations of these temples. Yet, prior to the Middle
Kingdom, the construction of most provincial temples appears to have been
initiated and carried out locally. Each temple seems to have had its own ad-
ministrators, workmen, and priests, although in the Old Kingdom some priests
may have been responsible for a number of cults in the same district (Goedicke
1979: 129).
The priests who served a particular cult were organized hierarchically. At
the top of the hierarchy were the servants of the god (h
• mw ntr), who might
be under the control of an overseer of such priests (ımy-r h
• mw ntr). They
were responsible for the daily rituals of feeding and tending the deity’s cult
statue (Morenz 1973: 301), assisted by a lector priest (hry h
• bt), who read
aloud the appropriate prayers and incantations, and stm priests, who washed,
clothed, and applied cosmetics to the cult statue. The general care of the
temple was the task of wb priests (puriﬁed ones), who cleaned the buildings,
slaughtered animals, cooked for the gods, and guarded and handled sacred
objects. All priests had to have their entire bodies shaved, bathe frequently,
avoid sex, and wear only linen clothing while they were on duty in the temple.
They were supported by large numbers of farmers, craftsmen, and temple
labourers (Hawass 1995: 241–45; Sauneron 1960; Shafer 1997b; Strouhal 1992:
223–33).
There is no evidence of full-time priests during the Old and Middle King-
doms. Instead priests were drawn from other professions to serve in teams (s3)
for part of each year. The highest-ranking ones were selected from among gov-
ernment administrators and scribes, while lower-ranking ones were recruited
among craftsmen and farmers. In the Middle Kingdom, priests were orga-
nized in four teams, each of which served in rotation for one lunar month. In
the Old Kingdom, there had been ﬁve teams, each divided into two sections,
which served for one of every ten solar months (A. Roth 1991a: 2–4). Such
an arrangement ensured that temples, with their rich endowments, did not
become autonomous institutions that were able to challenge the power of the
king. It also distributed temple revenues widely among ofﬁcials and ordinary
people (A. Roth 1991b: 120). H
• mw k3 were priests who were under contract
to perform the mortuary cults of deceased members of the upper class and of
well-to-do scribes and other professionals and were paid for their services from
perpetual tomb endowments. Offerings frequently came from temples, and
many of these priests probably also worked as ordinary priests in these temples.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
503
In the Old Kingdom many upper-class women served as priests (h
• mwt ntr)
in the cults of deities throughout Egypt, especially those of the female deities
Hathor and Neith. Women also served as funerary priests (h
• mwt k3). While
a few low-ranking wbt priestesses were still attached to the cult of Hathor in
the Middle Kingdom, the priests of other cults had become exclusively male.
Womencontinued,however,toserveasmusiciansanddancersintemplerituals
into the New Kingdom (Fischer 1989: 18–20). Their erotic performances were
believed to play a vital role in sexually arousing male creator deities and thus
ensuring the continued functioning of the universe (Robins 1993: 142–45).
It was not until the New Kingdom that full-time priests began to be put in
charge of temples. They were appointed and could be dismissed at the king’s
pleasure.
In the Central Andean highlands, ayllu or village leaders appointed elderly
men and women to act as part-time priests. Their responsibilities included of-
fering sacriﬁces to the ayllu’s wakas and the souls of its dead ancestors and being
the oracles through whom these supernatural beings spoke to humans (Cobo
1990: 158–59; Kendall 1973: 192; MacCormack 1991: 422–28). Throughout
the Inka kingdom, the government appointed priests and chosen women to
serve in state temples. The highest-ranking priest in the kingdom was the
willaq umu, who was the head priest at the main temple of the sun in Cuzco.
He was a close relative of the Inka king and seems to have belonged to either
Inka Wiraqucha’s or Lloque Qhapaq Yupanki’s panaqa. He held this post for
life or at the king’s pleasure and was the chief oracle of Inti, the sun god. The
Spanish described the willaq umu as a ‘pope’ who was in charge of all priests
throughout the Inka state. He outranked any other priest and was responsible
for organizing the annual visits to Cuzco of portable wakas from the provinces.
Yet, whenever the king wished, he could take the willaq umu’s place and him-
self offer sacriﬁces and transmit oracular messages from the sun god. It is
reported that, early in his reign, King Wayna Qhapaq removed the willaq umu
from ofﬁce and personally assumed the role of high priest of the sun (Gose
1996a: 23; Kendall 1973: 191).
The sun temple, the Qorikancha, was reported to have been served by two
hundred male priests and ﬁve hundred chosen women. Ten priests, called
hatun wilka, were of higher rank than the rest and belonged to the nobility; or-
dinary priests were called yana wilka. These priests were said to come from the
Tarpuntay ayllu, one of the pre-Inka groups in the Cuzco area whose members
had been made Inka-by-privilege (Kendall 1973: 191; MacCormack 1991: 112,
158). It was claimed that the solar temple at Vilcas had forty thousand servants
and forty gatekeepers, but these ﬁgures probably include the farmers who
worked the ﬁelds assigned to the temple and the total number of gatekeepers

504
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
who served the temple in rotation each year (MacCormack 1991: 99). Corv´ee
labour may have played as important a role in supplying staff for temples as
it did in providing other labourers for the Inka state. Bernab´e Cobo (1990: 9)
reported that in the Cuzco area more than one thousand men – priests and
their apprentices, who had to remember ﬂawlessly all the rituals associated
with the wakas they served – were employed solely to conserve religious lore.
Cobo also noted that a small group of nobles was specially concerned with
religious matters.
The title ‘yana wilka’ might indicate that ordinary priests were yanakuna,
but more likely it simply designated them as servants of the gods (Kendall
1973: 191). The priesthood was to some extent hereditary in certain ayllus
or lineages, from which individuals were selected by kinsmen, local rulers,
and the Inka government. Individuals were also called to be priests by vi-
sions, while children born during thunderstorms were destined in old age
to serve the storm god Illapa (Cobo 1990: 158–59; MacCormack 1991: 299,
422). Priests were ranked according to the importance of the wakas they
served, by whether and how well their temples were supported by the govern-
ment, and by their relative positions among the priests serving in a particular
temple.
The principal duties of priests were to tend wakas, sacriﬁce to them, main-
tain their particular traditions, and transmit this esoteric knowledge to their
successors (Cobo 1990: 159). Only nobles and attendant priests were allowed
to enter major temples such as the Qorikancha. That required ritual puriﬁca-
tion and avoidance of foods such as salt, chillies, meat, and corn beer for up to
a year (MacCormack 1991: 67). Priests were expected to serve as oracles for
their deities, interpret dreams and omens, pray for people, transmit messages
from the dead, and diagnose and treat diseases (Kendall 1973: 192). At small
shrines one or two priests probably performed all these duties, but at large
temples there was some division of labour.
Divination and oracular possession were employed to diagnose diseases,
identify hostile sorcerers, locate lost property, determine what was happening
to people far away, establish appropriate sacriﬁcial offerings, and settle contro-
versies. Four hundred seventy-ﬁve ofﬁcially sanctioned diviners (omo), many
of them elderly priests, were reported to have lived in the Cuzco area. Most
divination involved sacriﬁce, and diviners were allowed to keep for themselves
the parts of offerings that were not consumed by ﬁre (Cobo 1990: 160–63;
Rowe 1944: 302).
Hearing confessions was another important duty of priests. Only deeds and
words, not thoughts, were regarded as sinful, but undisclosed sins such as
murder, poisoning, theft, seduction, audibly cursing the king or a god, and

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
505
practising witchcraft were believed to anger the gods and invite supernatural
punishment in the form of illness. The gods might punish persons who com-
mitted crimes, members of their families, or community leaders. Confession
and subsequent puriﬁcation were the only way to avoid such supernatural ret-
ribution. Priests cast lots to determine whether a confession was complete and
prescribed penances, which included sacriﬁces, abstaining from luxury foods,
and avoiding sexual relations for a ﬁxed period, all of which were followed by
washing in running water (Cobo 1990: 122–25; Rowe 1944: 304–5).
The Inka queen was the principal ofﬁciant at Cuzco of the cult of Pak-
samama, the moon goddess. Women made up most if not all the ofﬁciants in
the cults of at least some female deities and participated in many other reli-
gious rituals performed at cult centres throughout the kingdom. Many of the
participants were chosen women, who were ranked and had religious duties
assigned to them on the basis of their age and their families’ social status.
Senior chosen women (mamakuna), who were of royal or noble birth, played
important roles in religious rituals, which made them the female counterparts
of priests, and also heard all confessions by women (Kendall 1973: 70, 192–93;
Silverblatt 1987: 99–106).
There is no clear evidence of a professional priesthood in Shang or Zhou
China. Kings, lords, and lineage heads sacriﬁced to the gods and to their
ancestors, assisted by their wives, mothers, sisters, and retainers (Creel 1937:
338). Female attendants (shifu) supervised the care of ritual vessels and the
preparation of sacriﬁcial foods, attended sacriﬁcial rituals, and organized the
ceremonial activities of other women living in the royal palace (C. Chang
1986: 112).
Divination,whichinvolvedcommunicating(bin)withroyalancestors,played
a major role in determining the detailed content and divine recipients of sac-
riﬁcial offerings. Such divination has been interpreted as an effort to turn
sacriﬁces into a form of spell-casting that would predispose the royal ances-
tors to inﬂuence nature and intervene in human affairs in a predetermined,
favourable manner (Allan 1991: 113–23; Keightley 1978b: 213). At the royal
court divination took the form of scapulimancy, with ﬁre being applied to turtle
plastrons and the shoulder-blades of butchered oxen. Replies were read from
the shapes of cracks that developed as a result of the heat. The dates of divina-
tions, the propositions tested, and sometimes the actual outcomes of events
were recorded in writing on the shells or bones used for divination. Divining
at the royal court clearly required specialized knowledge, but it is not clear
whether royal diviners were regarded primarily as priests or as court ofﬁcials.
Nor is it known whether being a diviner was a full-time occupation (Keightley
1978a).

506
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Royal diviners (bu, zhen) included princes and nobles as well as individuals
of lesser rank. Some diviners appear to have come from settlements or regions
whose names they bore to serve the Shang kings. In the earliest oracle texts
from Anyang, the names of diviners accompanied the records of their ﬁnd-
ings. Towards the end of the Shang Dynasty, divination rites were increasingly
performed only in the king’s name. Yet deputies may have continued to divine
and sacriﬁce for the king (Chou 1968: 60, 137–38; Keightley 1979–80). The
strongest evidence of highly skilled ritual specialists working at the Shang court
are the two so-called schools for sacriﬁcing to the royal ancestors identiﬁed
by Tung Tso-pin. Sacriﬁces were carried out in ten-day cycles, the sacriﬁce to
a particular royal ancestor being performed on the day of the cycle that bore
the same ‘heavenly stem’ designation as appeared in that ancestor’s posthu-
mous name. A full set of sacriﬁces took a whole year to complete (Chao 1972:
132; Creel 1937: 202; Li Chi 1977: 134, 248–54). Tung’s Old or Conservative
School offered elaborate sacriﬁces to a large number of ancestors who had
preceded the ﬁrst Shang king, Dayi; the New or Progressive School restricted
the number of male ancestors and the categories of queens to whom sacriﬁces
were offered and, instead of divining the contents of individual sacriﬁcial rit-
uals, prescribed standardized offerings. The two schools were also associated
with differences in writing styles and calendrical usage. For some reason they
alternated every two or three reigns. This suggests that at least two groups
of specialists, each with its own distinctive practices, persisted alongside one
another in Shang royal circles for over 150 years (Chˆeng 1960: 178–79, 222;
Hsu and Linduff 1988: 110).
Royal sacriﬁces appear to have been offered regularly only at the royal court.
They were also made to some powerful local nature deities when the king was
travelling. Princes sacriﬁced to their own ancestors and to local deities in their
provinces and districts (Chˆeng 1960: 204–6, 223–24). All these rituals must
have required numerous ofﬁcials to ensure that temples were maintained,
gather sacriﬁcial offerings, and assist the king or lord in carrying out major
sacriﬁces. Singers and musicians were also employed in these rituals. These
people were probably religious specialists only on a part-time basis.
There were also ritualists who were called xi if male and wu if female, both
terms usually being translated as ‘shaman’. Such ritualists worked either singly
or in groups. It has been suggested that their primary role was to facilitate
communication with the supernatural by summoning the souls of the dead
back into the terrestrial world or projecting their own souls into supernatural
realms (Allan 1991: 85–86; K. Chang 1976: 162). Kwang-chih Chang (1983:
44–54) suggested that Shang kings claimed preeminent shamanistic powers for
themselves. In divination, the king’s soul ascended into the sky to communicate

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
507
with the souls of his royal ancestors or their spirits descended from the sky
into the body of the king or his diviner. Yet Shang kings were never referred
to as shamans (Yates 1997: 82). David Keightley’s (1978b: 223–24) proposal
that the Shang rulers confronted their ancestors bureaucratically rather than
ecstatically seems to accord better with what is known about royal divination
in China.
One of the clearly attested duties of shamans was to perform elaborate rain-
making rituals (hun wu). Occasionally they seem to have allowed themselves
to be set on a blazing pyre or exposed to the sun in the hope of inducing rain
to end a drought. That these shamans risked being burned to death suggests
that they may have been commoners who were sometimes recruited, either by
farmers or the government, to perform rituals intended to control the weather.
In later times shamans belonged to the lower levels of society and authorities
carefully regulated their activities (Allan 1991: 42; Chˆeng 1960: 224, 226; Yates
1997: 82).
The idea of priests and kings as rivals and of competition between church
and state in early civilizations is not supported by the evidence. Concepts that
seemed appropriate for understanding the history of medieval Europe have
been misapplied to these societies. In all early civilizations individuals were
specially trained to conduct rituals and perform other religious tasks. Often
such training necessitated acquiring large amounts of esoteric knowledge and
maintaining a state of ritual purity. Ritual experts came from different classes
andwereorganizedinhierarchiesofvaryingcomplexity;whilesomeperformed
their religious duties full-time, others alternated religious tasks with admin-
istrative, craft, or agricultural work. The most important role performed by
these specialists was to offer, in the name of the king, the sacriﬁces that played
an essential role in providing the gods with what they needed.
The closest approximation to competition between church and state oc-
curred in Mesopotamia, where from time to time in some city-states there
was considerable rivalry between kings and the managers of major temple
estates. At other times and places, Mesopotamian kings controlled the oper-
ation of temples. In all situations, however, Mesopotamian kings were rec-
ognized as the chief stewards and agents of their cities’ patron deities. In
Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, priests served part-time as deputies for
the king, who alone was deemed capable of offering sacriﬁces to the gods.
The same situation may have prevailed among the Classic Maya, assuming
that they actually recognized priestly ofﬁces as opposed to full-time gov-
ernment ofﬁcials performing religious rites when required. Shang and Early
Zhou sacriﬁces were offered by lineage heads, the most important of whom
were also political leaders. Shang kings and high-ranking nobles were assisted

508
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
by diviners and others who possessed expert knowledge about how to deal
with the supernatural, but these specialists may have simultaneously held
other court or administrative appointments. The Aztec and Inka had full-
time priests, but kings and other ofﬁcials could assume their roles during
major rituals. The Yoruba had many cults, with different and even rival groups
worshipping the same deities. Each of these cults had its own priests and
hierarchical organization. Yoruba kings were regarded as supernaturally es-
sential for maintaining the unity of their kingdom and the well-being of the
world.
There has also been a tendency to imagine that the cult personnel found
in each state constituted a centrally controlled and disciplined hierarchy car-
rying out a common programme of worship mandated by the government or
by religious leaders. In Old Kingdom Egypt, the royal mortuary cults were
centrally controlled. The temples in provincial administrative centres appear
to have remained partly under local management until the Middle Kingdom,
although the central government subsidized their cults to some degree. There
was no overall hierarchy of Egyptian priests, and the part-time nature of local
priesthoods further limited their ability to exercise political power. The Inka
chief priest of the sun in Cuzco, acting in the king’s name, normally dealt with
wakas throughout the kingdom, distributed royal largess to their cults, curbed
potentially dangerous political activities by their oracle priests, and may have
coordinated solar rituals in the various provincial administrative centres. Yet
he did not impose a centralized control over local cults, most of which re-
mained self-ﬁnancing and self-managing. Nor is there evidence to sustain the
view that Aztec high priests controlled worship throughout the Aztec tributary
network.
In none of these societies does there appear to have been an overall re-
ligious hierarchy paralleling or overreaching the political order. Even in in-
dividual city-states, a single high priest rarely regulated all the temples, and
in territorial states it was considered unnecessary to impose a rigidly hierar-
chical religious organization on local cults. The staff of large temples or cults
tended to be complexly and hierarchically arranged. Their priests wore elabo-
rate costumes, observed numerous taboos, and specialized in various branches
of knowledge related to communicating with and serving the gods. Yet in every
case kings claimed to be the chief intermediaries between their people and
the supernatural powers that animated and sustained the universe. This role
did not inevitably confer divinity or even great political power on kings, but
it made them symbols of the unity of the state and responsible for sustaining
the cosmic order. Priests, if they existed at all in particular early civilizations,
were subordinates rather than rivals of the king.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
509
public ritual
Sacriﬁcing to deities was routinely carried out by priests or ofﬁcials in precincts
from which most people were usually excluded. These sanctuaries constituted
a ritually safe environment for encountering the supernatural and protected
unconsecrated people from the dangers of inadvertent exposure to supernatu-
ral power. Such seclusion increased the mystery and importance of these rites
in the minds of the people who were not permitted to participate in them.
Large numbers of people were, however, expected or required to partici-
pate in other public rituals. These rituals sought to tap the fertility, power, and
creativity of supernatural forces for the beneﬁt of the social realm by making
that realm more closely resemble its supernatural prototype. They also sought
to sustain, renew, and stabilize the cosmos for the beneﬁt of humanity, to draw
society into closer harmony with the natural environment, and to reinforce re-
spect for the political hierarchy by stressing its resemblance to the supernatural
realm. These goals were pursued by performing rituals that were believed to
duplicate what went on among the gods or had happened on earth long ago. In
addition to reinforcing cosmological beliefs and promoting social integration,
these public rituals sometimes provided a stage for acting out and partially
resolving political tensions that were not publicly acknowledged (Bauer 1996;
Clendinnen 1991: 235–43).
In the Valley of Mexico, the entire population of city-states joined in numer-
ous acts of collective worship. All the residents of calpollis, quarters, or cities
were expected to attend their religious festivals. All teenage boys and girls
were taught how to participate in these rituals (Dur´an 1971: 289–91). Public
rituals involving large numbers of celebrants drawn from all classes were per-
formed at various times of the year in plazas adjacent to the central temples
of each city, as well as at temples and shrines elsewhere in the city and in the
surrounding countryside.
The elaboration of public rituals expressed the relative power of different
city-states. As Aztec power grew, the frequency and magniﬁcence of Tenochti-
tlan’s religious rituals increased, along with the number of human sacriﬁces that
accompanied them. The Aztec’s main public rituals were keyed to an annual
calendar. Nine twenty-day summer ‘months’ were associated with agricultural
rituals that sequentially blessed the seed, encouraged rain, fed hungry com-
moners before the harvest, celebrated the harvest, and honoured the dead.
The nine winter months, stretching between harvest and planting, were de-
voted to rituals associated with war. Thus the ﬁrst half of the year was focused
on the fertility god Tlaloc, the second half on the solar war god and patron de-
ity, Huitzilopochtli. While most Aztec public rituals involved human sacriﬁce,

510
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the largest numbers of human lives were offered during four brief periods
of religious observance each year. The most were killed at tlacaxipeualiztli
(the ﬂaying of men), the ﬁrst major festival of the solar year, which occurred
at the beginning of the second Aztec month, in late March, and was associated
with the fertility god Xipe Totec (Clendinnen 1991: 91, 295–97; Dur´an 1971:
172, 412–65).
Special public rituals were enacted at four-, eight-, and ﬁfty-two-year in-
tervals, the latter by everyone living in the Valley of Mexico, to renew or
re-create the cosmos at the end of a calendar round (Berdan 1982: 134–35).
Inga Clendinnen (1992: 76) observes that, while Aztec public rituals united all
classes to honour the gods, they also emphasized the hierarchical social order
and the need for commoners to defer to the upper classes. This was paralleled
by general human submission to a supernatural order that was perceived as
being either highly capricious or determined without reference to human in-
terests. The alternative 260-day calendar largely designated feasts related to
individual humans and deities and was used for divination.
Yoruba worship tended to occur in public. Shrines were usually small, com-
pelling all but the most esoteric rituals to be carried out around rather than
inside them. The king performed special rituals for the welfare of the king-
dom in secluded parts of the palace, but even religious societies with secret
memberships conducted masked rituals in the streets. Women were excluded
from participating in some public rituals and men from participating in others.
Religious festivals (odun) played a conspicuous role in Yoruba community life.
At Ife only twenty-ﬁve days each year were without public festivals (Bascom
1969: 34). Elaborate annual ceremonies propitiated deities for the beneﬁt of
the community and sought to draw spiritual power from the bush into towns
and cities to ensure that women remained fertile, make crops grow, and keep
the king strong (Apter 1992: 98). In the course of its major festivals, each
Yoruba urban centre sought to re-create the world from its own point of view
and to re-establish a precarious balance between the political unity of the state
and the diversity of its constituent groups (Apter 1992: 21, 175–76).
In the community of Ila Orangun, the ﬁrst major public festival of the year,
held in March, was Odun Ogungun (the festival of the ancestors). In the
course of this festival, the townspeople reasserted their traditional rights and
freedoms vis-`a-vis the king. Odun Ogun, celebrated in June, dramatized the
conﬂict between an individual’s loyalty to the state, as embodied by the king,
and his loyalty to his kin group. Odun Oba, in late August and early September,
reafﬁrmed the king’s power. These major community festivals were followed
by and interpersed with festivals honouring particular deities (Pemberton and
Afolayan 1996: 101–96).

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
511
At Ife the annual Oduduwa festival celebrated the creation of the world and
the genealogical unity of all Yoruba kings and people. The sacriﬁce of a ﬁve-
toed chicken and the performances of dancers dressed in chicken costumes
commemorated the bird from the sky realm that helped Oduduwa create
the earth (Bascom 1969: 10–11). Three New Year yam festivals performed
by Ifa priests between late June and August allowed the king of Ife and his
retainers, then the worshippers of Ifa and other beneﬁcent deities associated
with the colour white, and ﬁnally the worshippers of other deities to eat new
yams. These festivals also ritually renewed the fertility of the soil (Bascom
1969: 19).
Because of the large number of people living in individual Yoruba extended
family compounds, especially in the northern regions, the cults carried out by
them had a public character. Every four days, the compound head sacriﬁced
to the various deities that were worshipped by his extended family. A series
of major festivals to honour these deities was held during the course of the
year. Women worshipped their husbands’ deities, but in addition every woman
returned to her father’s compound to participate in its cults after she had
married, and her children sometimes joined her (Bascom 1969: 77).
In Mesopotamia, an important form of public ritual was the journeying of
cult statues from one temple to another. Sometimes the images of deities were
transported from their temples to the surrounding countryside. This became
a major feature of the later akitum (New Year) festival at Babylon. Cult statues
from different city-states also visited one another. Pre-Sargonic texts record
such journeys between Lagash and Girsu and as far away as Uruk, while later
recordstellofvisitsbydeitiesfromsouthernMesopotamiatoNippurandEridu
(Postgate 1992: 123–24). The images of deities were also paraded around
cities during their festivals. Standards or symbols of deities were regularly
taken from temples to assist in collecting tithes and to be used for swearing
oaths in legal cases.
New-moon festivals were celebrated in every Mesopotamian temple, along
with feasts speciﬁc to each god (Jacobsen 1976: 97–98). The most important
annual religious festival was the New Year celebration, which extended over
approximately twelve days in March and early April. This elaborate ritual,
which followed the annual harvest, sought to renew the cosmos by re-enacting
its divine creation and supernatural ordering (Kuhrt 1987: 31–40). It was an
occasion for the public to feast on food provided by the king and temples, and
in the third millennium b.c. it was also a time when the fertility of the land
was renewed by a ritual marriage between the king, temporarily incarnating a
god, and his wife or some priestess, incarnating a goddess (Bott´ero 1992: 226;
Furlong 1987: 33–34; Hooke 1958; Postgate 1992: 123). It has been suggested

512
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that this ritual began in Uruk, with a priestess representing the goddess Inanna
and the en priest or king representing the god Dumuzi. In the Early Dynastic
period, sacred marriages were performed in the temples of many fertility
deities (Lerner 1986: 126–27).
Numerous Maya rites were performed in relative seclusion by members
of royal families or their deputies inside temples, palace complexes, or small,
enclosed plazas surrounded by elite structures. It is not known who was per-
mitted to witness these rites or the religious ball games that were played in
courts located within palace complexes, which reenacted the escape of the
Hero Twins from the underworld. Maya urban centres did, however, have
large, open courtyards adjacent to temples and palaces where huge crowds
could have assembled to witness the dedication of royal stelae at the end of
twenty-year periods and to celebrate various other rituals.
At Cuzco, the Inka rulers celebrated an elaborate cycle of religious rites
that corresponded with the solar year. These rituals were primarily concerned
with the planting, harvesting, and storage of crops and with promoting the
welfare of the king and the Inka nobility. They celebrated both the king’s
military prowess and his control over the reproductive resources of society.
The festival of Qhapaq Raymi, at the start of the rainy season in December,
involved an elaborate set of rituals at Wanakawri (Huanacauri), a major waka
associated with the arrival of the Inka royal family in the Cuzco region. In the
course of these rituals, the endurance and military skills of young members
of the nobility were tested and they were formally initiated into adulthood. In
January, rituals were performed for the health of the king. February-March
was the time for encouraging crops to grow, and in May the maize harvest
was celebrated. In June, the feast of Inti Raymi involved elaborate sacriﬁces
on the hillsides near Cuzco to strengthen and ensure the return southward
of the winter sun. In July, irrigation and sod-turning rituals were performed.
In August, new crops were ritually sown in sacred ﬁelds. In September, Quya
Raymi (the queen’s festival) was celebrated and diseases were driven from
the capital. In October, rituals were performed if drought threatened, while
November was associated with preparations for Qhapaq Raymi. Special rituals
were performed at times of major threats to the well-being of the state such as
wars, earthquakes, or widespread disease (Cobo 1990: 126–51; Kendall 1973:
198–99; Rowe 1944: 308–11).
The king, queen, and high-ranking members of the nobility played promi-
nent roles in these rituals. In July, the king, assisted by Inka nobles, ceremo-
nially inaugurated the agricultural cycle by using a gold-tipped foot plough
to begin to turn the sod of a sacred maize ﬁeld dedicated to the sun at Coll-
campata, on Saqsawaman Hill, and at Sausero, east of Cuzco. These two ﬁelds

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
513
were associated with the ﬁrst Inka ruler, Manqu Qhapaq, and his sister-wife
Mama Waqu. The ritual initiated the working of other ﬁelds belonging to var-
ious gods and dead kings and then the rest of the land in the Cuzco region
and throughout the Inka kingdom. The following May, the sacred maize ﬁelds
around Cuzco were harvested by the sons of Inka nobles who were preparing
to be initiated into manhood (Bauer 1996: 330; Cobo 1990: 143–44; Kendall
1973: 199; MacCormack 1991: 162; Rowe 1944: 310–11).
Singing and dancing were important features of Inka public worship. Large
quantities of beer were consumed by celebrants. Coca leaves were chewed
on these occasions by nobles and used for divining and in sacriﬁcial rites
(Rowe 1944: 291–92). The religious festivals that involved the greatest mass
participation were held in the two adjacent central squares of Cuzco or at major
wakas surrounding the city and were attended by the king and the mummies
of previous monarchs together with their oracle priests. During some of these
rituals, residents of the Cuzco region who were not Inka or Inka-by-privilege
were required to vacate the area (Rowe 1944: 310–11). State rituals had set
programmes, including special dances and songs, and different social classes
were assigned speciﬁc roles. The same songs were sung at rituals relating
to war as at those relating to agriculture. Ofﬁcial maize-planting rituals were
performed by young men wearing military regalia, and warriors played a major
role in harvesting ritual crops. The Inka leadership regarded agriculture and
military force as equally important for the welfare of the state and therefore
ritually equated them (Bauer 1996: 331).
Agricultural and other state rituals were also performed in and around the
main temples in provincial administrative centres. There is archaeological ev-
idence that lavish hospitality was offered at these centres to celebrants from
the surrounding province (Morris and Thompson 1985). At the community
level, ayllu priests offered sacriﬁces and libations to local wakas and ancestral
mummies both before planting and after harvesting the crops (Gose 1993:
486–87). Harvests were also celebrated with community dancing, feasts, and
the drinking of corn beer, while shrines containing cobs of corn wrapped in
cloth were set up in every house to honour the maize goddess.
In Egypt public and semi-public rituals sustained the monarch, the seasonal
cycles, and the gods themselves (Morenz 1973: 89). The ceremony that is best
documented prior to the Fourth Dynasty was the Sed festival. For it, cult
statues were assembled from every part of Egypt to assist in the ritual death
and rebirth of an aging king. This ritual revived his power to sustain the cosmic
order. It was usually ﬁrst performed around the thirtieth year of a king’s reign
and every few years thereafter (Frankfort 1948: 79–88; T. Wilkinson 1999:
212–15).

514
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Egyptian cult statues participated in religious festivals that required them
to leave their temples. They often visited one another, sometimes travelling
from one provincial town to another as Hathor of Dendera and Horus of Edfu
did each year to celebrate a ritual marriage. Other deities travelled from one
temple to another within a single district. At the New Kingdom Opet festival,
held during the inundation season, the cult statues of the Theban deity Amon,
his wife Mut, and their son Khonsu left their adjacent temples at Karnak to
visit the Luxor temple. There Amon and Mut conceived the god Khonsu and
by so doing strengthened the powers of the living king, with whom Khonsu was
closely identiﬁed. Beginning early in the Middle Kingdom, the statue of Amon
of Karnak crossed to the west bank of the Nile at harvest time to celebrate the
Beautiful Festival of the Valley. This involved visiting royal mortuary temples
as well as temples of Hathor and of Amon in the form of a primeval creator god
(Finnestad 1997; R. Wilkinson 2000: 95–98). In the Old and Middle Kingdoms,
priests carried cult statues in palanquins; in the New Kingdom the palanquins
were replaced by small portable boats.
Some celebrations, such as the Festival of the Opening of the Year, were
observed annually in every temple. In the Middle Kingdom the festival of
Pokar, which commemorated the death and revival of the god Osiris, attracted
pilgrims from all over Egypt to Abydos. Temples throughout Egypt held annual
festivals to which people came from considerable distances to honour local
deities. The most important of these festivals were subsidized by the king and
supervised by royal ofﬁcials acting in his name (Kees 1961: 241–43). The main
goal of all these festivals was to promote fertility and rebirth and to renew
gods, nature, and human beings (R. Wilkinson 2000: 96–97).
The Shang religious rituals that we know most about were those related to
the royal ancestor cult. These rites were performed privately in a restricted
palace setting. Among the public rituals was that of Ji (royal tillage). Each
February, at the beginning of the farming season, the king and certain high-
ranking ofﬁcials observed a ﬁve-day fast and then cultivated a sacred ﬁeld
and offered sacriﬁces for a good harvest to the god Shangdi. Food and drink
were served to the ofﬁcials and farmers who participated in this ritual. In the
autumn, the king offered the food grown on this ﬁeld as a thanksgiving sacriﬁce
for the harvest. This festival also recognized the farmers’ toil, which made the
production of food possible (Granet 1958 [1930]: 307; Hsu and Linduff 1988:
370; Keightley 1969: 111–23). Nobles may have performed similar planting
and harvest rites in honour of lesser deities at their regional and local centres.
The sacriﬁces that kings and nobles offered at earth altars in connection with
war and agriculture also appear to have been public rituals.

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
515
In all early civilizations state religious rituals such as enthronements, royal
funerals, and offerings to the gods had public as well as esoteric aspects. The es-
oteric elements stressed the special and restricted nature of the upper classes’
relations with the gods. The public rituals displayed the wealth, power, and
privileges of the upper classes, who controlled these events, but they required
the participation of ordinary people to align human activities with the cosmic
and divine orders. Public rituals strengthened the cosmos and drew energy
from it for the beneﬁt of humans. They re-enacted the creation of the universe
and reinforced the harmony between the annual cycles of human society and
those of the natural/supernatural world. The social order was justiﬁed by pro-
claiming it to be modelled on the natural world and the supernatural forces
that animated it.
There does not appear to have been any signiﬁcant distinction between the
ways in which religious festivals were controlled and organized in city-states
and in territorial states. The vast resources that rulers of individual territorial
states had at their disposal were lavished on religious rituals to varying degrees
and in different ways. City-states seem to have been characterized by even
more diversity. Early Egyptian rulers devoted more of their resources to con-
structing their burial complexes and maintaining their funerary cults than to
any other form of religious activity. Elaborate, state-managed public calendars
of festivals developed in both the Valley of Mexico and Inka Peru, while less
centralized forms of public ritual, focused on individual temples and cults,
played a more important role among the Yoruba, in Mesopotamia, and in
ancient Egypt.
In Mesopotamia, kings and temple ofﬁcials may have contested control of
religious rituals, while among the Yoruba individual initiative, combined with
even more decentralized political power, made public rituals a focus for po-
litical contestation and mediation. Egyptian kings organized ceremonies of
extraordinary magniﬁcence and national importance, but public ritual away
from the royal court and a few major centres appears to have been left largely
to local management. While the Inka imposed considerable uniformity on ma-
jor cults both in Cuzco and in provincial administrative centres, in Egypt the
central government did not try to control religious cults in provincial centres
to nearly the same extent, at least during the Old Kingdom. In China, respon-
sibility for ritual performance seems to have been linked to the segmentary
allocation of political power. The main role of public religious festivals in all
early civilizations was to establish ritual connections between ordinary people
and gods whose cults were controlled by the upper classes. By constraining the
lower classes to acknowledge this network of unequal relations through their

516
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
participation, these rituals emphasized the subordination of the lower classes
to the powerful and rich.
witchcraft and social control
In addition to the practice of religion in communal and family settings there
were relations between individuals and the supernatural, some of them socially
sanctioned and others entered into for harmful and illicit purposes. Many
turned on the assumption that the powers that could be used for good purposes
could also be used for bad ones.
In early civilizations people greatly feared spirits that sought to harm hu-
mans by causing illness, death, and misfortune to young and old alike. The
Mesopotamians believed that swarms of malicious spirits were unleashed upon
humanity by the deities who ruled the underworld. Neglected souls of the
dead also roamed the world seeking to feed or otherwise prey on relatives and
strangers (Bott´ero 1992: 282–85). The Aztec believed that the souls of women
who had died in childbirth returned to earth to murder children (L´opez Austin
1988, 1: 246). In Egypt, hosts of demons collectively representing the forces of
disorder threatened humans, especially during the night (Pinch 1994: 141–42).
Among the Inka malevolent spirits (sopay) appeared in various forms, such as
ﬂoating heads and long-breasted women (Rowe 1944: 297–98).
To try to control these dangerous spirits, people had recourse to prayers,
amulets, and spells. In Egypt, amulets manufactured in a wide range of mate-
rials were purchased and worn by rich and poor alike. Most Egyptian amulets
referred to and drew their power from episodes in the many myths that related
how the young god Horus was protected from danger by the magical skills of
his mother, Isis, and how he ﬁnally overcame his uncle Seth. Spells, which often
claimed to be ones that the Egyptian gods used to protect themselves, were
written on small pieces of papyrus, which were worn by individuals, dipped
into water which was then drunk, or recited over someone. Priests known as
h
• ry sˇst3 (knowers of secrets), sometimes wearing masks and equipped with
boxes of amulets and charms, deployed supernatural powers (h
• k3) to assist
in childbirth or the curing of disease (Davies and Friedman 1998: 171–76).
The Yoruba used charms and incantations to counteract witchcraft, protect
property, solicit good luck, shorten the distances they had to travel, avoid dan-
gers, and make their enemies obey them. When building a new house the
Yoruba propitiated malevolent local spirits in the hope that they would leave
the new residents alone and apologized to good spirits for having disturbed
them (Lucas 1948: 279–82; Awolalu 1979: 70, 160). The Inka regarded amulets
(ilya, ayaylya) as a form of waka (Rowe 1944: 296).

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
517
Andean peoples, as we have seen, feared supernatural punishment for per-
sonal misconduct. In Mesopotamia, people feared divine punishment if they
disobeyed a god’s wishes or violated his prohibitions, even inadvertently; in
retaliation gods might instruct the demons of illness and misfortune or dis-
satisﬁed souls of the dead to pursue and punish wrongdoers (Bott´ero 1992:
227–29, 283). By the second millennium b.c. there was a growing emphasis
on personal deities, both male and female, who could protect individuals from
such dangers by interceding for them with the high gods. Personal deities were
often passed down from father to son. Individuals petitioned these deities to
identify what wrongdoings they should repent, accept their atonement, supply
them with the good luck needed to succeed in life, and protect them from
demons. Unusually bad behaviour could cause a personal deity to desert the
person being protected (Jacobsen 1976: 150–60). In Egypt there was a gradu-
ally increasing tendency to appeal for help to major deities in times of personal
trouble. It was assumed that some deity had inﬂicted misfortune on a person in
retribution for misbehaviour and that winning the forgiveness and support of a
powerful deity constituted the best hope of redemption (Assmann 1995). The
Yoruba feared misfortune as a consequence of perjury, mistreating others, or
neglecting a god or ancestor. To punish such behaviour the gods might inﬂict
bad luck or even shorten a person’s life. Propitiatory sacriﬁces were necessary
to atone for misdeeds (Awolalu 1979: 156). Aztec, when threatened by per-
sonal misfortune, sought the protection of their calpolli’s tutelary deity (L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 252).
While conducive to moral behaviour, fear of divine punishment also en-
couraged a search for charms, incantations, and rituals that would prevent
individual misconduct from being noticed and punished by the gods. These
were the same means by which the assaults of malicious spirits might be
deﬂected. Individual humans sought to acquire supernatural power that
would protect them from the different forms of supernatural attack being
directed against them either as a result of malice or in the form of just
punishment.
In all early civilizations, people feared witchcraft. It was believed that, con-
sciously or unconsciously, some people sought to harm others by supernatural
means, either because of envy or in retaliation for some injury that a person
or group was believed to have perpetrated against them. Such people were
often well known to their victims, but they could also be complete strangers.
There were also sorcerers who were able and willing to help supernaturally
inexperienced people practise witchcraft against others. These sorcerers might
be clandestine practitioners wholly devoted to the use of supernatural pow-
ers for evil purposes or priests, shamans, diviners, or curers who, while they

518
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
publicly used their skills to protect and cure some people, secretly employed
their knowledge to harm others.
In small-scale societies fear of witchcraft, in combination with gossip and
ridicule, was a powerful force encouraging generosity and modesty. Individuals
who were more skilled, more hard-working, more enterprising, or simply luck-
ier than their neighbours were prepared to share their surplus produce with
them rather than risk illness, misfortune, and death for themselves and their
families as a result of their neighbours’ envy being supernaturally directed
against them. People who exercised leadership in these close-knit societies
likewise took care not to ﬂaunt their power in a way that would arouse envy or
annoy people (Lee 1990; Trigger 1990b).
In early civilizations the fear and practice of witchcraft must have continued
to function in this manner among ordinary people, while members of the
upper classes also practised witchcraft against each other, often with the help
of specialists. Yet the most urgent concern about witchcraft among the rich and
powerful in early civilizations was their dread that lower-class people might
use it to avenge insults, injustices, or mistreatment that they had suffered at
the hands of their superiors. It was especially feared that lower-class people
might resort to witchcraft to harm rulers in situations where overt resistance
was hopeless. Thus, among the upper classes, witchcraft became intimately
associated with concern that the people they controlled and exploited were
seeking to harm them.
To some degree such fears may have helped to curb the exploitative be-
haviour of the rich. Their main effect, however, was probably to make rulers
fear their subjects more than they would have done otherwise, and this en-
couraged a determined effort to uncover and punish witches and sorcerers
who might be seeking to harm them. The power of the upper classes to punish
witches turned the fear that authorities might accuse ordinary people of be-
ing witches into a powerful means for intimidating and controlling the lower
classes. Thus accusations of witchcraft, which in smaller-scale societies had
served to promote social and economic equality, became in early civilizations
a means by which the powerful could intimidate their subordinates.
The Inka state construed all crimes, regardless of the social status of the
victims, as acts of sorcery and treason. Every form of misconduct threatened
the well-being of the kingdom and the health of the king by angering the gods.
Rulers sought to regulate wrongdoers’ relations with the supernatural by mak-
ing the expiation of wrongdoing dependent on confession of the offence to
authorized priests or high-ranking chosen women (Kendall 1973: 194). They
also sought to control the clandestine manipulation of supernatural power by
experts. These included sorcerers (kawco), who killed people by means of

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
519
magical potions and images into which bits of hair, ﬁngernails, or teeth of the
intended victim had been inserted. It was believed that some priests, cur-
ers (hampikamayuq), and authorized diviners (omo) also secretly performed
criminal acts of sorcery. The activities of these clandestine manipulators of
supernatural power were greatly feared by ordinary people as well as by the
state. People carefully destroyed or kept their own hair and nail clippings
(Kendall 1973: 66, 76, 94; Rowe 1944: 302, 312, 314). Divination was employed
to expose clandestine sorcerers, and any person found to have murdered some-
one in this manner was slain along with the rest of his family (Rowe 1944: 314).
Kings must have dreaded that such intriguers would become involved in fac-
tional intrigues among the Inka nobility. At the same time, rulers employed
sorcery to enhance their own power. They had priests burn snakes, toads, and
jaguars to weaken the power of gods who supported rival rulers and then ex-
amined the hearts of sacriﬁced llamas to see if the ritual had been successful
(Kendall 1973: 100–101).
Yoruba of all classes feared witches (aje). Many witches were female, and
the power to be one tended to be inherited in the female line. Such power
could also be purchased from a practising witch and ingested in the form of
ritually treated food. The souls of witches were believed to enter the bodies of
animals at night, while their own bodies slept. In that form they travelled about
spreading disease and sucking blood and vitality from their victims. Witches
were assumed to be inherently evil. They killed close relatives, drained life-
forces from children, ruined their husbands’ businesses, and caused infertility.
Divination was frequently employed to determine whether a death was from
naturalcauses.Apublicformofbehaviourthatwascloselyrelatedtowitchcraft,
epe (formal cursing), involved the overt employment of supernatural power to
injure a rival or an enemy (Lucas 1948: 272–84; Awolalu 1979: 81–92).
There wereinYoruba societyboth people activelyseeking toinﬂictsupernat-
ural harm on those whom they envied or believed had injured or insulted them
and people who believed that they and their families were the victims of such
behaviour. The Gelede society, which worshipped Yemoya, goddess of rivers
and mother of witchcraft, as well as other deities associated with sorcery, sought
to control witchcraft by offering sacriﬁces to the souls of unidentiﬁed witches.
These sacriﬁces were intended to appease witches and deﬂect them from their
intended victims. Individuals who felt threatened by witchcraft attempted to
placate unknown witches by offering them animal sacriﬁces as substitutes for
their own lives. The Egungun society had as one of its missions to confront and
overcome witches, especially when their power was directed against hunters
and small children. Older members of the Egungun and Oro societies hunted
down and killed witches who persisted in threatening the well-being of society.

520
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Some Yoruba communities also performed special rituals that were intended
to drive witches from their midst (Bascom 1969: 93–95; Awolalu 1979: 154–58;
R. Thompson 1976: 14/1–15/2). Diviners were employed to determine who
might be secretly performing witchcraft. Those who were accused of witchcraft
were tried by ordeal and executed if found guilty. If they confessed, however,
they were usually released, since confession was believed to annihilate their
power to do evil (Lucas 1948: 277, 284; Awolalu 1979: 83).
In the Valley of Mexico, curers, midwives, and sorcerers were hired to per-
form various rituals to alter individual destinies and control the weather. These
specialists often worked in conjunction with local priests to help people, but
sometimes they used their knowledge to inﬂict harm on those they disliked
or the enemies of those who employed them. The Aztec especially feared
the activities of sorcerers, who had obtained the power to manipulate the su-
pernatural by having been born on a particular day or having been trained
by a practising sorcerer. Tlacatecolotl (owl men) cast spells on others which
caused them to get ill or die. Nahualli were able to project their souls into
animal forms (nagual), which roamed about while their human bodies slept.
Nahualli intent on harming people penetrated the bodies of their intended
victims and consumed the powers that animated them, causing sickness and
death. If, however, the nagual was killed, the resident soul could not return
to its human body, and this caused the nahualli to perish. Sorcerers also used
charms, especially the arm of a woman who had died while delivering her ﬁrst
child, to render themselves invisible and rob houses.
Aztec priests and curers attempted to discern the source of ailments that
had been caused by witchcraft by tossing twenty maize kernels onto a cloth
and interpreting the pattern they formed. They also counteracted sorcery with
various rituals. Efforts were made to search out and punish those practising
witchcraft and supernaturally aided robbery. In Texcoco such crimes were
tried by the religious rather than the legal council (Berdan 1982: 139–41;
Clendinnen 1991: 54–56; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 364–73; Offner 1983: 149;
M. E. Smith 1996: 261). The Aztec believed that individuals lived to an old
age by stealing life from other people, who as a consequence died young. As a
result, elderly people were credited with possessing great supernatural power,
and people treated them with deference in the hope they would steal life from
someone else. A normal life span was considered to be one calendar round of
ﬁfty-two years (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 257–58).
In Egypt, people had recourse to charms and spells to assist them to commit
criminal acts such as robberies and murders. In the New Kingdom a plot to
murder King Ramesses III involved smuggling into the palace wax images of
the king that would help to ensure the success of the conspiracy. Priests and
sorcerers who were willing to manufacture such equipment (Grimal 1992: 276)

Priests, Festivals, and the Politics of the Supernatural
521
must have been regarded as a considerable threat by the king and the upper
classes. At the same time, the widespread manipulation of the supernatural
not only to keep the cosmos running but to cure illness and help the souls of
the dead escape punishment for their crimes in life must have made it difﬁcult
to determine who was using the same powers to harm other people. Moreover,
the Egyptian state used magic to weaken and subdue its enemies. The Middle
Kingdom ‘execration texts’ employed supernatural techniques to control the
foreign enemies of the Egyptian king (Posener 1940).
ritual and hierarchy
A vast amount of wealth was expended in early civilizations on temples, sacri-
ﬁces, religious festivals, and priests. Remains associated with religious beliefs
and activities loom large in the archaeological and textual records of early civi-
lizations. Yet early civilizations were not theocracies. Priests did not constitute
a social order in any of the early civilizations we are studying; they were drawn
from and remained members of various social classes. In ancient Egypt and
amongtheYorubathepriesthoodwasonlyapart-timeoccupation,andinChina
and among the Maya priests as a group may not have been distinguished from
administratorsandsupportstaff.Themostimportantpriestswerehigh-ranking
ofﬁcials and the king was ultimately responsible for his society’s relations with
the supernatural. Local or family cults might express a group’s political aspira-
tions to manage their own affairs, but they could not directly challenge royal
authority. Because political and religious roles were not clearly distinguished,
there was no opportunity for serious political competition between priests and
secular rulers.
Much of the routine worship of the gods was conducted in enclosed areas
without public participation, but at various times of the year religious festivals
required the participation or at least the presence of large numbers of peo-
ple. These public rituals reinforced the collective identity of society but also
reafﬁrmed the hierarchical organization of early civilizations by stressing the
key role that the upper classes played in representing society as a whole in
its relations with the supernatural. Finally, fear of witchcraft, now focused on
the concerns of the upper classes about malevolent forces that the weaker and
less afﬂuent members of society might direct against them, was transformed
from what it had been in smaller-scale societies – a way to frighten the more
prosperous members of society into being more generous – into yet another
means for the upper classes to intimidate and repress the lower classes. Yet
witchcraft also provided the lower classes with a way of resisting the demands
of the upper classes that was covert and considered effective.

23 The Individual and the Universe
I
f views about humans’ relations to the cosmos – about the creation of
human beings, the purpose of human existence, and the fate of individ-
uals after death – reﬂected the roles that different classes played in society,
one might expect the self-image of lower-class people to have been humbler
and more pessimistic where the upper classes advanced the most extravagant
claims concerning their own superiority. Such assertions tended to be made in
territorial states and in city-state systems where nobles were distinguished as
a hereditary group from commoners. Combining these two criteria, one might
expect the lower classes to have had the most positive self-image among the
Yoruba and Mesopotamians (city-states with no formally deﬁned hereditary
nobility) and progressively humbler ones among the Aztec and Maya (city-
states with hereditary nobles), in Egypt (a territorial state that deemphasized
its hereditary nobles), and in Shang China and the Inka kingdom (territorial
states with strong hereditary nobilities).
The ethnographic literature on the Yoruba provides no detailed account of
the creation of the ﬁrst human beings. Oduduwa, the god most often credited
with creating the earth, was also the ancestor of the ﬁrst Yoruba kings. The god
Orisala was charged by the high god Olorun with the ongoing task of creating
individual humans – shaping their bodies (ara) from semen and menstrual
blood in their mothers’ wombs. If Orisala were angry, he might produce defor-
mities in fetuses. Olorun then gave each infant life (Bascom 1969: 10; Awolalu
1979: 12; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 97, 218).
The Yoruba believed that the human body was animated by multiple souls
or life-forces. One of these was the emi (breath), which Olorun breathed into
each individual. The emi was associated with the lungs and chest and was
believed to be the force that allowed people to live, move about, and work.
It required food in order to continue functioning. The emi was able to leave
the body when a person was asleep and travel about, its experiences taking
522

The Individual and the Universe
523
the form of dreams. If a wandering soul was captured and prevented from
returning to its body, the deprived body would die after four days (Bascom
1969: 74; cf. Lucas 1948: 247–48).
Equally important among the Yoruba was a soul called the ori (head), which
supplied an individual’s intellect, personality, destiny, luck, and supernatural
protection. Often called the ancestral guardian soul, it was sometimes de-
scribed as made up of a person’s mind (iye) and inner self (ori inu), as distin-
guished from the personality that an individual revealed in public (ori ode).
It was given by Olorun to someone about to be reborn. The ori was regarded
as a minor orisa, living inside a person’s head. Its well-being depended on its
being fed regularly with sacriﬁces. Individual emi and ori were associated with
particular descent groups, and lineage members fed their heads on the same
day. In Benin, warriors and other prominent men also sought to strengthen
the supernatural power in their right arms, sacriﬁcing to them both before
and after special undertakings. In addition, the Yoruba accorded supernatural
status to their shadows (ojiji), although shadows performed no special func-
tion, received no sacriﬁces, and remained closely linked to the body. (Apter
1992: 199; Awolalu 1979: 9, 12, 53–54; Bascom 1969: 71–74; Bradbury 1957:
58; Lucas 1948: 246–47).
At the time of a person’s death, both souls left the body. If the person had
died prematurely, they might continue living in a ghostly form in some other
community until their allotted life span was used up. Sooner or later, however,
all souls travelled to the spirit world, which was generally believed to be located
in the sky (Bascom 1969: 75).
The dead were buried in the ground. Men who lived in towns were interred
beneath the rooms or courtyards of their residential compounds. Country
dwellers were brought for burial to their patrilineages’ urban compounds,
while women were interred within their fathers’ residences. People without
descendants were buried simply, while those who had children were interred
with elaborate rites and venerated as long as their children lived. Lepers,
albinos, hunchbacks, pregnant women, and people killed by lightning were
buried in the sacred groves of various deities by priests who ensured that these
individuals were reconciled after death with the deity who was responsible for
their misfortune (Bascom 1969: 65–66). Various prohibitions were observed;
burying red cloth with the deceased, for example, might cause the person to
be reborn a leper.
Elaborate burial rites ensured that the souls of the dead reached the su-
pernatural world and did not become wandering ghosts. Animal sacriﬁces, the
blood of which was sprinkled on the corpse, strengthened the souls of the dead
and ensured that they were well disposed towards the living (Bascom 1969:

524
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
65–68). After the burial, offerings continued to be made to the body in the
form of blood and other libations, which were poured down a hole into the
grave. The bodies of the dead were also believed to share in the ﬁrst-fruits
offerings that were made to the earth god (Ojo 1966a: 168). The body appar-
ently ceased to have a personal existence after death (Lucas 1948: 246) but
was identiﬁed with the life-giving powers of the earth.
The Yoruba believed that after death both the emi and the ori went before
Olorun, who punished the souls of evil people, sometimes by forbidding them
to be reborn. After death, the emi could visit relatives in dreams (Bascom 1969:
75), while the ori became an ere spirit, supernaturally supporting its lineage
in the sky world by acting as an intermediary on its behalf with Olorun and
the other gods (Awolalu 1979: 60; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 25). These
ancestral souls were feared as a possible source of supernatural punishment for
misbehaviour. The ori was called back by the dead person’s living descendants
to their family shrine to receive offerings of animals and kola nuts in a ritual
performed on the same days that its owner had sacriﬁced to his head while
alive (Bascom 1969: 72). Senior Egungun-society priests caused ori to enter the
bodies of cult members during festivals in order to bless their descendants, and
the ori spoke through the individuals whose bodies they possessed (K. Barber
1991: 253).
The chief aim of an ancestral soul living in the sky was to be reborn, prefer-
ably back into its patrilineal extended family as a grandchild of its previous
incarnation. It could be reborn as the same or the opposite sex in successive
lifetimes. When the time to be reborn had arrived, the ori appeared before
Olorun to receive its body (ara), breath (emi), and destiny (iwa). It could bar-
gain with Olorun concerning the day of its next incarnation’s death and the
speciﬁc personality, occupation, and luck this incarnation would have. Actions
during a person’s subsequent lifetime could alter most of these arrangements,
either for better or for worse, to some extent, but they could not change the
day of death. Therefore much of an individual’s fortune depended on the de-
mands that his or her ori made at this time. These concepts reﬂected the great
importance that the Yoruba placed on bargaining and individual self-reliance
in everyday life. The former identity of the ori of a newborn child was revealed
to his or her kinsmen by the child’s physical appearance and behaviour or
through dreams and divination (Bascom 1969: 71–72).
Problems were posed by the belief that ancestral guardian souls were re-
born but remained in the sky world acting as intercessors for their families.
Sometimes it was claimed that there were two guardian souls, one of which
stayed in the sky while the other was continually reborn. If the sky-dwelling
version, or ere, were an essence from which individual ori were derived, that

The Individual and the Universe
525
would explain the Yoruba belief that a number of living people might share the
same soul. Although the ori conserved the basic personality and behavioural
traits of a dead person, it is unknown whether it retained personal memories
of previous incarnations. Such memories were more likely associated with the
ancestral guardian spirits that continued to live in the sky world than with ones
that returned to earth. In Benin it was maintained that there were two versions
of each soul, which alternated generationally with each other in living in the
sky and on earth (Awolalu 1979: 58–61; Bascom 1969: 71–76; Bradbury 1957:
56–58).
Mesopotamian myths concerning the creation of human beings were associ-
ated with different city-states and ethnic groups. Sumerian texts recount that,
at the request of the other gods, after Enlil had separated the earth and the
sky he used his hoe to break the hard crust of the earth in Uzu´e (The Flesh
Grower), a garden located within the temple of Inanna in Nippur, where the
ﬁrst humans sprang up like grass. In another Sumerian myth the god Enki
created humans from the ‘engendering clay’ of the watery underworld. These
creations were brought to term by Enki’s mother Nammu. In an Akkadian
version of this myth, when the gods decided to create humans Enki advised
that a rebellious minor god named We´e be slain and that the birth goddess
Nintur mix that god’s ﬂesh and blood with clay to create humans. Fourteen
womb goddesses then gestated this mixture and gave birth to seven human
couples. In the Enuma Elish, Enki alone fashioned humans, using the blood
of the slain rebel deity Kingu (Jacobsen 1970: 112–14, 116, 207; 1974: 1004;
1976: 118; Kramer 1963: 123).
In some of these creation myths, human beings were conceived as clay
infused with an element of divinity, often the soul (etemmu) of a slain god.
Originally less important deities, under Enlil’s supervision, had performed the
physical labour required to shape the terrestrial world and feed, clothe, and
house the gods. When they refused to continue working, Enki created or super-
vised the creation of human beings to do this work instead. The earth goddess
Ninhursaga taught humans the arts that transformed them from simple pas-
toralists into city dwellers, and the institution of kingship was introduced to
Mesopotamia from the sky world. Eventually, there were so many humans
that they disturbed Enlil’s sleep. With the agreement of the other gods, he
sent them plagues, drought, crop failures, and ﬁnally a great ﬂood that de-
stroyed all but one family and then, to keep population growth in check, he
shortened their lives, afﬂicted them with barrenness and child death, and intro-
duced virgin priestesses and homosexual behaviour amongst them (Jacobsen
1976: 113–21). The Mesopotamians valued competitiveness, and individuals
boasted of their efforts to outdo rivals and to gain fame, wealth, and positions

526
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of leadership (Kramer 1981: 11). Yet they dreaded the ability of supernatural
powers to harm them and sought the support of personal guardian spirits to
avoid illness and misfortune. Individual well-being depended on having sup-
portive supernatural powers present inside one’s body. These were called ilu
(god), if male, and lamassu (angel), if female, and they promoted good luck
(ilanu), vitality and sexual potency (ˇsedu), and a favourable destiny (ˇsimtu).
Without them an individual would quickly fall prey to disease and misfortune
(Oppenheim 1964: 199–201).
After death, it was believed, the corpse (ˇsalamtu) dissolved back into clay.
The bones (esemtu) remained forever asleep but were often taken along when
families moved from one place to another, and the soul (etemmu) survived
as a phantom, ghost, or shadow. If, by mischance, a body remained unburied
and no proper funeral rites were performed, its soul wandered the earth as a
malevolent spirit. Most souls descended into the underworld (eretsu) by way
of the grave or various openings (ablal) and then had to cross a dangerous river.
Once there, they lived a cheerless existence in a dark, arid, dusty realm. This
was the home of the gods of death, under the command of Erishkegal and her
husband Nergal, and of the demons of disease and misfortune. The sun passed
through the underworld each night, brieﬂy lighting portions of it; the moon
remained for one day each month. Because nothing could be grown there,
the souls of the dead were deemed useless to the gods except for assisting the
deities of the underworld to harass the living. Escape was impossible, although
on rare occasions the soul of a dead person or god might be released in return
for the soul of a living one.
Offerings were made to the souls of dead family members at each new moon.
These souls were petitioned to intercede for the welfare of their descendants
before the council of the Annunaki, the gods who decided the fate of humans.
Yet they could not grow their own food or produce their own clothing in the
underworld, nor were these necessities provided for them by the deities of
that realm. They depended on food offerings from their living descendants if
they were not to starve.
The dead were socially ranked in the underworld as they had been in life.
Kings lived in gloomy palaces built of lapis lazuli. They received larger food
offerings than commoners, and in Early Dynastic times some were accom-
panied by the souls of slain household servants. They took riches with them
into the underworld so that they might bribe the gods of death into treating
them better. Even so, their lives were wretched. Conditions were worse for the
souls of ordinary people, especially those who were no longer supplied with
offerings by their descendants. The sole exceptions to this fate were Utnapish-
tim and his family, who had survived the great ﬂood. The gods had permitted

The Individual and the Universe
527
them to live without aging in a pleasant but inaccessible enclave on the edge
of the world.
Mesopotamians believed that the dead maintained their personal identities,
at least as long as their souls were fed. The gods of the underworld were said
to ‘judge’ the souls of the dead, but that seems to have involved conﬁrming
their rank rather than rendering a moral evaluation; there was no reward
or punishment for what they had done while alive. While the deities of the
underworld were supposed to have prayed for the welfare of the souls of the
dead, these souls endured an etiolated, marginal existence in a realm that
was physically little different from the grave. Many, willingly or unwillingly,
helped to harass and injure the living. Living people attributed some of their
misfortunes to the souls of the dead, especially ones whose bodies had been
left unburied or who did not receive offerings. Such souls might attack (literally
‘eat’) strangers or their own kin. Yet appropriate exorcisms could return the
most malevolent souls to the underworld (Bott´ero 1992: 230, 271–85, 288;
Kramer 1963: 130–35; Postgate 1992: 92).
A favourite myth of the Aztec and their neighbours described how human
beings had been created when the cosmic order was restored at the beginning
of the era of the Fifth Sun. The god Quetzalcoatl had descended into the
underworld (Mictlan) and, having failed to persuade the god who ruled it to
part with some bones of the dead from earlier creations, he stole some from
Mictlan’s lowest depths. Quetzalcoatl accidentally dropped these bones on
his way out, and, as a result of his losing some, the humans of the Fifth Sun
were smaller than the intelligent creatures of previous creations. Quetzalcoatl
brought the bones to Temoanchan, the place of creation at the centre of the
cosmos. There the earth mother Cihuacoatl (Snake Woman) ground the bones
into a powder or meal, which the male gods moistened with blood drawn from
their genitals. From this mixture men and, four days later, women came into
being (Clendinnen 1991: 173; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 107–11; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 188; M. E. Smith 1996: 206–7).
According to another version of this myth, at the time of the creation of the
Fifth Sun sixteen hundred gods descended from the sky world to Teotihuacan
in the form of a ﬂint nodule, which shattered into that many pieces when it
hit the ground. The mission of these gods was to help animate the new sun,
create humans, and become the patron deities of ethnic groups and calpollis.
These gods were instructed to retrieve the bones and ashes of the people of
former ages from Mictlan. The chief creator of humans was either the god
Quetzalcoatl or all four of the primary emanations of Ometeotl. These deities
mixed their blood with these bones and ashes to create human beings. The
ﬁrst humans lived in caves or wombs in the earth, from which they emerged

528
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
to serve their patron deities. A less elaborate myth suggested that the sun had
shot an arrow into the ground and a man and woman with no bodies below the
waist had emerged from the place where the arrow struck; by kissing they had
given birth to the ﬁrst humans (Le´on-Portilla 1963: 107; L´opez Austin 1988,
1: 240–43).
A more erudite myth claimed that the supreme deity, Ometeotl, had created
the ﬁrst humans. The calendar was born with them and a gender-based division
of labour, men being ordered to work the soil and women to spin. This original
couple appears, however, to have existed prior to the creation of the sky, earth,
and underworld and to have been the ancestors of the gods as well as of
humans. It is therefore uncertain whether they were humans or gods. It is also
unclear whether a few humans were believed to have survived each of the four
successive destructions of the cosmic order or different human-like creatures
had to be created at the beginning of each cosmic era. Some versions claimed
that the human-like creations of one era survived as animals in succeeding
ones (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 238–40).
Hereditary nobles claimed that they, unlike commoners, were descended
from the god Quetzalcoatl. Yet, while this descent distinguished nobles from
commoners, it may not have indicated that nobles and commoners had been
created differently. The nobility claimed as its ancestor Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin,
the ruler of the ancient city of Tollan. Following rebellions, he had abandoned
hiskingdomandmadehiswayeasttotheGulfofMexico,whereheroseintothe
sky to become the Morning Star. It was ambiguous in Aztec mythology whether
Quetzalcoatl Topiltzin was the parthenogenic incarnation of the cosmic deity
Quetzalcoatl or an entirely human ruler who was empowered by that god
(Gillespie 1989: 123–72).
The people of the Valley of Mexico believed that each child was created by
or at the command of Ometeotl, who recycled the life-forces that descended
with the dead into the lowest point of the underworld and were drawn from
there back to the highest level of the cosmos, where the creator deity lived. In
the womb the fetus was nourished by energy that came from Ometeotl rather
than from the sun (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 208–10).
The Aztec and their neighbours believed in a complex set of souls or life-
forces. The human body became ﬁlled with these supernatural powers at con-
ception, birth, and ﬁrst exposure to ﬁre and sunlight. Tonalli, which was re-
ceived from Ometeotl at conception, was associated with the head, body heat,
and blood. It was an impersonal animating power and the source of individual
qualities such as strength, vigour, growth, temperament, appetites, rationality,
and destiny. Loss of tonalli resulted in illness and disability. Tonalli could leave
the sleeping body in dreams or be dissipated as a result of drunkenness, drug

The Individual and the Universe
529
use, and too much sexual activity. It could also be stolen by means of witchcraft
or by evil spirits or old people who were anxious to appropriate other people’s
strength to prolong their own lives. Tonalli was the life-force offered to deities
in human sacriﬁces. Hair, because it grew, was believed to inhibit tonalli from
leaving the body; hence the forcible cutting of hair not only constituted a severe
public humiliation but also threatened a loss of vitality. Teyolia, associated with
the heart, was the source of memory and personality and was closely related
to personal identity. The teyolias of nobles and outstanding commoners were
strengthened by gifts of divine force from speciﬁc deities, which returned to
these deities after a person died. Ihiyotl, associated with the liver and with
breath, was the source of strong emotions such as bravery, love, hatred, desire,
and exhilaration. A person or animal who could separate his ihiyotl from him-
self or draw another’s ihiyotl inside his body was a nahualli and could use this
power to harm others surreptitiously. People sought to maintain a harmonious
balance among these three soul forces in order to ensure their personal health
and well-being. They were not, however, able to prevent the disaggregation of
these forces after death (D. Carrasco 1990: 53, 68–70; Clendinnen 1991: 315;
J. Furst 1995; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 213–36, 318–19, 329–31).
The Aztec believed that human life was characterized by hard work, hunger,
illness, worry, pain, and sorrow. Individuals were expected to curb their selﬁsh
tendencies and try to exercise stoical self-control, limit their appetites, and
work hard to support their families and serve their communities. They ex-
pected little in return. Humans always had to be ready to sacriﬁce their lives
to maintain a cosmic order that was ultimately beyond human control. The
gods compensated humans for their toil and suffering with routine pleasures
such as sleep, laughter, families, and sex, although the latter had to be indulged
in with appropriate moderation (Clendinnen 1991: 70–72, 238; Le´on-Portilla
1992: 190; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 189, 249–51, 342–43).
Each individual received a destiny that was determined by the day on which
he or she was born. Some days, especially the ﬁve supernumerary days at the
end of the solar year, were less lucky than others. An unfavourable birth day
could be partially offset by selecting a favourable day for naming a newborn
child. It was also believed that human effort could alter an individual’s fate.
Eachchildwassaidtobebornwithoutaface(ixtli),andoneofeveryindividual’s
chief goals in life was to create a face. Through courage and self-discipline one
could gradually acquire a good reputation, and by surrendering to frivolous
inclinations and dissipation one could very quickly lose it. Just as people sought
to promote equilibrium among their inner forces, so they sought equitable
relations with the gods, their communities, and their families. An imbalance
could be corrected to some degree by a confession, usually made once in a

530
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
lifetime by a man to a priest of the deity Tlazolteotli (Eater of Filth) or by a
woman to a midwife (Clendinnen 1991: 141; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 104, 115–19;
L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 267–69).
After death the animating forces left the body and went their own ways. The
tonalli or life-force returned to Ometeotl, perhaps later to be infused into a
child born to the family of the deceased. The unaugmented teyolia or sentient
soul, which preserved the personality of the dead person, experienced a variety
of fates determined not by a person’s social status or behaviour in life but by
the nature of his or her death. Only the souls of infants, who had never had
any direct contact with the dirt and ﬁlth of the earth, returned directly to the
sky world, from where, after a period spent nursing on a breast tree, Ometeotl
sent them back to earth to be reborn.
Beginning four days after their bodies had been cremated and their ashes
buried under the ﬂoors of their houses, the teyolias of people who had died
ordinary deaths journeyed to the underworld. Teyolias of kings and some high-
ranking nobles were accompanied by those of slain household slaves, while
commoners’ dogs were often killed so that their teyolias could accompany
those of their masters. The teyolia spent four years making its way ever deeper
into a cold, dark, barren, and dangerous underworld. If it did not perish from
hardship or the terrible dangers encountered on its journey, it passed into
oblivion after it had reached the ninth and lowest level. Offerings were made
to the souls of the dead every eighty days for four years to help them during
their passage through the underworld. After that, their identities were pre-
sumed to be extinguished. The power that constituted teyolias survived in some
shadowy, vestigial form until it was anonymously recycled back into the living
universe by Ometeotl (Caso 1958: 62–64; Coe 1978: 21; Le´on-Portilla 1963:
90, 109).
In contrast, the teyolias of warriors who had died in battle or been killed as
human sacriﬁces travelled to the east, where after eighty days they joined the
sun. Each morning for four years these souls accompanied the sun from the
eastern horizon to the zenith. After four years they were turned into humming-
birds or butterﬂies and lived a carefree and memoryless existence for as long
as the Fifth Sun lasted. Women who had died in their ﬁrst childbirth travelled
westward and each afternoon for four years carried the weakening sun in a lit-
ter from the zenith to the western horizon. Then they became evil spirits who
haunted the earth on the ﬁve supernumerary days of each solar year, seeking
to kill children by means of paralysis or convulsions. People who died as a
result of drowning, being struck by lightning, diseases that caused the body to
swell, or being sacriﬁced to Tlaloc and other fertility deities were transformed
into spirits who lived in paradises located inside hills. Some believed that these

The Individual and the Universe
531
souls were reborn on earth after four years but without any memory of the
past.
For the people in the Valley of Mexico, a human being made sense only
in this world. After death, the elements that made up an individual had only
a short and uncertain existence separate from one another before they were
reabsorbed by the gods and recycled to form new human beings or were
transformed into birds, butterﬂies, spirits, or demons, none of which recalled
their human identity. There was no belief in punishment or reward after death
for what an individual had done while alive (Caso 1958: 58–62; Clendinnen
1991: 178–79; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 124–26; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 253, 332–41).
No Classic Maya account of the origin of human beings has survived, but
myths recorded in the sixteenth century claimed that two ancestral gods had
created human beings after they had fashioned the world. The ﬁrst imperfect
creations were formed from mud, the next from wood, and the third from
ﬂesh. Finally present-day humans were made from maize ﬂour mixed with the
gods’ own blood (Coe 1993: 29; Schele and Miller 1986: 144). Ruling families
claimed descent from major deities, usually identiﬁed with ‘God K’ (Houston
and Stuart 1996: 297; Tate 1992: 20; Taube 1992: 69–79).
The Maya believed that every human shared souls with one or more animal
or spirit companions (wayob). (The word way was etymologically connected
with ‘sleep’.) Royal spirit companions were represented as fantastic beasts or
combinations of beasts. The White Bone House Centipede was associated with
the ruler of Palenque, while the Sun-bellied Jaguar was one of the wayob asso-
ciated with the kings of Calakmul (Houston 2001; Martin and Grube 2000: 81).
Through dancing, massive blood-letting, drug-induced trances, and dreams,
people sought, individually and collectively, to transform themselves into their
spirit companions as a way of accessing the supernatural (Schele and Mathews
1998: 83–84, 417).
The souls of the dead descended into the underworld (xibalba) through
caves, down the trunk of the cosmic tree (wakah kan), or by falling through the
open jaws of the earth monster. All these openings were designated ol (door
or hole). The souls of the dead, especially those of powerful rulers, could
hope to escape from the underworld by challenging, outwitting, and ﬁnally
killing its rulers, the Lords of Death. Then, by identifying themselves with
gods associated with the sun and the planet Venus, they could rise temporarily
out of the underworld into the daytime sky. The life-forces of dead rulers
could likewise ascend from their tombs and be reborn as future monarchs of
their dynastic lines. Divinized souls of kings were brieﬂy called back into the
world by their descendants’ vision quests. Ordinary souls appear to have been
trapped and doomed to oblivion in the underworld (D. Carrasco 1990: 52;

532
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 76–78; A. Miller 1989: 183–86; Schele and
Mathews 1998: 414; Schele and Miller 1986: 244–45).
The ancient Chinese appear to have believed that each person had at least
two souls: the po, which supplied the vital life-forces of a living person, and
the hun, which provided the intellect, emotions, and consciousness. The po,
sometimes referred to as the lower soul, was believed to come from the un-
derworld and the hun or upper soul from the sky realm. A child was born
with only a po and acquired its hun when it ﬁrst cried or laughed. Because the
souls of peasants were fed mainly on grain, they were believed to be weaker
than those of upper-class persons, who frequently ate meat and other more
nourishing foods (Granet 1958 [1930]: 256, 323–24; Lewis 1990: 77). When
people died, their po souls, like their bodies, descended into the earth. The
po travelled from the grave down to the Yellow Springs (huang quan), where
it remained as a ghost (gui) at least until its life-force was recycled. The hun
ascended into the sky, where it lived as a shining spirit (shen ming) that was
able to communicate with its living descendants and intercede for them with
the sky deities that controlled the natural world.
Dying lords sought to eat rich food and drink wine to nourish their hun souls
and increase their power to survive. The hun souls of dead members of the
nobility regularly received offerings of sacred harvests, domestic animals, and
game killed in their honour and could punish living descendants who failed
to provide them with satisfactory nourishment. Over time, the individuality
of dead ancestors faded from memory, as a result of which their hun came to
resemble nature spirits more. As this occurred, their name tablets in temples
were removed from view and put into a box with those of more remote ances-
tors. Berthold Laufer (1913) surmised that these tablets were a replacement
for earlier ancestral images. Peasant souls, being weaker, seem not to have
endured long after death and soon ceased to be useful intermediaries for their
descendants. Commoner lineages did not have special temples where the souls
of their ancestors were worshipped, but at speciﬁed times each year ordinary
families seem to have made offerings to their ancestors at altars located within
their homes (Granet 1958 [1930]: 256–57, 323–24; Lewis 1990: 87).
It has been suggested that the po, unlike the hun, originally received no
cult (Allan 1991: 66). In later times the po was believed to live near the body
in its tomb while the hun could be contacted at its lineage’s ancestral shrine
and communicated with by means of divination. Sacriﬁces, including human
beings and animals, were offered year after year around Shang royal tombs.
These rituals appear to have been focused on small mortuary structures atop
low stamped-earth platforms. Thus it appears that in the Shang period the
po souls or ghosts of royal ancestors were revered at individual graves, while

The Individual and the Universe
533
their hun souls were venerated collectively at ancestral temples inside palace
complexes (Wu 1988).
Prominent among the Andean accounts of human origins was the Inka claim
that, after Wiraqucha had created the sun at Lake Titicaca, he modelled ani-
mals and people from clay at the nearby site of the ancient city of Tiwanaku.
He distinguished ethnic groups by painting different clothes and hairstyles on
these ﬁgures, assigned them their distinctive languages, songs, and customs,
and endowed them with the materials and skills they needed to survive. In an
alternative creation myth, the sun and moon gave birth to Camac Pacha (Lord
Earth) and Mama Cocha (Lady Ocean), from whom in turn men and women
were descended (Classen 1993: 19–25; Rowe 1960). Wiraqucha commanded
the humans he had created to descend into the earth and travel through
underground passages to designated dawning places (pakarina), which were
distributed throughout the world. The ancestors of each ayllu emerged from
a speciﬁc pakarina. Some pakarinas were caves, others were mountains, tree
roots, or other natural features that facilitated movement back and forth be-
tween the surface of the earth and the underworld. The founders of each ayllu
claimed ownership of the land and water surrounding their pakarina for them-
selves and their descendants. At the same time, domestic plants emerged from
cave pakarinas and domestic animals from lake ones. Before disappearing into
the Paciﬁc, Wiraqucha visited every human community, teaching people how
they should live.
At every pakarina, one or more of the new arrivals was turned into a waka,
often in the form of a rock. Each waka embodied the life-force that would sus-
tain and be revered by a speciﬁc ayllu. From the ﬁrst arrivals future gener-
ations of human beings were born as the life-force, which had been created
by Wiraqucha and taken up permanent residence in the waka, combined with
local water sources to create living descendants. The most powerful beings
that Wiraqucha sent to inhabit the earth were four pairs of brothers and sis-
ters, who were children of the sun god, Inti. They emerged from a cave at
Paqariktambo, near Cuzco, at the dawn of the ﬁrst day to become the ances-
tors of the Inka royal family (Gose 1993; Kendall 1973: 182–83; Rowe 1944:
315–16; 1960; Sherbondy 1992: 63: Urton 1990).
The Andeans believed that life was created as a result of the combination of
dry,enduringsubstancessuchasearthandrockandmovingwater.Eachhuman
being was believed to have two kinds of souls, one associated with each of
these elements. The personal soul (kamaquen) was derived from the enduring
power to fashion and vitalize that was possessed in perpetuity by the founding
ancestor of an ayllu, who had been transformed into a waka or preserved as
a mummiﬁed (dried) body (mallqui). The power which vitalized such a waka

534
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
provided its descendants with food, clothing, agricultural fertility, reproductive
capacity, health, and oracular advice. Living in the heart (sonqo) of each of its
descendants, this eternal power shaped every individual’s bodily form and
character. The upani, an impersonal life-force, was associated with water. Its
main role was to transform the enduring essence of the kamaquen into a living
being. The upani was regarded as deaf and mute, a force that animated the
individual but did not otherwise shape the personality (Gose 1993; Salomon
1991: 14–16). Death resulted from the separation of the kamaquen and upani
souls. The physical manifestation of this separation was desiccation, which
occurred as water was withdrawn from the body. When a person died, his
or her heart and the personal kamaquen associated with it rejoined the waka
from which they were derived. For this reason, local wakas were used as burial
sites. The upani soul, attracted to water, drifted away and rejoined the nearest
lake, river, or spring, increasing its volume and helping to return water to its
ultimate source in the ocean.
The survival of an ayllu was made possible by an ongoing cycle of kamaquen
souls emanating from their waka to become human beings and then return-
ing to their source when people died. Mummiﬁcation, which involved drying
corpses while preserving their form, was an essential manifestation of this
process. While water drained away, the personal kamaquen soul endured as
long as the mummiﬁed body it was associated with lasted. That mummies of
commoners were preserved, fed, reclothed, and consulted as oracles indicates
that, while individual humans were manifestations of the generic kamaquen
dwelling within their ancestral waka, their individual souls survived after death
(Gose 1993; 1995; Salomon 1991: 19–20).
Dead ancestors issued oracles and punished their living descendants with
crop failures, disease, and death for improper conduct or neglect. Groups
that relocated took the bodies of their ancestors and all or portions of their
wakas with them and continued to venerate them in their new homes. Mum-
miﬁed bodies of dead kings became wakas of great importance, living kings
having been shaped by and embodying the power of the sun. Their per-
sonal kamaquens survived in association with their mummies and cult statues
and spoke through their oracle priests. Their kamaquens also rejoined the
kamaquen of the sun, and their hearts were placed in an image of the sun god
kept in the main temple in Cuzco. Dead kings continued to live in their palaces
and country houses but they were also said to have rejoined or become the
sun (Gose 1993; MacCormack 1991: 91–98, 424–32).
The Egyptians’ solar creator god was said to have formed human beings
(rmt) from his tears (rmyt), as a result of which humans lacked the clear vision
of the gods. Egyptian deities, according to some accounts, were formed from

The Individual and the Universe
535
the creator’s sweat or the blood that he lost while circumcising himself. Some
rebellious deities were believed to have been transformed into humans as well
as into animals destined for sacriﬁce (Faulkner 1985: 45; Hornung 1982: 149–
50; Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 33; Morenz 1973: 183). The potter god
Khnum was portrayed as fashioning the body of each child from clay on his
potter’s wheel. Female deities known as the Seven Hathors assigned individ-
uals their destiny (ˇs3w) when they were born. Their pronouncements greatly
inﬂuenced a person’s quality of life, life-span, and cause of death. However,
the gods could adjust individual destinies for better or worse throughout a
person’s lifetime. Responsibility for altering an individual’s fate may have been
assigned to a guardian deity (Baines 1991a: 140–41; Morenz 1973: 70–73).
The Egyptians believed that at least six elements were necessary for a human
being to exist. The body (ht, h
• ) or physical shell within which every person
existed was animated by its heart (ıb), the source of reason, memory, character,
emotions, desire, and pleasure. The name (rn) and the shadow (ˇswt) were
components of personhood, along with multiple souls, most notably the k3
and b3.
The k3, associated symbolically with the placenta and etymologically with
the concept of food or provisioning (k3w) and fertility (k3, bull; k3t, vulva)
(L. Bell 1997: 282 n. 2), was moulded by the god Khnum at the same time as
he fashioned the mortal body. It was portrayed in Egyptian art as a duplicate
of the living person. Described as related to physical nourishment, vitality,
and emotions, the k3 appears to have been the creative power passed from
parents to children within a family line. Each new k3, created for a speciﬁc
individual and apparently capable of enduring as long as the cosmos, seems to
have been a speciﬁc manifestation of a supernatural life-force transferred from
one generation to the next since the time of creation. Kings and gods possessed
multiple k3s while ordinary humans had only one and unlike ordinary humans
were able to communicate with them. Periodic unions of rulers and their k3s
in special ritual contexts rejuvenated and re-empowered monarchs. The b3
has been described as a supernatural force that provided perception, speciﬁc
appetites, and the power to inﬂuence other sentient beings. It could leave the
bodyandtravelindreamsabouttheearthaswellasvisittheskyandunderworld
and has therefore been described as a travelling soul (J. Allen 2000: 79–81;
Baines 1991a: 145; L. Bell 1997: 130–32; Kemp 1989: 208; Lichtheim 1973:
65; Morenz 1973: 158).
Death occurred when the k3 departed from the body. It was a depressing
event that stole living beings from their families and transferred them from
a fertile, living world into a realm of infertility, thirst, darkness, and uncon-
sciousness, where most of the time one person did not know another. Death

536
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
disrupted the unity of the life-forces that constituted an individual, although
Egyptians sought to do all they could to arrest this process. To prevent the dis-
integration of the corpse (h3t) they mummiﬁed and buried it in as elaborate
a tomb as an individual could afford. Once the body and its internal organs
were embalmed, the mouth of the dead person was symbolically opened prior
to interment so that the body might once again speak and eat.
In the tomb the corpse was reunited with its k3, which made the deceased
like a god (ntr). Each night, as the sun passed through the underworld (with
which the burial chamber was identiﬁed), the corpse was restored to life. Both
the corpse and its k3 were sustained by offerings of food, drink, and clothing
that were supposed to be provided on a daily basis. Rich tombs were decorated
with scenes of offerings being presented to the deceased and food being grown
and processed for these offerings to nourish the deceased if real food offerings
ceased. Texts promising offerings were erected in the accessible parts of tombs;
the reading of these formulae would also provide the corpse and its k3 with
food. Substitutes for the mummy in the form of cult statues and relief images
of the dead person were placed in the tomb chapel and local temples. Equally
important for the survival of the deceased was the preservation of his or her
name, which sustained the dead person’s identity and ensured that offerings
reached their intended recipient.
The corpse, animated by its k3, was able to journey to the kingdom of
Osiris, a fertile land where food was grown and corv´ee labour was performed
by wˇsbty (shawabti, ‘answerers’), human ﬁgurines magically programmed to
act in place of the dead person. It was only possible to stay in the kingdom of
Osiris, however, if the heart – the locus of memory – did not supply evidence
that a person had committed any one of forty-two misdeeds (h
• ww) of a ritual,
ethical, or criminal nature during his or her earthly existence. If the deceased
was not found innocent and acclaimed worthy (m3 h˘
rw) by the court which
judged the dead, his or her soul would be eaten by m mwt (the swallower of
the dead). Once again, magical means were employed to ensure a favourable
verdict. The dead who reached the kingdom of Osiris became identiﬁed with
its mummiﬁed ruler. Life in the tomb and in the kingdom of Osiris provided
the dead with a dt eternity.
The b3, represented in hieroglyphs by a jabiru stork or a human-headed
bird, maintained its life-force by periodically reuniting with the corpse and
k3 of the person to whom it belonged. It also visited the terrestrial world to
bring back food and drink for the corpse, communicating with living relatives
and friends of the dead person in dreams and visions that either reassured
or threatened them and haunting people in the form of a dangerous spirit of
the dead (mwt). The b3 was also the means by which dead males periodically

The Individual and the Universe
537
experienced sexual gratiﬁcation. (This belief was based on the homophony
between the words b3 [soul] and b3h
• [phallus].) B3s also descended into the
underworld and travelled to the sky, thus participating in the endless cycles
of death and rebirth that took place in the natural world and ensuring their
possessors of a nh
• h
• eternity for as long as the cosmos lasted. By ascending to
the sky the b3 could also become an 3h˘
, a radiant or transﬁgured spirit, in the
form of a star. As one of the circumpolar stars, the b3 could enjoy the same
dt immortality in the sky that the k3 did in the tomb. The k3, the b3, and the
corpse could hope to continue their association for as long as the universe lasted
and the individual sustained an existence and a personal identity provided that
some trace of his or her name, image, and provisioning endured. The corpse
also continued to be associated with attributes such as its shadow.
The Egyptans believed that the dead could use their supernatural powers
(h
• k3) to harm people who had treated them badly during their lifetime or
relatives who neglected to provision them after death. They could also use
their easier access to the gods to intervene in favour of relatives who pleased
them. If the dead were thought to be causing harm, letters addressed to them
were left at their tombs, seeking to learn what was troubling them and what
had to be done to win their approval. Answers appear to have been received
mainly in dreams. The supernatural powers of the dead do not appear to
have been markedly greater than those they possessed while alive. Moreover,
contact between the living and the dead seems to have lasted only as long as
people who had known the dead person remained alive (J. Allen 2000: 94–95;
Faulkner 1985; Morenz 1973: 187–212; Reeder 1998).
Egyptologists used to maintain that in the Old Kingdom it was believed
that only monarchs and those who were able to construct elaborate tombs
and endow them with perpetual funerary offerings were able to enjoy life
after death. It has long been evident, however, from the village cemeteries
that George Reisner (1932) excavated at Naga ed-Deir, in Upper Egypt, that
from Predynastic times ordinary people performed scaled-down versions of
the funerary cults of the upper classes. Excavations of the burials of craftsmen
and workmen who constructed the Fourth Dynasty Giza pyramid complex
have revealed small tombs and evidence of cults that were based on the same
general ideas that guided the burial practices of the upper classes (Davies
and Friedman 1998: 85–88). Hence it appears that, at least as early as the
Old Kingdom, all classes had generally similar aspirations concerning life after
death, even if the same marked social distinctions were observed in realizing
these aspirations that applied in everyday life. By the Middle Kingdom, all
who could afford it sought to identify themselves after death with Osiris, the
supreme exemplar of a god who was surviving in a changeless dt state. This

538
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
required embalming and the performance of costly, esoteric rituals that dur-
ing the Old Kingdom had remained the prerogatives of royalty. In the Old
Kingdom, the carving in tombs of magical texts to ensure the well-being of
the dead was limited to kings and occasionally queens. At the end of the Old
Kingdom, these writings became more widely known and, in the form of the
Cofﬁn Texts, were part of the burial equipment of all who could afford them.
belief and self-image
Myths concerning the creation of humanity indicate that in early civilizations
it was believed that the ﬁrst humans were brought into existence not only
by the gods but at least to some extent from the substance of the gods. This
view accords with the more general belief that the entire natural world was
animated by supernatural power, which seems to have been linked to beliefs
that prevailed in still earlier and less complex societies. Yet it was also empha-
sized in early civilizations that human beings had been created differently from
the gods and were inferior to them in their capacities. Moreover, upper-class
people often asserted that their origin was different from that of commoners.
In early civilizations the human body was believed to be animated by multi-
ple supernatural forces rather than by a single soul. (The Mesopotamians are
generally assumed to have viewed the body as being animated by a single soul,
but their beliefs may have been inadvertently misinterpreted to make them
more closely resemble modern Western ones; the bones may have constituted
a separate life-force that complemented the etemmu-soul, which embodied
consciousness.) Often the main distinction was between the life-forces that an-
imated the body and made it function and an intellect power that constituted
an individual’s mind. One or the other of these souls generally had the power
to move beyond the living body in dreams and the imagination. In general, it
was believed that these souls constituted a unity focused on the body while
the person was alive but separated from one another after death. In Egypt and
among the Inka the body was regarded as an important component of the dead
person; the Mesopotamians, Yoruba, Chinese, and Maya attached importance
to the bones of their ancestors and continued to guard and venerate them.
Various life-forces were thought to survive the deaths of individuals and
be recycled to younger generations of the same family or to become part of
a pool of cosmic energy that animated future human beings or the universe
generally. While personality traits or the appearance of the deceased might be
transmittedalongwithsuchforces,suchenergydidnotconserveanysigniﬁcant
aspects of individual consciousness, personal identity, or memory. In contrast
to the conception of reincarnation of some later preindustrial South Asian and

The Individual and the Universe
539
East Asian civilizations, the soul does not appear to have been conscious at any
point of previous existences. Nor was moral behaviour in one life believed to
inﬂuence how that energy was reincarnated as it did according to the Hindu
doctrine of karma. What varied considerably in early civilizations was the extent
to which a personal identity was believed to survive the dispersal of life-forces
following death. Wherever such a personal identity survived, it was believed to
depend heavily on offerings made by the living, usually its own descendants, for
its power and quality of life. There was only a limited tendency to view the fate
of human personalities after death as being linked to an individual’s conduct
while alive. Morality appears to have been generally viewed as a communal
matter rather than as a personal or religious one.
The evidence concerning beliefs about the destiny of the individual after
death does not indicate that ordinary people living in city-states imagined a
better fate than was anticipated by commoners living in territorial states. All
the inhabitants of territorial states, whatever their class, seem to have believed
they had a better chance of individual survival and a tolerable existence after
death than did the inhabitants of city-states. The well-demarcated class hier-
archies and the opulence of upper-class life in territorial states encouraged the
upper classes to anticipate a comfortable personal survival after death, and this
belief may have spread as a result of status emulation among the lower classes
(Cannon 1989). In Egypt, for example, from Predynastic times on, burial cus-
toms diffused from the royal court to progressively lower social strata, with each
class imitating the practices of the upper classes to the extent that its more
limited resources and access to esoteric religious knowledge permitted. The
spells contained in the Pyramid Texts, which were collated for royal burials,
ceased to be royal prerogatives during the First Intermediate Period, when all
aspired to be identiﬁed after death with the god Osiris (Davies and Friedman
1998: 85–88; Lehner 1997).
In city-state civilizations the existence of a hereditary upper class might
be thought to have encouraged the development of a similar optimism about
life after death that would have diffused among commoners. Yet the most
pessimistic early civilization in our sample was that of the Valley of Mexico,
where, despite having a hereditary nobility, people believed that no individual
identity survived for more than four years after death. The Yoruba, who did not
have a hereditary nobility but had royal clans that traced their descent from
the gods, may or may not have believed in the long-term survival of a personal
identity for any dead person. The Maya, who appear to have had a hereditary
nobility, believed in a relatively favourable survival after death for resourceful
members of the upper class but had lower expectations for commoners. The
randomness of these cases suggests that formal class stratiﬁcation by itself did

540
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
notmakeasigniﬁcantdifference.Asimilarsituationprevailedamongterritorial
states, where the Egyptians, who tended to de-emphasize hereditary descent
and inherited membership in an upper class, were at least as optimistic about
life after death as the Inka and Chinese, for whom hereditary upper-class status
was a basis of political order.
While the upper classes in territorial states stressed their similarities to the
gods, the upper classes in rivalrous city-states, whether or not these classes
were formally deﬁned, viewed the world as a risky place in which they as well
as commoners existed to serve the gods. While the optimism that all ancient
Egyptians and both Inka rulers and their subjects shared about personal life
after death contrasted with the pessimism of the Aztec, Mesopotamians, and,
to a lesser extent, the Yoruba, the Chinese may have been less optimistic about
the fate of commoners than people in other territorial states, while the Maya
appear to have been more optimistic about the fate of the upper classes than
people in other city-state civilizations. Even so, the view that all Maya shared
concerning the underworld was a gloomy one, while the early Chinese appear
to have envisaged everyone as sharing a more promising fate after death than
the Mesopotamians or the peoples of the Valley of Mexico.
Beliefs about souls and life-forces in early civilizations appear to have been
based on ideas that were widespread if not panhuman prior to the develop-
ment of these civilizations. Yet the adaptation of these views to the needs of
hierarchical societies produced numerous unanticipated parallels among his-
torically unrelated societies. In general, the beliefs evolved by the upper classes
played a major role in inﬂuencing what the lower classes believed. While sta-
tus differences in early civilizations are reﬂected in beliefs about the fate of
individuals after death, the greater sense of security and self-importance of the
ruling classes and the greater opportunities for status emulation in territorial
states were very important in determining how these views were expressed in
particular societies.

24 Elite Art and Architecture
C
lass hierarchies are held together by the ‘unproductive uses of eco-
nomic surplus’ (Eyer 1984: 52). In early civilizations conspicuous con-
sumption afﬁrmed the power of the upper classes and served to distinguish
strata amongst them. Ordinary people – supporting themselves with simple
technologies, able to produce only meagre food surpluses, and allowed by
rulers to keep only a small portion of those surpluses – easily appreciated the
social signiﬁcance of the ruling classes’ being able to expend large amounts
of surplus energy on non-utilitarian projects. Key examples of such undertak-
ings were the creation of costly luxury goods and monumental architecture –
cost being measured by the amount of labour required to produce them
(Maisels 1999: 344). The ability of the upper classes to sponsor such produc-
tion reinforced their political power in the imaginations of ordinary people,
even though it was lower-class craft workers and corv´ee labourers who were
the producers. Public displays of such production encouraged the loyalty and
obedience of the lower classes (Tate 1992: 31).
Yetsuchafunctionalistapproachdoesnotaccountforalltheevidence.While
temples, palaces, and tombs were often impressive from the outside, much
elaborateartandarchitectureremainedhiddenfrompublicview.Mostpalaces,
temples, and government buildings were located behind walls that prevented
ordinary people from observing what was inside them. Functionalists can argue
that what was visible only to the upper classes reinforced their self-image and
helped to demarcate and reinforce internal hierarchies. Even so, some of the
most costly and elaborate art was hidden away in the darkened, innermost
rooms of temples, which only a few ofﬁcials and priests ever entered, or went
straight from the workshop to the tomb. This magniﬁcent art was intended to
be viewed only by the gods and by the dead, not by living humans.
In considering the art and architecture of early civilizations, it is impos-
sible to separate functional considerations from symbolic ones. An Egyptian
541

542
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
pyramid complex may have been the supreme manifestation of royal authority
because of its size and elegance, but it was also built to protect the body of
a dead pharaoh, nourish his k3 souls, facilitate the movement of his b3 souls
back and forth between the earth and the sky, and maintain the cosmic order.
Mesopotamian temples were expressions of community pride and identity and
of royal power, but they were also manifestations of the supernatural power
or auras of their resident deities (Jacobsen 1976: 16). Maya temples were be-
lieved to be animated by supernatural power that accumulated as the result
of a divine presence within them and made them ever more effective loca-
tions for communicating with the gods (Fox 1996: 485; Schele and Freidel
1990: 72–73). Egyptian tomb art sought to nourish the dead, while Egyptian
and Yoruba cult statues were created and used to focus supernatural power
(R. Thompson 1976: 20/1). In early civilizations, art and architecture were no
less vehicles for managing sacred powers and conducting relations with the
supernatural than they were social-regulatory statements. Claims of supernat-
ural power acquired meaning and validity through the expenditure of material
resources.
Art and architecture are both commonly viewed as quintessential products
of idiosyncratically variable cultural traditions. While buildings perform social
functions and their design is subject to various material limitations, stylistic
innovation in art and architecture is regarded as relatively free from environ-
mental and social constraints and predominantly inﬂuenced by cultural tra-
ditions. Even modern neophytes can soon learn to distinguish the formal art
and monumental architecture of one early civilization from those of another.
This is much harder to do with the less elaborate symbolic creations and house
types associated with commoners in the same societies. It is therefore assumed
that, stylistically, thematically, and iconographically, art and architecture var-
ied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another and, of the two, art
probably varied more because it was subject to even fewer formal constraints.
While the highly stylized art and architecture that were associated with
the upper classes had their origins in the less hierarchical cultures that had
developed into early civilizations, both art and architecture were strongly in-
ﬂuenced by increasing social complexity. They evolved distinctive forms that
reﬂected the growing class hierarchy. This development constituted the differ-
entiation of what Robert Redﬁeld called a ‘Great Tradition’, the deliberately
cultivated lifestyles of the upper classes, from the ‘Little Tradition’ of the lower
classes. While Little Traditions routinely absorbed elements of elite lifestyles,
they were basically continuations of long-established cultural traditions at the
community level. Within these local traditions, themes, iconography, and style
were not consistently harmonized to the same degree as they were in Great

Elite Art and Architecture
543
Traditions (Maisels 1999: 355–56; Marriott 1955; Redﬁeld 1941). It seems ap-
propriate to refer to the art associated with these two traditions as ‘elite art’
and ‘commoner art’ respectively. Philip Dark (1973: 61–62) has noted that in
Benin there were what he called ‘court’ and ‘plebeian’ versions of the cutaway
mud sculpture used to decorate the walls of shrines, the court style being lim-
ited to Benin City and the work of specialized priests. While ordinary people
might carry on traditions inherited from earlier and simpler times, each Great
Tradition and its associated elite art and architecture were new creations that
involved the radical transformation of old ways of doing things to satisfy new
social needs (Haselberger 1961).
elite art
Formal, highly sophisticated art was produced by unusually skilled craft work-
ers for the upper classes. Some were employed full-time by particular patrons.
Especially in territorial states, the most skillful artisans worked for the gov-
ernment or for kings, setting standards of excellence for the whole society. In
these cases, Redﬁeld’s Great Tradition is often called a ‘court culture’ (Kemp
1989: 64–65; Willett 1967: 162). The quality of what skilled artisans created
reﬂected the extent to which patrons supported their work, greater investment
permitting more specialization, the use of more costly and exotic materials, and
greater attention to detail.
Highly sophisticated art that is acclaimed for its aesthetic qualities was also
produced by part-time specialists working in small-scale societies. The sculp-
ture of the aboriginal peoples of coastal British Columbia, for example, has
been compared to that of Classical Greece (L´evi-Strauss 1982). Art of this sort
did not, however, employ as wide a range of exotic materials or such elabo-
rate technologies as did the art created in early civilizations. Moreover, even if
high-ranking persons commissioned the production of such art as a strategy for
self-promotion, this art resulted from the relentless competition for prestige
among rival individuals, kin groups, age-grades, and communities rather than
the use by established upper classes of distinctive forms of art to represent
their superior status in early civilizations. What the two forms of artistic pro-
duction shared was the investment of wealth to produce highly visible material
status symbols.
While modern scholars conventionally refer to the items that were specially
produced for the upper classes in early civilizations as works of ‘art’ and to their
producers as ‘artists’, there is no evidence that concepts genuinely equivalent
to these existed in early civilizations (Tate 1992: 30). High-quality work was
produced by elite artisans who possessed the specialized skills, raw materials,

544
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and resources needed to create the superior work desired by their patrons.
Minor ofﬁcials who had special drawing skills and knowledge of iconography
were often involved in designing such items and overseeing their production.
These ofﬁcials would have been the intermediaries between upper-class pa-
trons and the craft workers who physically manufactured luxury goods.
Individual works of high quality were frequently produced by teams of
artisans labouring together. Egyptian workshop scenes depict a number of
sculptors working simultaneously on large stone statues. Bas-reliefs appear to
havebeendesignedanddrawnontolimestoneorplasterwallsbyliteratescribe-
artists who specialized in such work and then chiselled out by stonemasons and
coloured by specialized painters (Andreu 1997: 61–65). Designing and drawing
also seem to have been separate from stone-carving among the Classic Maya.
Two or more Maya designers, as well as two or more stonecutters, sometimes
worked on the same monument (Tate 1992: 40–49). Fourteen sculptors are
reported to have jointly carved a now destroyed statue of the Aztec ruler
Mochtezuma II at Chapultepec (Berdan 1982: 153). Shang bronze-casting
requiredlarge,well-coordinatedteamsofhighlyspecializedartisanstoproduce
high-quality vessels (Treistman 1972: 84–93). At least one Egyptian sculptor
recorded his name and a small image of himself in a tomb that he decorated for
a high-ranking ofﬁcial of the Old Kingdom, presumably with the permission of
thetomb’sowner(Strouhal1992:166–67).Mayaindividualsassociatedwiththe
production of stone monuments recorded their names on some carved stone
lintels and stelae (Tate 1992: 45–47). However, while skilled artisans appear
to have been greatly valued and well-treated by their patrons or clients, most
of them remained anonymous.
The teamwork and general anonymity of the people who produced the major
art works of early civilizations more closely approximate the modern concept of
a skilled artisan or master craft worker than they do the idea of an artist. Like
modern artisans, master artisans in early civilizations sought to work within
established aesthetic traditions rather than to transcend them by dramatic acts
of personal creativity. Especially skilled Yoruba wood-carvers acquired reputa-
tions for being able to infuse their creations with unusual amounts of spiritual
power, and this ensured that they received important commissions. Yet such
reputations were based on their ability to innovate within a traditional frame-
work (R. Thompson 1976: 19/1). Master craft workers were the response to a
growing demand for outstanding products by upper-class individuals or insti-
tutions. Such patrons provided artisans with the resources that allowed them to
devote large amounts of time to developing skills and producing high-quality
items.

Elite Art and Architecture
545
In early civilizations there was no equivalent of art for art’s sake. Artistic
creations indicated their owners’ or donors’ social standing as well as serving
religious and practical functions. Upper-class Egyptian jewellery, in addition
to signifying the social status of its wearers, incorporated or took the form of
amulets that protected such individuals from attacks by evil spirits. The elab-
orate gold vessels used to serve food and drink to the Inka ruler distinguished
him from other people and also symbolically reafﬁrmed his connection with
the sun god. John Baines and Norman Yoffee (1998: 235) have proposed that
‘aesthetic items’ would be a more appropriate designation than ‘works of art’
for the special creations of early civilizations. It is tempting to go still farther
and designate these items ‘elite goods’, thereby eliminating any reference to
subjective and little understood artistic considerations. Moreover, some highly
prized crowns and royal insignia were manufactured from inexpensive, locally
available materials using widely practised and not especially elaborate tech-
niques. What distinguished these products was that only certain people were
allowed to make and use them. These elite insignia may have been no less
valued by the upper classes, but they differed in terms of how they were man-
ufactured from goods produced from rare and valuable materials by highly
specialized artisans. The cost of producing the latter items ensured that they
could not be copied or usurped by the lower classes. It therefore seems ap-
propriate to retain the designation ‘elite art’ as an admittedly approximate and
ethnocentric gloss for elite goods that required special skills and high economic
expenditures to produce.
Each early civilization created elite art that was stylistically unique. Even
the Classic Maya and the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, whose cultures
were expressions of a single Mesoamerican cultural tradition, created highly
divergent art. Egyptian relief sculpture, with its serene, hieroglyphic-like hu-
man ﬁgures arranged in registers against a ﬂat background, shared numerous
features with Aztec relief sculpture (Pasztory 1983; Nicholson and Qui˜nones
Keber 1983; Robins 1997; Townsend 1979), but the iconographies of the two
sculptures were completely different. The Egyptian symbolic variations in ﬁg-
ure size, more open backgrounds, and more elaborate arrangements of regis-
ters are not found in the relief styles of the Valley of Mexico. Neither relief style
can be confused with that of the Classic Maya, with its ﬂowing lines and dense,
convoluted layouts (Baudez 1994; Benson and Grifﬁn 1988). Nor can Maya
vase-painting, with its sinuous lines and washed colours, be confused with the
mural or codex paintings of the Aztec and their neighbours, which featured
heavy outlines ﬁlled with bright, uniform colours, expressionless faces, and a
strong emphasis on the symbolic details of costumes (Coe 1978; M. E. Smith

24.1. Classic Maya and Valley of Mexico painting styles: (a) detail from the Quirarte vase, apparently showing gods of the Maya
underworld; (b) ﬁrst page of a ritual almanac, the Codex Fejervary-Mayer. The highland Mexican Fire God Xiuhtecuhtli is shown in the
centre, east is at the top. Sources: (a) after Bassie-Sweet 1991: 139; (b) with thanks to the Board of Trustees of the National Museums
and Galleries on Merseyside [Liverpool Museum].

Elite Art and Architecture
547
0
20 cm
0
10 cm
a
b
24.2. Early Shang ritual vessels cast in bronze from Zhengzhou. Sources: Wen Wu, no. 3, 1983,
pp. 53–57.
1996: 263–64; Smith and Heath-Smith 1980) (Fig. 24.1). Shang metallurgy
and wood-carving, with their abstract, balanced, and geometricized ﬁgures of
animals or parts of animals covering whole surfaces (Fig. 24.2), cannot be
mistaken for the more realistic and simply decorated statues of people, an-
thropomorphic deities, and animals fashioned by Inka craft workers (Chˆeng
1960: 233–38; Stierlin 1984). Yoruba wood sculpture, with its large heads, sim-
pliﬁed extremities, and emphasis on cylindrical shapes, was very different from
Egyptian stone or wood sculpture, with its frontality, symmetry, blockiness, and
idealized naturalism, and from Mesopotamian stone statues, with their large
round eyes, introspective gaze, and elongated forms (Abiodun, Drewal, and
Pemberton 1994; R. Armstrong 1981; Ben-Amos 1995; Ben-Amos and Rubin
1983; Dark 1973; Forman, Forman, and Dark 1960; R. Thompson 1976)
(Fig. 24.3). Mesopotamian relief sculpture differed from that of Egypt in
terms of its more deeply cut ﬁgures, greater emphasis on human muscula-
ture, and more crowded compositions, as well as its different themes (Caubet
and Pouyssegur 1998).
In territorial states centralized control and patronage of the production
of sophisticated art tended to promote a polity-wide uniformity of style. In
Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, the production of luxury goods was centred
around the royal court, near Memphis, while in the New Kingdom there were

548
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
Egypt
Mesopotamia
Yoruba-Benin
Shang China
f

Elite Art and Architecture
549
subtle stylistic differences between goods produced at Memphis and at Thebes
(Fuerstein 1999; Martin 1991). The Inka rulers established a uniform style of
elite craft production that was evident both in objects made of precious metals,
created at a small number of government workshops, and in painted pottery,
manufactured at numerous sites throughout the kingdom. The Shang state was
characterized by a distinctive art style that would have required standardizing
bronze-casting activities at various administrative centres (Thorp 1985).
Each city-state system also had a distinctive, shared art style, presumably
disseminated and sustained by interstate contacts among the upper classes
of neighbouring city-states, the trading of luxury produce, and sometimes
the movement of elite craft workers from one state to another. Shared styles
reﬂected and reinforced a sense of cultural identity among the upper classes of
neighbouring city-states and facilitated communication concerning numerous
matters of common interest. Yet individual city-states and their upper classes
also expressed their identities with local variations in art styles. Western Maya
kingdoms such as Palenque and Piedras Negras were the only Classic Maya
states to move from single-ﬁgure to multiple-ﬁgure sculptural compositions. In
addition to erecting the free-standing vertical stelae found in most Maya states,
the rulers of these kingdoms decorated buildings with elaborately carved stone
wall panels and lintels. While upper-class costumes and the use of symbols
also varied from one Maya urban centre to another (Tate 1992: xii), changes
in the representation of dress and the positioning of ﬁgures permit stelae
throughout the Maya area to be dated to within less than a century on the basis
of stylistic criteria (Proskouriakoff 1950). This suggests that artists in different
Maya centres must have communicated extensively with one another.
Yoruba art also varied in style and motifs from one region and one urban
centre to another (R. Armstrong 1981: 91). This variation is clear in both wood-
carving, which varied regionally, and the ritual bronze heads produced at Ife
and the brass ones of Benin. Although the tradition of casting these heads
24.3. Statues in early civilizations: (a) Egyptian painted limestone statue of Nofret, wife of
Rahotep, a high ofﬁcial and member of the royal family, from Meidum, early Dynasty IV, height
120 cm; (b) painted limestone statue of a scribe from Saqqara, name lost, Dynasty V, height
50 cm; (c) Mesopotamian limestone female worshipper statue, from Khafaja, Early Dynastic
period, height 37 cm; (d) bronze head of Akkadian monarch, either Sargon or Naramsin, found
at Nineveh, height 37 cm; (e) brass head of the Late Period (nineteenth century) from Benin,
probably associated with the cult of a dead ruler, height 52 cm; (f) jade statuette of a standing
dignitary, Shang period, height 9 cm. Sources: (a),(b) Egyptian Museum, Cairo (photos courtesy
ofScala/ArtResource,NYandFototecaInternacionalLda/ArtResource,NY);(c)IraqMuseum,
Baghdad (photo courtesy of Scala/Art Resource, NY); (d) J. G. Macqueen, Babylon (London,
1964), 25; (e) after Willett 1967: 155; (f) courtesy of the Arthur M. Sackler Museum, Harvard
University Art Museums, Bequest of Grenville L. Winthrop (photo Michael Nedzweski and
Junius Beebe, c⃝President and Fellows of Harvard College).

550
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
is reported to have been introduced to Benin from Ife, the oldest surviving
headsatBeninhaveadifferent,morestylizedformfromcontemporaryIfeones
(Dark 1973: 8–9). Art styles also appear to have varied from one Mesopotamian
city-state to another and among different states in the Valley of Mexico. It has
not been ascertained, however, to what extent observed differences repre-
sented expressions of local identity. Both in the Valley of Mexico and among
the Yoruba, towns tended to specialize in the production of different kinds of
luxury goods, which were traded over considerable distances.
Elite art traditions could evolve rapidly when social circumstances were
propitious. In Egypt such a tradition developed, beginning in Upper Egypt, in
the generations that immediately preceded and followed the uniﬁcation of the
country. Rows of animals and antithetical arrangements of humans on stone
palettes and ivory knife handles gave way to scenes that were increasingly
dominated by the monarch, who came to be represented as acting without any
human assistance. At the same time, human beings, animals, and plants were
represented in ever more conventionalized forms that were to persist with only
minor modiﬁcations for over three thousand years. Apart from the appearance
of a few short-lived motifs that may have been of Mesopotamian or Elamite
origin, this appears to have been a purely internal development (Joffe 2000;
Kemp 1989: 19–63).
The Aztec, in contrast, acquired their ﬁrst elite stone-sculptors following
their conquest, early in the ﬁfteenth century, of the neighbouring hegemonic
city of Azcapotzalco, to which they had hitherto been tributary. Previously
Azcapotzalco and Culhuacan had been the two major centres of stone-carving
in the Valley of Mexico. Aztec sculptors drew inspiration from the large stone
images visible in the ruins of the ancient city of Tula, seventy kilometres to
the north, some of which they brought to Tenochtitlan. They and others in
the southern part of the valley also adopted Huaxtec models for producing
three-dimensional cult efﬁgies. As Aztec power grew, craft workers evolved a
dynamic new style that emphasized bolder compositions and more dynamic
and anatomically observant representations of the human body. By the late
ﬁfteenth century Tenochtitlan was the pre-eminent centre of stone-carving in
central Mexico.
While the Egyptians had to invent their own style of monumental art, the
Aztec were able to draw upon various older traditions. Relatively quickly, how-
ever, they evolved their own distinctive style of stone-carving, which they em-
ployed alongside introduced ones (Townsend 1979). Maya art was inﬂuenced
by earlier Olmec and Izapan styles, which the Maya transformed to create a
new and distinctive style (Coe 1977; Quirarte 1977). Shang elite productions
retained the basic shapes of the Neolithic art of northern China while their

Elite Art and Architecture
551
technical expertise and the ﬂamboyance of their decoration increased dramat-
ically, creating an ever-greater contrast with the goods produced by and for
the lower classes (Bagley 1999: 146–53; Keightley 1969: 60).
In some early civilizations elite art acquired a uniform style regardless of
the material that was being worked. In Egypt jewellery, furniture, sculpture,
and relief carvings that were produced for the upper classes exhibited the
same style and ornamentation whether they were manufactured from stone,
metal, or wood. Pottery by this time had become purely utilitarian and was
largely undecorated. Throughout the course of ancient Egyptian civilization,
the elite style slowly changed, but any innovations continued to inﬂuence goods
produced in all materials. It is known from historical records that different
materials were worked by separate groups of craft specialists. The stylistic
unity of Egyptian art therefore reﬂected the taste of patrons and the control
that the royal court and bureaucracy were able to exert over various groups
of artisans. It also indicated the extent to which the upper classes viewed the
goods made for their use as material expressions of their class identity and unity
vis-`a-vis ordinary people. Although the stylistic unity of elite craft products was
disrupted during the First Intermediate Period, a uniﬁed style remained the
ideal and once again became a reality in the Middle Kingdom (W. Smith 1958).
Shang bronze-casting, the carving of jade, turquoise, marble, ivory, shell,
and wood, and the manufacturing of ornate pottery all employed the same
highly stylized composite animal motifs and the same complex geometrical
patterns (Chˆeng 1960: 233–38). This uniformity attests to the ability of upper-
class patrons to impose their shared tastes on groups of craft specialists living
and working in small communities.
Inka production of elite goods appears to have been less stylistically uni-
ﬁed. Gold and silver ornaments produced for the state tended to emphasize
simplicity and plainness, while pottery and fancy cloth were decorated with
extremely complex geometrical patterns (Fig. 24.4). These varied produc-
tions tended to share an underlying sense of order, formal clarity, balanced
proportions, and clean outlines (Jones 1964: 5; Stierlin 1984). Thus in each
territorial state an elite art style which exhibited varying degrees of stylistic
homogeneity in relation to different raw materials played a major role in rein-
forcing a sense of unity within a governing class that was dispersed over a large
region.
In city-states elite and commoner art tended to be less sharply differenti-
ated than in territorial states. There was also less stylistic unity in the output
of different crafts. The lack of a clear distinction between art created for
the upper classes and commoner art resulted in part from skilled artisans’
producing for a broader social spectrum than artisans in territorial states.

552
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
f
24.4. Inka art styles: (a) hollow anthropomorphic silver ﬁgurine – such ﬁgurines, often clothed
in miniature textile garments were used as offerings, height 20.3 cm; (b) silver image of a llama
made of pieces of hammered sheet silver soldered into place, also used as offering, height
12.7 cm; (c) – (f) Inka decorated ceramics. All these objects would have been manufactured
in state production centres. Sources: (a) – (f) after V. W. von Hagen, Realms of the Incas
(New York, 1957), 78, 90, 168, 172.
Particularly in city-state systems that lacked a hereditary nobility, different
crafts tended to have their own styles. Among the Yoruba, the style em-
ployed by wood-carvers in any one community differed from the styles as-
sociated with ironworking, bronze- or brass-casting, terracotta-ﬁgure-making,
stone-carving, pottery-making, bead work, leather work, resist-dyeing, and
the decoration of calabashes (Bascom 1969: 111; R. Thompson 1976: 1/1). In
Mesopotamia the same motifs and styles were used on stone cylinder seals,
metal temple and palace decorations, and stone relief-carving but absent on
a wide range of mundane objects, including clay statues intended for house-
hold use. The representational motifs employed in painting and sculpture
were totally absent from elite jewellery. This suggests that temple and palace
institutions imposed some degree of uniformity on artisans who worked for
them full-time or even part-time but could not (or chose not to) inﬂuence
the full range of their production. That temples and palaces appear to have
patronized similar art styles may reﬂect either an attempt to impose a com-
mon elite identity on the art sponsored by these two types of institutions or,
more likely, kings’ patronizing the production of major art works for temples

Elite Art and Architecture
553
(Caubet and Pouysseggur 1998; Collon 1987; Crawford 1991: 155–67;
Frankfort 1954).
Aztec stone-carvers, employed mainly by the state, evolved a distinctive
style, although stone cult images continued to be manufactured in the Huaxtec
style.Featherworkers,whomayoriginallyhavebeenofforeignorigin,carefully
adhered to local iconography. Gold jewellery stylistically resembled what was
produced by the Mixtec, but it too incorporated local iconography. Manuscript
and mural-painting were executed in a style that appears to have been derived
from Puebla and Cholula. While there were some tendencies towards greater
stylistic unity in Aztec art, the upper classes appear to have tolerated and even
valued foreign styles that enjoyed regional prestige. This same attitude may
have encouraged the highest levels of Aztec society to use only painted ceramic
vessels imported from Cholula (M. E. Smith 1996: 99–107).
The Classic Maya employed similar styles for carving stone, wood, and jade
objects and for painting murals such as the ones that decorated the interior
of a small three-room temple at Bonampak. Scenes painted on high-quality
ceramic vessels were executed in a more ﬂuid style, and the iconography was
different from that used in public art, but the general approach was much the
same. Similar forms governed the production of elaborate representational
(so-called eccentric) ﬂints (Hanks and Rice 1989). The stylistic uniformity of
Classic Maya art may partly reﬂect the greater geographical isolation of most
Maya groups from alternative artistic traditions than was the case with states in
the Valley of Mexico. It may also, however, indicate that the Maya upper class,
like that of territorial states, exerted stronger controls over the production of
various groups of elite specialists, who lived and worked in separate residential
groups in Maya urban centres.
The materials used to manufacture high-quality art varied considerably from
one culture to another. The ancient Egyptians produced stone statues, re-
lief sculpture, and fancy jars and dishes. In the Old Kingdom, statues varied
from small to more than life-size. By the Middle Kingdom, some colossal stone
statues were being produced for kings and hereditary nobles. Limestone and
sandstone were most frequently worked, but harder rocks, such as granite
and diorite, were also carved (DePutter and Karlshausen 1997). In addition,
life-size statues were made of wood and sheet copper and small ones cast
of precious metals. Gold and semiprecious stones were used to create fancy
jewellery, copper and gold to fashion serving vessels, and imported cedar wood
and gold leaf to produce ornate furniture and burial equipment. Faience, or
blue frit, was a cheap substitute for turquoise.
The Mesopotamians used limestone and alabaster, which they quarried close
by, and sometimes imported harder rocks, such as diorite, to carve reliefs,

554
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
stelae, small statues, doorpost sockets, and cylinder seals. Precious metals
were employed to produce jewellery and copper and bronze to manufacture
vases and statues.
The Maya carved stelae, lintels, and decorated panels from limestone, tufa,
and hardwoods and fashioned painted reliefs of moulded or carved plaster.
Painted scenes were also applied to ﬂat plaster surfaces. Jewellery was made
of jade and fancy painted vessels and statues of pottery.
The Aztec carved statues, temple furniture, and relief sculpture from stone,
painted murals on plaster, and manufactured jewellery and ornaments from
jade, obsidian, wood inlaid with turquoise, gold, and copper. Feathers and
feather work were highly valued. While high-quality pottery vessels were im-
ported from beyond the valley, large terracotta statues were manufactured
locally.
The Shang Chinese lavished their greatest artistic skills on the casting of
ritual vessels and elite weapons from bronze. They also carved and lacquered
wood, sometimes in the form of large room panels, and manufactured orna-
ments from jade, shell, and bone. Only a few small human and animal statues
were carved from stone. Fancy pottery was decorated with stamped and incised
patterns.
The Inka fashioned statues and ornaments from gold, silver, and bronze.
They also produced high-quality painted pottery and wove fancy clothing. Al-
though they could work hard stone with great precision, they did not carve
statues or bas-reliefs from it. Stone buildings were ornamented with trape-
zoidal niches but only rarely with simple carved motifs.
The most elaborate and highly prized Yoruba artistic creations were rit-
ual human heads cast from copper or brass and elaborately decorated metal
plaques that were used to cover wooden doors and pillars. The most common
material for works of art was wood, which was carved and painted to produce
statues, masks, and fancy doors for shrines, palaces, and ofﬁcials’ houses. Art
works were also made of ivory. At Ife nearly life-size statues were moulded from
terracotta (Ojo 1966a: 252). Jewellery and cult equipment were manufactured
from brass, iron, and carved ivory. Red coral and glass beads, especially glass
beads fom Ife, were highly valued. The stone statues carved in some localities
were very crudely executed (Stevens 1978).
There was no cross-cultural uniformity in the materials preferred for artis-
tic expression. Egyptians, Maya, Mesopotamians, and Aztec lavished particular
attention on carved stone, but other early civilizations did not. This neglect
was especially curious for the Inka, who worked even the hardest types of rock
expertly for architectural purposes. Moreover, the ruins of Tiwanaku, which
may have inspired Inka stone construction, contained numerous stone reliefs

Elite Art and Architecture
555
and statues. Metals were important vehicles for artistic expression among the
Chinese, Inka, Mesopotamians, Egyptians, and Yoruba but of minor impor-
tance in the Valley of Mexico and rare and entirely imported among the Classic
Maya. Various forms of jadeite were highly valued by the Chinese and Maya
and in the Valley of Mexico. Wood-carving was a signiﬁcant art form among
the Yoruba, in Egypt, in Shang China, and among the Maya. Pottery vessels
were a focus of elite art among the Maya, Inka, and Shang Chinese and to a
lesser degree in the Valley of Mexico, while high-quality ceramic statues were
produced by the Aztec, Yoruba, and Maya. Elsewhere, even where ceramics
had formerly been a signiﬁcant artistic medium, as in Egypt and Mesopotamia,
it was reduced to utilitarian status as new, more exotic materials became the
preferred means of artistic expression. Murals painted on plaster played an
important role in Aztec, Maya, Mesopotamian, and Egyptian culture. Feather
work was greatly prized in the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya. Fancy
cloth was an especially important medium of artistic expression among the
Inka.
It is difﬁcult to correlate these variations with the availability of materials.
Egyptians and Andean highlanders had equal access to many types of stone, but
the Inka made almost no use of them except for their extensive architectural
projects. While both the Yoruba and the Maya had access to a wide variety
of hardwoods, the Maya tended to use stone instead. Everywhere there was
some preference for durable materials and for scarce and exotic ones, but this
emphasis was not overwhelming. The selection of materials for creating elite
art seems to have reﬂected many idiosyncratic cultural preferences.
More cross-cultural regularity can be discerned when art is examined the-
matically. Elite art in most early civilizations emphasized images of rulers and
deities. In general, anthropomorphic beings were portrayed in a more de-
tailed, naturalistic fashion and to a much greater degree in early civilizations
than in the small-scale societies from which they had evolved. The Assyriologist
V. K. Afanasieva (1991: 128) suggests that art produced prior to the develop-
ment of early civilizations depicted human beings, if at all, only as integral
parts of nature. She maintains that the emphasis on human ﬁgures and their
more realistic portrayal in early civilizations reﬂected a new self-conﬁdence
and sense of power resulting from greater control over nature and perhaps
increased isolation from it. There is, however, no obvious support for this
generalization.
The elite art of the ancient Egyptians, Mesopotamians, Classic Maya, and
the Valley of Mexico accorded prominence to naturalistic, if often highly styl-
ized, anthropomorphic ﬁgures, with a special emphasis on deities, kings, and
other persons of high rank. The Yoruba produced naturalistic representations

556
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
of rulers and their retinues but frequently rendered other anthropomorphic
ﬁgures in a more abstract style that was also applied to animals. Yoruba an-
thropomorphic religious ﬁgures were usually representations of kings or wor-
shippers rather than of deities (Bascom 1969: 111).
Apart from metal statues of gods and rulers, which were used for cult pur-
poses, the Inka did not produce anthropomorphic representations of any sort;
human ﬁgures on Inka-style pottery appear to date from the early colonial
period. Nor did they create naturalistic representations of anything else, apart
from the metal images, sometimes life-size, of plants and animals produced for
ritual purposes (Earle 1987: 73). Despite the prominence of anthropomorphic
representations in the elite art of earlier civilizations in the southern Andean
highlands and the contemporary lowland states that had been absorbed into
the Inka kingdom, their overwhelming preference was for elaborate aniconic
designs.
Shang art was focused heavily on animal ﬁgures, with human or humanoid
representations playing only minor and subordinate roles. Kwang-chih Chang
(1983) has interpreted the general absence of human ﬁgures in Shang and
Western Zhou art as resulting from the inspiration of shamanistic themes, with
humans being less important than the animals into which shamans transformed
themselves. Yet there is much uncertainty about what roles shamans actually
played and the beliefs associated with shamanism in early Chinese society. By
contrast, Maya artists rendered indubitably shamanistic themes in a format
that emphasized the human aspects of the participants (Schele and Miller
1986). One might, following Afanasieva, argue that the minimal importance
accorded to human ﬁgures in Shang art indicates that Shang society remained
at a chiefdom level of development, as Judith Treistman (1972: 130) once
claimed. Yet later Chinese elite art, while representing humans to a much
greater degree than Shang or Western Zhou art, never accorded as much
importance to representations of kings as the art of Egypt, Mesopotamia, the
Valley of Mexico, the Maya, or the Yoruba. The art associated with the early
civilizations of China and Inka Peru seems to have been based on culturally
distinctive choices concerning what was important or appropriate to represent.
In Maya civilization the decoration of temples underwent a major alteration
during the Classic period. In Late Preclassic and Early Classic times, temple
platforms were faced with elaborate murals executed in moulded and painted
plaster. These murals portrayed frontal images of deities or cosmic forces rep-
resented in a highly abstract and symbolic form that in some of its general
principles resembled Shang art. In the Late Classic period relief sculpture,
conﬁned to the shrines atop temple platforms, represented relations between
realistically portrayed human kings and anthropomorphized supernatural

Elite Art and Architecture
557
beings and was accompanied by texts documenting the dynastic claims of the
rulers. Arthur Miller (1986: 28–29, 72–80) interpreted this change as reﬂect-
ing a growing emphasis on the linear inheritance of Maya kingship. Yet more
recently deciphered Maya inscriptions indicate that linear inheritance was al-
ready well established by the Early Classic period. Stelae displaying the images
of kings were ﬁrst produced in the Tikal region and spread from there to other
urban centres in Early Classic times. This makes it unlikely that the switch
from cosmic symbolism to royal representations was associated with a major
redeﬁnition of kingship. It may, however, have reﬂected the growing political
and ritual power of kings, who became capable at this point of imposing their
own identities on major temples until then associated with communities.
A similar increasing emphasis on rulers in monumental art appears to have
occurred in Mesopotamia during the Early Dynastic period. Small stone stat-
ues that have been conventionally identiﬁed as ‘priest-kings’ and other images
that have been speculatively interpreted to be of rulers were produced in
Mesopotamia as early as the Uruk period, but ﬁgures of kings identiﬁed by
name do not occur before Early Dynastic times. The appearance of these
named images did not, however, correlate with major changes in the pro-
grammes of temple decoration as happened among the Maya. Depictions of
rulers became common on stone cylinder seals beginning in Ur III times;
up to this point such seals had been decorated with banqueting, mythological,
and religious scenes (Collon 1987: 123–30). Maya and Mesopotamian evidence
casts doubt on the likelihood that the sparseness of surviving anthropomorphic
representations in Inka and Shang art necessarily indicates that these civiliza-
tions were institutionally less developed than the others. Instead, it suggests
that the development of anthropomorphic and royal themes was neither an
inevitable nor an automatic concomitant of the rise of early civilizations.
Nevertheless, the early civilizations in which representational art did de-
velop show signiﬁcant cross-cultural thematic parallels. Statues of gods, rulers,
and members of the upper-classes were produced for cult purposes. Life-size
statues of rulers and of high-ranking ofﬁcials and their families were manu-
factured for funerary purposes in ancient Egypt. These statues were usually
carved from stone in an idealized but naturalistic style by sculptors attached
to the royal court (Fuerstein 1999). Smaller stone statues of kings and ofﬁcials
were set up in Egyptian temples so that the k3 souls of these individuals could
share in the daily food offerings made to the gods. The creation under royal
auspices of cult statues of deities was regarded as important enough for years
to be named for such events during the First Dynasty. Although no early ex-
amples have survived, these statues appear to have been small and made of
precious metals (T. Wilkinson 1999: 267–69).

558
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Mesopotamians manufactured statues of deities, kings, and prosperous
citizens for placement in temples. Cult statues may have been made of wood
overlaid with metal. Stone statues of men and women were placed in temples to
offer perpetual devotion to a deity on behalf of some individual or to remind the
deity of that person’s devotion. Royal statues were sometimes works of high
quality portraying kings in a semi-idealized form. Most worshipper statues
exhibit relatively simple workmanship and few, if any, individualizing traits
and may have been bought ready-made by well-to-do persons to place in
temples. Some of the statues of kings who aspired to divine status may have
been intended as objects of worship rather than as images of worshippers
(Crawford 1991: 160–64; Postgate 1992: 118).
The Inka made some large sheet-metal statues of major deities and of living
and dead rulers. The power of living and dead kings was thought capable of
entering into such statues and speaking through their medium priests, thus
allowing kings to be present in two or more places at once and facilitating the
delegation of royal power (Gose 1996a: 19–20). While no large statues of this
sort have survived, small metal images of anthropomorphic beings and llamas
have been recovered from the burials of sacriﬁced children.
In the most powerful Yoruba states, metal heads were cast to serve as cult ob-
jects for the veneration of dead rulers. Lesser families were restricted to using
ritual heads made of wood or ceramics. Other three-dimensional bronze cast-
ings depicted kings or queen-mothers with their retainers. Statues of Yoruba
deities or their worshippers were normally carved from wood (Bascom 1969:
111–13; Dark 1973).
The Aztec produced numerous stone statues of deities, while others were
fashioned from wood. They also carved stone images of warriors, ﬂag-bearers,
and various guardian ﬁgures to ornament their temple precincts. Statues of
Aztec kings were carved in stone outcrops at Chapultepec, among them one
showing King Ahuitzotl wearing the costume of the fertility god Xipe Totec
(Townsend 1979: 32–33). These images, which were probably objects of vener-
ation, did not survive the early colonial period. The Maya equivalents of royal
statues were deeply carved stelae, each displaying the image of the monarch
on its front face. The Maya also carved wooden cult statues of deities, which
appear to have been kept wrapped in cloth bundles in temple sanctuaries
(Baudez 1994; Houston and Stuart 1996: 303–4).
It therefore appears that in any civilization where anthropomorphic statues
were produced, some of them represented gods and others kings. Only in
Egypt, Mesopotamia, and among the Yoruba were high-quality statues regu-
larly created representing other prominent individuals: in Egypt as recipients
of funerary offerings and in Mesopotamia and among the Yoruba as suppliants

Elite Art and Architecture
559
or worshippers. The Egyptians also produced small worker statues for inter-
ment with the upper classes.
The number of anthropomorphic statues produced varied considerably from
one early civilization to another. Scarcely any such statues were fashioned by
the Shang, but large numbers were created by the Egyptians. They also varied
according to the type of being portrayed. The Aztec produced many statues of
gods but relatively few of rulers, while, in the Old and Middle Kingdoms, the
Egyptians manufactured many life-size statues of kings, administrators, and
their families but fewer and much smaller statues of the gods. Most statues
were produced in a style that emphasized a youthful and idealized rather than
a literal likeness of an individual.
Relief carvings and painted murals (which are usually not so well preserved)
depicted anthropomorphic creatures doing things to a much greater extent
than did statues, which in early civilizations tended only to portray prominent
individuals standing, sitting, or kneeling. Much of the elite relief art of early
civilizations was focused on kings. Scenes portrayed rulers interacting with the
gods or with their ancestors, performing rituals, defeating or dominating their
foes (Fig. 24.5), and being attended by high-ranking subjects.
Except in the Terminal Classic period, Maya stone relief sculpture appears
to have been a monopoly of rulers. It often portrayed kings alone or in the
company of supernatural beings, including their ancestors. Occasionally kings
were accompanied by a female member of the royal family, and in the western
part of the Maya zone they were sometimes attended or assisted by nobles and
courtiers. Maya kings were depicted wearing the costumes of gods, performing
rituals such as bleeding themselves, militarily defeating enemy rulers, and
dominatingandhumiliatingrivalsandenemiesinvariousways,suchasstanding
on their crouching, bound bodies. Sometimes kings were portrayed on a larger
scale than commoners or vanquished enemies. Enemies were often shown
stripped of their regalia and dishevelled. Stone relief sculpture is found in
other than royal or temple settings only from the end of the Classic period,
when, at places such as Copan, it began to appear in the residential complexes
of some high ofﬁcials (Baudez 1994; Fash 1991: 162–63; Joyce 1992; 1996;
Tate 1992).
In Egypt little ofﬁcial, non-funerary relief art did not portray the king. Pub-
lic monuments and temple reliefs depicted kings defeating their enemies,
receiving blessings from the gods, and performing rituals, which most often
involved offerings to deities. Defeated foes were often represented stripped of
their insignia and the clothing that was appropriate to their high social status.
These themes endured with only minor changes throughout ancient Egyptian
history. Kings were represented on a larger scale than any other humans

a
c
b
24.5. Kings subduing enemies: (a) Egyptian King Narmer defeats Wˇs, the leader of a northern Egyptian or Libyan people, ca. 3000 b.c.; (b) Bird
Jaguar IV, ruler of the Maya city of Yaxchilan, captures Jewelled Skull, a.d. 755; (c) the Aztec ruler Tizoc is represented defeating a warrior from nearby
Culhuacan, probably its king – this scene is one of a set of similar images around the circumference of the Tizoc Stone, dated ca. a.d. 1481, symbolizing
Aztec hegemony over various city-states. Sources: (a) after Gardiner 1950: 7; (b) adapted from John S. Henderson, The World of the Ancient Maya,
2nd ed. (Ithaca, 1981), c⃝1981 by Cornell University, and used with permission of the publisher, Cornell University Press; (c) adapted from Joyce Marcus,
Mesoamerican Writing Systems (Princeton, 1993), c⃝1993 by Princeton University Press, and used with permission of Princeton University Press.

Elite Art and Architecture
561
except royal wives and on the same scale as the gods. No one was ever shown
helping the king. If anyone else was present, it was simply to witness his
achievements.
During the Old and Middle Kingdoms, neither the king nor the gods were
represented in the tomb art of the upper classes. Tombs of nobles and ofﬁcials
contained wall reliefs showing food being grown, processed, and presented to
the deceased tomb owner. The owner was represented on a larger scale than
the commoners who served him. A considerable amount of private tomb art
of this sort was produced during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. An unusual
religious genre consisting of scenes celebrating the earthly creativity of the sun
at different seasons was associated with Fifth Dynasty solar temples (Harpur
1987; Lustig 1997b; Robins 1997).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian reliefs, often carved on stone stelae, depicted
kings leading armies in victorious battles, building temples, and presiding over
the feasts that celebrated such accomplishments. Kings were often portrayed
on a larger scale than other individuals, but many reliefs emphasized the partic-
ipation of large numbers of commoners in civic enterprises. Defeated enemy
soldiers were depicted naked, being caught in a net by the victorious ruler,
clubbed by uniformed and well-armed adversaries, trampled by foot-soldiers
and chariots, led away as prisoners, or with their bound and prostrate bodies
forming a deity’s throne (Caubet and Pouyssegur 1998; Furlong 1987: 16, 21;
Parrot 1960; Strommenger and Hirmer 1964).
Aztec relief sculpture depicted mainly deities, anonymous warrior ﬁgures,
standard-bearers, stacked human skulls, calendrical dates, and miscellaneous
religious symbols. Fewer deities were depicted on stone in relief than in the
form of three-dimensional sculptures. Royal ﬁgures were rare, but the reliefs
on the monumental Tizoc stone portrayed that king defeating a series of elab-
orately dressed human ﬁgures, each associated with a tributary city-state. A re-
lief celebrating King Ahuitzotl’s enlargement of the main Aztec temple in 1487
records that date and shows him and his predecessor, Tizoc, dressed as priests
and engaged in ritual blood-letting (Nicholson 1971a: 112–33; Townsend 1979:
41–42).
Benin brass plaques, which were the equivalent of relief sculpture, were
produced not as cult objects but as palace decorations recording historical
events and scenes of everyday life. Some showed the king, occasionally on
horseback, accompanied by retainers (usually soldiers) and larger than some
of them. None showed him in action (Dark 1973: 24–28). Nor did any of
these plaques portray recognizable deities. No examples of relief art depicting
human or anthropomorphic ﬁgures are associated with Shang China or the
Inka state.

562
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Where anthropomorphic ﬁgures were depicted, their relative size often
corresponded with the social importance of the individuals they represented.
In Egypt and to a lesser extent in Mesopotamia and among the Maya and
Yoruba, kings were shown larger than their subjects. Egyptian ofﬁcials were
likewise portrayed on a larger scale than their subordinates in tomb art.
Conventions for portraying human beings in relief also displayed consider-
able cross-cultural uniformity. Human faces were usually depicted in proﬁle,
eyes and shoulders frontally, and the lower torso, legs, and feet as if viewed
from the side. This style of representation, which emphasized each aspect of
the body in its most easily drawn or most easily recognized form, exhibited
the most intricate conventions in Egypt. In Egyptian relief art, both feet were
shown from the side but with their big toes facing the viewer.
In public representational art, the main focus was generally on the king. He
was frequently portrayed leading others in Mesopotamian art and as a passive
ﬁgure accompanied by his followers among the Yoruba. Egyptian rulers and,
with some exceptions, Maya ones were shown either alone or as the dominant
human ﬁgure. In Egypt only the king could be represented as performing a
signiﬁcant action in any scene in which he was portrayed, and therefore in the
Old and Middle Kingdoms kings are shown personally defeating enemies but
not leading armies. In one panel from Yaxchilan, an eighth-century Maya king
is shown ﬁghting alongside one of his subordinate lords, each of them subduing
an opponent.
It is not surprising that what many art historians judge to be the ﬁnest art
of early civilizations was produced in the two territorial states that endured
the longest: the stone sculpture and relief carving of Old Kingdom Egypt
and the bronze ceremonial vessels of Shang China. The quality of such art
was largely determined by how much wealth patrons were able and willing to
invest in its production. The best work was produced in small quantities and
its distribution controlled by the state and a small upper class. In Old Kingdom
Egypt all elite art appears to have been produced by craft workers associated
with the royal court and displayed a uniform style. From earliest times, even
the smallest and least signiﬁcant products of royal workshops were coveted
by minor ofﬁcials and village leaders (Aldred 1971: 174–75). While multiple
centres of bronze-casting and jade-working appear to have ﬂourished within
the Shang kingdom, the uniﬁed style of this art suggests that its production
was under centralized control. The Inka elite maintained a uniform style for
luxury goods that were manufactured from precious metals at a few places and
for decorated pottery and fancy cloth fabricated in production centres located
throughout the kingdom. In all three territorial states there was a vast gap
between the consistently high-quality luxury goods produced by the state and

Elite Art and Architecture
563
the inferior and uneven quality goods produced in farming villages and market
towns.
By contrast, in smaller and less centralized Mesopotamian city-states, the
decorations and furnishings of temples and palaces were cruder and less clearly
distinguished from what was found in ordinary houses. Temples, palaces, and
individuals purchased the work or services of the same full-time artisans. The
quality of palace and temple art was much higher in hegemonic cities. The
bronze statue head often attributed to Sargon I and the excellent composition
and carving of the stela celebrating Naram-Sin’s victory over inhabitants of
the Zagros Mountains provide examples of the high artistic levels achieved by
elite specialists working for the Akkadian Dynasty. The royal statues of the
Ur III Dynasty and the stela bearing Hammurabi’s law code are examples of
the distinguished artistic accomplishments made under the patronage of later
rulers (Strommenger and Hirmer 1964).
In the Yoruba ritual centre of Ife bronze-casting reached its highest level
of sophistication during the fourteenth century and then declined in quality
as that city’s political power waned (Willett 1967: 149). The casting of brass
heads for the royal court is said to have begun in Benin in the fourteenth
century and achieved peaks of excellence in the sixteenth and again in the
eighteenth century. These peaks corresponded with exceptional periods of
unity and prosperity in Benin’s history (Dark 1973: 5–13). The production of
Oyo’s best art likewise coincided with that city’s greatest power and prosperity
in the eighteenth century and was disrupted by internal strife and military
defeat in the nineteenth. For this reason, Frank Willett (1967: 162), Mich`ele
Coquet (1998), and others identify the highest-quality art in the Yoruba region
as court art.
In the Valley of Mexico, high-quality artistic production also tended to be
correlated with periods of heightened power and prosperity of various city-
states and especially with Tenochtitlan’s gradually becoming the dominant
regional centre. Richard Townsend (1979: 20) praises the dynamic forms and
great plastic force of the key artistic achievements of Aztec sculptors in the
late ﬁfteenth century. A similar pattern prevailed among the Classic Maya city-
states, with major episodes of artistic creativity generally corresponding with
periods of military success and the cessation of production of public monu-
ments with periods of disastrous military defeat and external domination. Yet
the leadership of some Maya states continued to produce notable works of art
despite political setbacks. In the eighth century, Copan’s leaders responded
to the capture and sacriﬁcial killing of their thirteenth king by the ruler of
the smaller neighbouring state of Quirigua by erecting richly decorated struc-
tures that reafﬁrmed Copan’s unity and dynastic history (Fash 1991: 139–46).

564
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
More than in any other early city-state system, numerous Maya dynasties suc-
ceeded in sustaining distinctive local traditions of elite art over long periods.
This accomplishment cannot be attributed simply to major Maya centres’ be-
ing farther apart than Mesopotamian ones or those in the Valley of Mexico,
since the Yoruba states, whose main centres were also relatively far apart, ex-
perienced severe cultural ﬂuctuations similar to those of the other city-state
systems in our sample.
Elite art differed radically in style from one early civilization to another. Less
extreme variations in style also occurred among city-states. The upper classes
sponsored the creation of elaborate works of art that symbolized their power
and social exclusivity. The degree of elaboration of such art, its stylistic unity,
and the extent to which it was differentiated from ordinary artistic productions
depended on the wealth and political stability of its patrons. These conditions
favoured greater development of elite art in territorial states.
The preferred media of artistic expression and their thematic content also
varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another. Human imagery was
highly restricted in Shang and Inka culture. This absence calls into question
claims that poorly documented early civilizations that lack obvious represen-
tations of kings must have had no kings. In early civilizations where human
representation was common, its primary focus tended to be on the king alone
(most Classic Maya states), the king and members of the upper class (Egypt), or
the king and larger groups of people (Mesopotamia, Yoruba). Only the Aztec,
among those early civilizations that portrayed human forms regularly, appear
to have paid relatively little attention to kings in their surviving monumental
civic art. Kings and members of the upper classes were often depicted wor-
shipping the gods and defeating their enemies in battle. Yet, when civilizations
that did not widely portray human forms are taken into account, the art of early
civilizations was characterized by almost as much thematic as stylistic diversity.
monumental architecture
Among the creations of the upper classes in early civilizations, buildings of
unusual size and splendour played a special role. Large buildings were highly
visible and attested publicly to the ability of governments, institutions, and
individuals to concentrate labour and resources. Royal tombs, palaces, and
temples bore witness to polities that were believed to be legitimated by divine
power and inseparable from the cosmic order. In most cases the size and elab-
orateness of such buildings and the costly materials used to embellish them
far exceeded what their practical use would have required. This explains, at
least in general and functionalist terms, why, as societies grew increasingly

Elite Art and Architecture
565
inegalitarian, monumental architecture loomed larger in the archaeological
record (Abrams 1989; Trigger 1990a). It has been suggested that, in some
chiefdoms, phases dominated by monumental construction may have alter-
nated with phases characterized by elite-controlled production of high-status
goods (Trubitt 2000). While periods of hypertrophy in the construction of
monumental buildings suggest that this process also may have ﬂuctuated in
importance in early civilizations, monumental construction and the production
of elite goods occurred together at all times.
Despite architecture’s symbolic role only a few functional types of buildings
were constructed. Temples, royal palaces, and upper-class residences existed
in all early civilizations and elaborate upper-class tombs in many of them.
Palaces often combined royal residences with administrative centres, meeting
places for the upper classes, storehouses, workshops, and barracks. Kings
sometimes had private residential and recreational palaces as well as ofﬁcial
ones. Temples were the dwelling places of deities or places where contact
could take place on a regular basis between the supernatural and designated
representatives of human communities rather than places for congregational
worship (L. Bell 1997: 135). Temples, palaces, and tombs were not as clearly
differentiated in all early civilizations as they are in modern nomenclature.
Aztec and Maya temples were often the burial places of rulers. Most Maya
temples seem to have been constructed for the cults of dead rulers as well as
for the worship of cosmic deities. Yoruba palaces contained important public
shrines, and Inka palaces became the tombs of dead kings. Maya ‘palaces’ were
ritual as well as residential and administrative in function. In early China,
temples for the veneration of royal ancestors were located inside palaces.
Temples, palaces, and royal tombs appear to have been clearly distinguished
from one another only in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Temples, palaces, and tombs were all derived from and generally continued
to be identiﬁed as the houses of deities, rulers, and the dead. The Sumerian
word for temple, ´edingir, signiﬁed ‘house (or household) of a god’, while the
Yoruba term ile orisa and the Nahuatl teocalli meant literally ‘house of a god’.
The Egyptians called a temple pr ntr (house of a god) or h
• wt ntr (mansion
of a god). Maya terms for temple included yotot (his house) and k’ulnah (holy
house). In Sumerian a palace was called ´egal (great house) or ´elugal (house of
a king). The Egyptian term was pr nsw (house of the king) or h. In Egyptian
an elaborate non-royal tomb was called a h
• wt k3 (mansion of the life-force).
Some early civilizations constructed city walls, frontier forts, and border
defences. In highland Mexico and the Maya region, ritual ball courts were
elaborate stone structures (Fox 1996). The Inka constructed large halls with
gabled roofs (kallanka) to shelter soldiers or corv´ee labourers travelling on

566
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
ofﬁcial business and as places where public festivals could be held indoors in
inclement weather. Few other buildings were constructed for public use.
Archaeological studies of temples in precolonial Hawaii demonstrate that, as
state power developed, open structures, which had been used for public feast-
ing, were walled off and access to them was restricted to high-ranking ofﬁcials
(Kolb 1994). In early civilizations entry to temples, palaces, and administrative
buildings was carefully monitored. Such buildings were often raised on mas-
sive platforms or enclosed by walls penetrated by only a few carefully guarded
entrances. Rituals were performed by ofﬁcials high above the commoners who
witnessed them or within enclosures to which ordinary people were denied en-
try. These arrangements heightened the mystery of what was going on in such
places and made it easier for the upper classes to emphasize the importance
of their activities.
The materials used for monumental construction varied from one early civ-
ilization to another. The Yoruba and Shang employed stamped earth to con-
struct monumental buildings and thatch to cover their gabled roofs. Chinese
palaces were erected on stamped-earth (hang-tu) platforms. Wooden pillars
and poles supported gabled roofs, while the curtain walls of houses were also
constructed of stamped earth (Chˆeng 1960: 52–53; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 22–
24). Roof tiles were not employed in China until the Zhou period, and even
in early Zhou times tiles covered only the crests of roofs (Hsu and Linduff
1988: 297). The Yoruba’s buildings were erected directly on the ground and
had thick roof-bearing walls constructed of stamped earth. Free-standing en-
closure walls and the houses inside them were covered with broad thatched
roofs to protect the stamped earth from tropical rains (Bascom 1969: 30; Ojo
1966b: 63–66).
Large Mesopotamian buildings were constructed mainly of mud-brick, al-
though ﬁred bricks and stone slabs were sometimes used for foundation
courses. Outer walls were either plastered with mud or lime or encased in
ﬁred bricks. Roofs were ﬂat and constructed of logs covered with mats and
several layers of clay (Crawford 1991: 53–56).
The Inka built elaborate structures with thick stone bearer walls or con-
structed the lower walls, which were most exposed to the rain, of stone blocks
and used stamped earth above. The most important buildings were constructed
of carefully shaped stone blocks, while more utilitarian structures were built
of ﬁeld stones set in mud. The broad, gabled roofs of Inka buildings were
thatched, and important state structures had intricate patterns worked into
their roofs (Gasparini and Margolies 1980; Hyslop 1990: 6–18; Protzen 1993).
People living in the Valley of Mexico and in the Maya area constructed
major buildings of cut-stone facing blocks and rough stone ﬁll. In the Valley

Elite Art and Architecture
567
of Mexico, roofs of residential structures were either ﬂat and covered with
poles and waterproof plaster or gabled and thatched. Major temples had high,
sloping wooden roofs. Important Maya buildings either had thatched roofs or
were covered by corbelled vaults (Abrams 1994; M. E Smith 1996: 153–61).
The Egyptians constructed elaborate tombs and later temples of cut stone,
but palaces, large houses, and administrative buildings continued to be built of
plastered mud-brick, although they often had stone doorways and decorative
elements. Roofs were ﬂat and constructed of mats and earth supported on
horizontal poles. Outer enclosure walls were constructed of mud-brick.
Choices of building materials were inﬂuenced at least partly by practical
considerations. The Mesopotamians, Shang Chinese, and southern Yoruba
lived on plains where stone of any sort was rare. It is therefore not surprising
that they used stamped earth or mud-brick to construct even large buildings.
Yet, in northern Yoruba territory, where there was abundant Precambrian rock,
people did not use it as building material. While this stone is difﬁcult to cut, it is
friable and could easily have been used to construct house walls. Nevertheless,
stoneworking of any sort was limited among the Yoruba.
The Maya lived in a karst region, where there were vast deposits of lime-
stone and the scarcity of groundwater encouraged the excavation of massive
reservoirs to sustain large population centres. The digging of these reservoirs
provided building stone and raw material to make plaster, reducing the cost of
these materials for construction purposes (Abrams 1994). The Maya also econ-
omized on construction costs by subtly incorporating natural features such as
hillsides into temple platforms wherever possible in order to create buildings
that looked larger and higher than they really were. The Egyptians, the Inka,
and the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico lived in areas where stone was
abundant. In the highland Peruvian countryside, constructing buildings and
terraces using boulders and rough stone blocks set in mud had long been part
of the tradition of vernacular architecture. The Inka government used large
blocks of limestone to build forts and lay foundations for other structures,
polygonal blocks of diorite to build enclosure walls, and carefully squared
blocks of andesite to erect their highest-quality buildings (Rowe 1944: 226).
The Egyptians constructed tombs and temples of limestone and sandstone
blocks, using granite (which was much harder to work) for special features.
Such construction often required transporting blocks of stone by boat for long
distances along the Nile.
The amount of energy that had to be expended to utilize these different
raw materials varied. Stone was the most difﬁcult material to work, and the
extent to which it was employed provides an approximation of the amounts of
labour invested in different forms of architecture. Stone was used sparingly in

568
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the monumental architecture of Mesopotamia, the Yoruba, and Shang China,
in considerable amounts (usually in the form of small blocks) in the Valley
of Mexico and by the Classic Maya, and in large amounts (often in the form
of massive blocks) by the Inka and the ancient Egyptians (Heizer 1966). Yet
the Mesopotamians constructed mud-brick temples, palaces, and city walls of
monumentalproportionsandgreatarchitecturalbeauty;theShangsurrounded
some of their administrative compounds with stamped-earth walls of immense
size; and the larger Yoruba and Benin palaces were impressive stamped-earth
structures. It therefore seems misleading either to overrate the inﬂuence of
the environment on the choice of materials used for monumental architecture
or to equate architectural achievement with a preference for any particular
material.
Architectural styles differed greatly from one early civilization to another.
Despite their common use of stamped earth, a Shang palace, with its bilater-
ally symmetrical arrangement of buildings around a linear series of courtyards,
could never be mistaken for a Yoruba one, with its cluster of state and private
rooms located within a large enclosure wall. Temples were built on solid plat-
forms of varying heights in Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico and among
the Maya. In all three early civilizations higher, multistage platforms, often
referred to as truncated pyramids, were associated with major temples. Yet
no one could confuse a Mesopotamian ziggurat with a major temple from the
Valley of Mexico. In addition to being constructed of brick rather than stone
and rubble, a ziggurat had steeper sides, a single or triple rather than a dou-
ble stairway on the front face, and one rather than two shrines at the top. Nor
would a large platform temple in the Valley of Mexico, with its squarish proﬁle,
fail to be distinguished from a Maya temple, with its more slender, steep-sided
platform and elaborately decorated roof comb (Fig. 24.6).
Within the Maya region, each major urban centre developed styles of monu-
mental architecture that expressed its own identity or that of its ruling dynasty
(Tate 1992: xii). Temples similar to those of Late Classic Tikal, which rose
steeply for over forty-six metres, were not constructed in any other Maya city.
These temples celebrated the revived political power of Tikal’s rulers after a
long period of subordination to Calakmul (Harrison 1999). Palenque, to the
northeast,wasamuchsmallercentre thatlackedanotableEarlyClassichistory.
Chan-Bahlum, one of its ﬁrst major rulers, sought to emphasize the legitimacy
of his royal lineage by erecting a series of triple temples that emulated standard
types of the much earlier Late Preclassic Maya period. He also had himself
portrayed wearing Early Classic–style regalia long abandoned at established
centres such as Tikal. Although Palenque’s resources were limited, its archi-
tecture was distinguished by its elegance (Freidel and Schele 1988b: 64–67).

b
c
d
e
0
50 m
a
24.6. Temples on raised platforms in city-states shown at a common scale: Maya temples – (a) Tikal, Temple I; (b) Palenque,
Temple of the Inscriptions; (c) Piedras Negras, Structure K-5; (d) Valley of Mexico – Tenayuca Pyramid; (e) Mesopotamia –
ziggurat at Ur. Sources: (a) – (c) after Andrews 1975: 40–41; (d) after G. Kubler, The Art and Architecture of Ancient America
(Harmondsworth, 1962), 49.

570
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The architecture of Copan was distinguished from that of other Maya cities
by the connected arrangements of its buildings and the impression of mas-
siveness achieved by juxtaposing various structures (Fash 1991). Distinctive
architecture and urban plans made every Maya urban centre visually unique.
Bycontrast,Inkastatearchitecture,withitsheavy,unadorned(thoughsome-
times gold-plated) rectangular buildings and distinctive trapezoidal niches,
exhibited a uniform style throughout the central Andean highlands. This ar-
chitecture was visually different from that produced by any earlier or con-
temporary Andean culture. Egyptian formal architecture, with its distinctive
geometrical precision and ﬂat surfaces, likewise evolved as a homogeneous
correlate of the Egyptian state.
Constructing large buildings required far more engineering and managerial
skills than building ordinary houses. As size and weight increase, even solid
structures can collapse from internal stresses if they are not properly built
(Mendelssohn 1974). The largest single Egyptian pyramid, at Giza, is estimated
to contain over 2.3 million blocks of limestone, each weighing an average of
2.5 tonnes. Even if most of these blocks were quarried nearby, using them
to build a massive symmetrical structure 160 metres high in about twenty-
ﬁve years (the reign of a single king) would have required a vast amount of
specialized knowledge (Kemp 1989: 130–36; Lehner 1997: 200–225).
Engineering techniques were limited, although what was understood was
applied to good effect. The outside walls of large buildings in most early civi-
lizations were battered, not only giving them an imposing appearance but also
helping to steady them. The Egyptians made limited use of corbelled stone
ceilings in royal tombs and regularly used barrel vaults to roof mud-brick store-
rooms, but the roofs of major temples invariably consisted of ﬂat stone slabs
supported on short beams running between heavy pillars. The Mesopotami-
ans used bricks to construct true arches in doorways and small domed ceilings.
The more elaborate of Maya stone buildings had corbelled roofs. In the other
early civilizations, large buildings had walls of stone or stamped earth that sup-
ported ﬂat roofs formed of poles covered with earth or plaster in relatively dry
climates and gabled, thatched roofs where rainfall was more abundant. Only
the Chinese used pole-and-beam structures, a prototype of modern structural
steel construction, to support the weight of roofs. The basic architectural tech-
niques that were applied to monumental architecture were generally the same
ones that were used to construct ordinary houses, but the increasing size of
buildings and sometimes the use of unfamiliar construction materials required
the development of new and more specialized engineering skills.
The Egyptians ascribed the construction of the Step Pyramid complex at
Saqqara, the oldest collection of stone buildings in Egypt, to Imhotep, a high

Elite Art and Architecture
571
ofﬁcial of Djoser, the ﬁrst king of the Third Dynasty, and regarded him as
the inventor of stone architecture. However, recent discoveries suggest that
large-scale stone construction may have begun at Saqqara at least a generation
earlier (Davies and Friedman 1998: 64–69). In the Fourth Dynasty, work on
royal funerary complexes was under the control of the Overseer of All the
Works of the King (ımy-r k3t nbt nswt), who at that time was a close relative of
the king. Under him a large team of ofﬁcials and scribes dealt with engineering
problems and scheduled, fed, and deployed large numbers of full-time masons
and the still more numerous rotating teams of corv´ee labourers who hauled
the stone blocks. Many later Egyptian mathematical texts were concerned with
the pragmatic reckonings involved in administering such projects (Strudwick
1985: 217–50).
Archaeologists have observed how, in successive pyramid construction
projects, better solutions were found to problems of ensuring the stability
of the building blocks and preventing the collapse of inner chambers under
the weight of the heavy masses erected above them. Over the course of a
few reigns, builders learned that it was more efﬁcient to work with large stone
blocks, that horizontal courses were more stable than courses aligned obliquely
to the face of a pyramid, and that heavy structures needed to be sited on ﬁrm
bedrock. Given their unprecedented size, it is surprising how few serious errors
were made in constructing these early stone pyramids (Lehner 1997: 218–23).
The largest single Inka building project was Saqsawaman, a fortress and
ritual centre located on a hill adjacent to the royal residential precinct at
Cuzco. According to Inka tradition, twenty thousand people had worked on
this construction at any one time for about seventy-six years prior to the Spanish
conquest. Major Inka building projects were supervised by members of the
Inka nobility. Sinchi Roka, a half-brother of Wayna Qhapaq, was responsible for
major state buildings erected in and near Cuzco during that king’s reign. While
clay and stone models guided the construction of Inka state buildings, we know
little about the lower-level ofﬁcials who routinely supervised such work. The
large size of the buildings that were erected in provincial centres and elsewhere
throughout the core of the Inka kingdom and of many of the individual stones
that were used to construct them required manipulative techniques that were
unfamiliar to ordinary workers (Hyslop 1990: 51–57; Kendall 1973: 122; Niles
1993: 161; Rowe 1944: 224).
The kinds of monumental structures that were accorded greatest promi-
nence varied from one early civilization to another. In most city-states, tem-
ples were the earliest monumental buildings. Later one large temple or temple
complex in the centre of the city continued to symbolize the unity of the state.
Throughout Mesoamerica, temples were repaired periodically and enlarged

572
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
if resources were available to do so. In the Valley of Mexico, the main temple
honouring the two principal gods of each city-state stood in the centre of a
complex of smaller temples, priests’ residences, elite schools, and ritual plazas
enclosed by a wall (Matos Moctezuma 1988: 59–83). Maya temples consisted
of a shrine to a single deity built atop a pyramidal platform. Large ones tended
to be free-standing, while smaller ones were often incorporated into an ar-
chitectural agglomeration that included plazas and palaces (Andrews 1975).
The earliest Mesopotamian temples were erected on low platforms that grew
higher as they were rebuilt. In the Ur III period ziggurats were erected in hon-
our of the patron deity of each major city throughout southern Mesopotamia.
At the same time, standardized plans replaced the more variable temple lay-
outs of the Early Dynastic period. The central room of a temple, which was
approached from the side, contained the cult statue of the resident deity. Ma-
jor temples were surrounded by a walled area containing the residence of the
high priest or priestess, storerooms, workshops, and sometimes cemeteries
(Crawford 1991: 57–81).
Mesopotamian temples were referred to as mountains (kur) and believed
to be places for communication between the earth and the sky; ziggurats rep-
resented an extreme expression of this concept (George 1993). Aztec temples
were viewed as microcosms of the universe, mountains of fertility, symbols of
mythic events that had happened long ago to deities who were patrons of local
ethnic groups, and places where special connections with the sky world and
the underworld could be achieved (van Zantwijk 1985: 200). The Maya de-
scribed their temples as world trees (wakah kan) or mountains (witz) through
which it was possible to communicate with the higher and lower supernatural
realms. The shrines inside temples, where images of the gods were kept, were
regarded as caves, which provided direct contact with the gods. These shrines
were called pib nah (underground house), kunul (conjuring place), kun (seat),
or waybil (resting place) (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 136–55; Schele
and Freidel 1990: 72; Schele and Mathews 1998: 29).
At the centre of each Yoruba city was a royal palace (aﬁn), which contained
complexes of private living quarters for the king, his wives, and his children,
ofﬁcialmeetingrooms,servants’quarters,storerooms,andshrinesofimportant
deities. The royal palace at Benin also had a series of large enclosures each
of which contained the shrine of a dead king. Neither the palace nor ordinary
houses were more than one storey high, but the royal palace at Benin had
a tower rising over twenty metres, ornamented with the wooden image of
a python, which provided a visual focus for the whole city (Gallagher 1983:
26). Leading town ofﬁcials occupied large house compounds located around
the perimeter of the palace, and the central market was usually in front of

Elite Art and Architecture
573
its entrance. Near the market were important temples or shrines, the more
elaborate of which had one to three forecourts or rooms. Prior to the disruptive
wars of the nineteenth century, Yoruba temples were reported to have been
elaborately decorated with carved wooden beams and mud sculpture. Some
of them were also larger than any temples of more recent times (Apter 1992:
100; Awolalu 1979: 114–17; Krapf-Askari 1969; Mabogunje 1962; Ojo 1966a:
186; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 201).
In other city-state systems, palaces seem to have developed later than tem-
ples (Fig. 24.7). Maya ‘palaces’ were one- or two-storey stone structures built
on low platforms. They consisted of large numbers of relatively small, corbel-
vaulted rooms arranged around open courts. It has not been resolved whether
these structures were inhabited by the royal family or used for administrative
and ritual purposes while the royal family lived in lighter and airier wooden
buildings nearby (Schele and Miller 1986: 134). David Freidel (1992: 122–25)
has suggested that at least parts of ‘palaces’ served for communication with
the supernatural and as dynastic shrines, while ‘temples’ were the cult places
of speciﬁc royal ancestors.
In the Valley of Mexico, palaces were built of stone, with rooms opening
off a number of inward-facing courtyards. Usually these palaces were located
just outside the central temple precinct and close to the main city market.
The palace of Mochtezuma II was described as a rectangular structure 220
metres long, with blank outer walls and few entrances. Its rooms were arranged
around three courtyards, with the apartments of the king and his family being
located on the second storey. The ground ﬂoor contained council halls, law
courts, guest rooms, meeting rooms for warrior societies, dining halls, servants’
quarters, kitchens, a jail, arsenals, accounting rooms, and storerooms. Nearby
palaces of former rulers, considered too small or old-fashioned to be lived in,
were used as storerooms and perhaps ofﬁces (Bray 1968: 104–6).
Mesopotamian palaces were located either near the central temple complex
or in a different part of the city where more building space may have been
available. They consisted of complexes of rooms, sometimes two storeys high,
arranged around one or more internal courtyards. These rooms served as
residences for the king and his dependents, audience chambers, barracks,
workshops, and storerooms (Crawford 1991: 81–91; Margueron 1982).
In three of the four city-state civilizations there was little emphasis on royal
funerary monuments. Aztec kings were cremated along with a few sacriﬁced
retainers and their ashes interred in or near the platform of the main temple
(Dur´an 1964: 178, 210). Yoruba kings were buried in sacred places in the palace
grounds or outside the city. Their bodies were often dismembered and parts of
them buried in different locations. The heads of at least some of the rulers of

a
b
0
20 m
0
100 m
24.7. Royal palaces in city-states: (a) Yoruba – aﬁn of the king of New Oyo surrounded by the
compounds of his functionaries and state ofﬁcials; (b) Mesopotamia – plan of Palace A at Kish,
Early Dynastic Period; (c) Maya – palace at Palenque, seventh-eighth centuries a.d.; (d) Valley
of Mexico – a courtyard of the palace of King Nezahualcoyotl at Texcoco, from Mapa Quinatzin,
ofﬁcials sit in council (illustrations not to common scale). Sources: (a) after Mabogunje 1962:
ﬁg. 12; (b) after Strommenger & Hirmer 1964: 391, ﬁg. 17; (c) adapted from Tracy Wellman,
Chronicle of the Maya Kings and Queens by Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube (London, 2000),
with permission of the publisher Thames & Hudson Ltd.; (d) after G. Kubler, The Art and
Architecture of Ancient America (Harmondsworth, 1962), 54.

Elite Art and Architecture
575
c
d
0
20 m
(no scale supplied)
24.7. Continued.
Benin were interred at Ife in a special burial ground called Orun Oba Ado (The
Spirit World of the Benin Kings) (Bradbury 1958: 22; Pemberton and Afolayan
1996: 27). At Oyo and elsewhere, the underground wooden burial chamber for
the body of the king and some of his sacriﬁced retainers was covered by a small
mound and became a place where his remains were venerated (S. Johnson

576
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
1921: 55). Some Mesopotamian kings and high-ranking women were buried
underground in domed or vaulted brick or ﬁeldstone chambers. The Early
Dynastic royal burials at Ur were accompanied by richly dressed court women
and male servants. Ur III rulers had large brick funerary chapels erected over
their graves. (Crawford 1991: 104–12; Huot 1989: 209–18).
Maya provisions for dead rulers were considerably more elaborate (Coe
1988). Kings were buried with a few retainers in underground tombs dug
out of bedrock or constructed of masonry. The most elaborate was that of
King Hanab-Pakal at Palenque, which contained a magniﬁcently carved sar-
cophagus. On top of or near these tombs rulers built large funerary temples
dedicated to the gods with whom they were identiﬁed (Houston and Stuart
1996: 296–97). Michael Coe (1957; 1961) has drawn a close parallel between
these temples and the royal funerary temples in which deceased Cambodian
rulers were once identiﬁed with Hindu deities.
Considerable energy was expended on large-scale defensive architecture in
some city-state civilizations. Yoruba cities were surrounded by moats and earth
ramparts pierced by fortiﬁed gateways (Connah 1975: 244). Some Yoruba city-
wall systems expanded or contracted over time, creating multiple fortiﬁcations,
and in certain urban centres internal walls separated one section of the com-
munity from another. Defensive walls, often planted with thorn bushes, were
also constructed along the borders of some Yoruba states. The small kingdom
of Ijebu-Ode had a rampart 130 kilometres long enclosing 1,036 square kilo-
metres of farm land (Bascom 1969: 4). The mud-brick walls that surrounded
Mesopotamian cities in Early Dynastic times were celebrated as physical tes-
timonials to the relative power and afﬂuence of different city-states, becoming
a major component of their identity as well as their defence (Jacobsen 1976:
196). Vanquished states were required to breach or demolish their walls.
Mesoamerican cities were rarely walled. Tikal, with its north and south earth
ramparts, was a partial exception. Tenochtitlan was connected to the mainland
by four causeways and by aqueducts that carried fresh water into the city
centre. In addition to serving a defensive function, the causeways were major
architectural works that added to the splendour and impressiveness of the
Aztec capital.
The symbolic role of monumental architecture in city-states was to glorify
and express the power and unity of the community and the effectiveness of its
leaders. Yet different kinds of buildings occupied city centres in the various
early civilizations. Yoruba palaces were the residences and property of succes-
sive kings, but they were also identiﬁed with the multifocal government of a
state and played a major role in the religious life of the community. In the
Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia, temples marked the city centre. Palaces

Elite Art and Architecture
577
were located either adjacent to the central temple complex or elsewhere in
the city. They tended to increase in size as royal power grew and were largest
in relation to temples in hegemonic city-states. At the same time, victorious
rulers also manifested their power and wealth by building larger and more
splendid temples. In small city-states, both palaces and central temples were
small. Among the Maya, the major ‘temples’ were higher and more prominent
than the ‘palace’ complexes, but these temples were associated with the fu-
nerary cults of dead kings as well as with the worship of the gods with whom
kings were identiﬁed.
In territorial states, monumental architecture celebrated the power of the
king and of the central government. The Inka rulers constructed imposing
temples, palaces, residences for chosen women, and public halls in Cuzco and
other highland administrative centres from Ecuador to Lake Titicaca. The
uniform style of Inka state buildings made them symbols of royal power in a
kingdom that was characterized by great ethnic diversity and numerous pock-
ets of settlement separated by rough mountainous terrain. Artisans were sent
to Tumipampa, in Ecuador, to teach local masons how to construct Inka-style
buildings after the area was incorporated into the Inka state (von Hagen 1959:
77). While Inka ofﬁcial buildings were constructed of cut stone, their basic
pattern was that of the traditional commoner farmstead, a rectangular walled
enclosure with a number of rectangular one-room, one-storey dwellings, con-
structed of ﬁeld stones set in mud plaster, located around the inside of the wall.
Inka palaces consisted of a series of intercommunicating courtyards sur-
rounded by a blank stone wall. A main entrance, which was well guarded, led
into the outer courts, which contained large and small reception halls and of-
ﬁces and accommodations for palace ofﬁcials. The inner, more private, courts
were reserved for the king and his family. This section also contained gardens
and bathing facilities, as well as apartments and work areas for retainers and
domestic servants (Kendall 1973: 128–29). Kings and other members of the
royal family built rural palaces in the vicinity of Cuzco as places for relaxation
(Niles 1987; 1993; von Hagen and Morris 1998: 161–98).
The main temple in Cuzco was constructed of especially ﬁne masonry and
partly covered with gold plaques. Cuzco also contained a large residential
complex for chosen women and large halls for state rituals. At least in the
highlands, every provincial capital was a little Cuzco, with its own state temple,
government residences, ofﬁces, residence for chosen women, rest-houses for
people travelling on state business, and, on the edge of the settlement, well-
built government storehouses. The residences of provincial governors were
smaller versions of royal palaces that the king probably occupied when he
visited. Provincial nobles lived in local-style residences in ethnic communities

578
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
rather than at the provincial administrative centres (D’Altroy 1992; Hyslop
1990; LeVine 1992; Morris and Thompson 1985; Malpass 1993b).
The greatest architectural creations of Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt were
the tombs of kings built near Memphis, which remained the capital of a united
Egypt except during the Eleventh Dynasty, when the capital was located at
Thebes. The most complete royal funerary complex of the Third Dynasty, that
of King Djoser, had a rectangular stone enclosure wall 1,645 metres long and
10.5 metres high, containing a 60-metre-high step pyramid, as well as stone
chapels and other facilities for celebrating the Sed festivals that would permit
the king to continue renewing himself after death. Beginning with the Fourth
Dynasty, royal burial complexes consisted of large pyramid-shaped tombs, with
adjacent cult temples reached by covered ramps from valley temples located
alongside canals. This change represented a growing emphasis on the king’s
relation to the sun god. In the Old Kingdom, other members of the royal family
and high-ranking ofﬁcials constructed smaller, rectangular stone tombs above
burial chambers cut into the rock (Edwards 1985; Hawass 1995; Lehner 1997).
Egyptianpalacesweresurroundedbyrectangularmud-brickenclosurewalls
and contained staterooms, the king’s private apartments, separate residences
for the royal women and children, and gardens, as well as food storage facilities
and administrative ofﬁces. One such palace, The Lotus Blossom of King Isesi,
built for a Fifth Dynasty king, appears to have measured 640 by 231 metres
(Lehner 1997: 231). The original Inb h
• d (White Wall), which came to sym-
bolize the unity of Egypt, was undoubtedly a combined palace and national
administrative centre that King Menes was reputed to have built near the bor-
der between Upper and Lower Egypt. The city of Memphis, which grew up
around this palace, was relocated as the course of the Nile shifted eastward,
but successive versions of the palace and the adjacent temple of Ptah remained
the nucleus of Memphis for the rest of that city’s history (Baines and Malek
1980: 136; Davies and Friedman 1998: 38–44; O’Connor 1989). In addition
to using this administrative palace, Old Kingdom rulers appear to have built
important residential palaces near the construction sites of their pyramids.
During the Fourth Dynasty, one or more such palaces appear to have been
located adjacent to the Giza plateau. Residential palaces no longer used by
the king might have continued for a time to be employed as administrative
ofﬁces.
Egyptian temples were considerably smaller and simpler during the Old
and Middle Kingdoms than they became later. They appear to have developed
from shrines or royal funerary chapels, surrounded by rectangular mud-brick
enclosures, that were constructed in the Early Dynastic period (R. Wilkinson
2000: 16–19). Most temples were built, like palaces and ordinary houses, of

Elite Art and Architecture
579
mud-brick, although during the Middle Kingdom it became increasingly com-
mon for the inner parts of temples to be made of stone. The best-preserved
temples of the Old Kingdom are two solar temples at Abu Sir, near Memphis.
Used for royal funerary cults, they were ﬁrst constructed of mud-brick and
then rebuilt in stone. Each contained an open court in the centre of which
stood a large obelisk that was a symbol of the sun god. Most Old and Middle
Kingdom temples were roofed, houselike structures whose architecture and
decoration turned them into models of the cosmos. The shrine containing the
cult statue of the principal deity, which was lodged in the innermost, most ele-
vated, and most secluded portion of the temple, symbolized the creator deity
standing on the mound of creation.
Although the central government appears to have played a major role in
building and maintaining the main temples at Memphis and nearby Heliopolis,
there seems to have been no standardized temple architecture in provincial
capitals prior to the Middle Kingdom (Kemp 1989: 65–83; O’Connor 1992;
Seidlmayer 1996). Whereas the Inka emphasized their authority by imposing a
uniform architectural style on administrative centres throughout the kingdom,
the Egyptian rulers stressed theirs by enhancing the distinctiveness of their
capital. One reason for this difference may have been the much smaller size of
the Egyptian kingdom. Because it was likely that, in the course of corv´ee labour
or military service, most male Egyptians would visit the capital region from
time to time, focusing attention on its architecture was a symbolically effective
way to express the unity of the state.
The Shang kings and nobility erected large building complexes on stamped-
earth platforms, sometimes within rectangular enclosures surrounded by mas-
sive stamped-earth walls. These buildings had doors and windows facing south,
away from the cold winter winds. The main palace structure excavated at
Anyang was entered through a south gate ﬂanked by two large towers. This
gate opened onto a courtyard containing a great hall at the far end and two
side halls. Beyond, along the main axis of the building, was another large hall
and still farther north another courtyard with an ancestral temple at the north
end. Nearby were servants’ houses. The general layout of palaces appears to
have been established no later than early Shang times (G. Barnes 1993: 126–
28; Thorp 1991). The residences of regional ofﬁcials were probably of similar
design but built on a smaller scale and with greater emphasis on fortiﬁcations
in districts that were exposed to uprisings or attack. Ancestral shrines were an
integral part of all upper-class residential complexes, while earth altars were
associated with administrative centres.
Shang royal tombs were dug deep into the earth and had burial chambers
constructed of carved and lacquered wooden panels. Many people were killed

580
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and buried alongside kings in these graves, together with horses, chariots,
bronze vessels, and other luxury goods. Only royal graves appear to have had
stepped entrance passages approaching them from four sides, a design that
had cosmological signiﬁcance. Burial complexes of other members of the royal
family and of nobles were smaller, of simpler design, and contained fewer
grave goods. Although no superstructures survive, a stamped-earth platform
and shrine appear to have been built over each royal grave (Li Boqian 1999;
Wu 1988; Yang 1986).
The largest buildings erected in Old Kingdom Egypt were royal tombs,
some of which were the largest single structures created by any preindustrial
society. In Shang China the largest buildings seem to have been palaces, which
containedtemplesforancestorworship.TheInkaassignedequalimportanceto
royal palaces and temples for state deities, and the two types of buildings were
similar in design. Inka palaces became tombs and centres of mortuary cults for
dead kings. The largest single Inka building complex was Saqsawaman, which
was both a fortress and a royal ritual centre. Enclosure walls were constructed
around royal residences (Egypt, Inka, China), regional administrative centres
(Egypt, China), temples (Egypt), and royal tombs (Egypt). The chief aim of
monumental architecture in territorial states was to facilitate and glorify royal
authority.
William Sanders (1974: 109) has argued that in states corv´ee labour was em-
ployed mainly to erect palaces, which served as administrative centres, while
in chiefdoms it was used to build temples and tombs, which served commu-
nal (including religious) functions. Yet, while it is true that the largest temple
platform in the Valley of Mexico in the Late Aztec period was smaller than the
much earlier Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan (Willey and Phillips 1958: 184,
193–94), and that the largest pyramid-temple complexes at Tikal were smaller
than the two largest Preclassic complexes at El Mirador, Danta and El Tigre,
broader evidence does not support this conclusion. Egypt was not a chiefdom
when the Great Pyramid was built and, while palaces constituted the largest
Yoruba architectural complexes, there is no evidence that Yoruba polities were
more statelike than Mesopotamian or Valley of Mexico ones, where temples
rather than palaces dominated city centres and symbolized urban corporate
identity. Yoruba data also call into question the notion that palaces as secular
entities can be distinguished from temples as religious ones. Likewise, Classic
Maya ‘palaces’ may have served various ritual functions, while temples were as-
sociated with cosmic deities that were not only related to the city as a whole but
also identiﬁed with individual deceased rulers. In the Valley of Mexico during
the Late Aztec period, as well as in Mesopotamia and among the Classic Maya,
increasing palace size and opulence appear to have been the consequences of

Elite Art and Architecture
581
expanding royal power, which was accompanied in hegemonic states by the
increasing size of temples. In the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia this sit-
uation reﬂected either a balance of power between rulers and other powerful
institutions or, more likely, growing royal patronage of religious institutions
that continued to symbolize the community. Among the Maya, the increasing
size of both ‘temples’ and ‘palaces’ may have reﬂected greater royal control
over the economy. This evidence further calls into question the suggestion that
general stages of development can be differentiated among early civilizations.
In territorial states, temples, tombs, and palaces served in various ways and
combinations as symbols of royal power.
The energy expended on monumental architecture was considerable in all
early civilizations but appears to have varied signiﬁcantly from one to another.
While it is impossible, given the limited data that have survived, to calculate
precise energy expenditures on monumental architecture, rough approxima-
tions based on current population estimates and the largest surviving struc-
tures are possible. Among territorial states constructing the stone pyramids
and upper-class tombs of Old Kingdom Egypt appears to have required a
greater expenditure of energy in relation to total population than the impres-
sive monumental stone architecture of the Inka. The Egyptian pyramids of
the Fourth Dynasty were the most ambitious short-term building projects un-
dertaken by any early civilization. While the construction of massive stamped-
earth walls and platforms in Shang China necessitated considerable expendi-
tures of energy, the work time estimated to have built the main enclosure at
Zhengzhou (ten thousand persons working for four years [Hsu and Linduff
1988: 20]) falls far short of the labour required to build the largest Egyptian
pyramid.
Among city-state civilizations, the Maya’s ubiquitous construction of stone
temples, palaces, and elite residences probably represented the highest per
capita expenditure of energy on monumental architecture. The various city-
states in the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia, with their stone and brick
temples and palaces, seem to have occupied a middle position. While the
stone, rubble, and mortar construction of the Valley of Mexico was probably
more labour-intensive than the brick construction of Mesopotamia, the total
per capita labour input required to build its temples and palaces was probably
less than that required to construct Mesopotamia’s many temples, palaces, and
city walls. The Yoruba’s stamped-earth buildings and less elaborate earth walls
seem to have been the least labour-intensive of all the early civilizations we
have examined.
Energyexpendituresonmonumentalarchitectureinterritorialstatesappear
to have exceeded those in city-states, and this suggests that the major factors

582
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
promoting the construction of monumental architecture were the power and
resources of different governments. Among city-states, the elaboration of ar-
chitecture varied directly with the hegemonic status and prosperity of individ-
ual rulers. While, in Mesopotamia, kings and temple corporations may have
begun erecting larger and more splendid buildings as symbols of their conﬂict-
ing political claims within city-states, the increasing power of kings eventually
enabled rulers to sponsor all forms of monumental construction.
cultural traditions
The elite art and architecture of each early civilization were stylistically distinct
from those of every other, and within city-state systems urban centres exhibited
varyingdegreesofstylisticdiversity.Artandarchitecturalstyleschangedslowly,
usually as the result of innovations within ongoing local traditions. Some Early
Classic Maya copied aspects of the building styles and motifs of Teotihuacan
in emulation of that far-off but powerful foreign state, but in general their
art and architecture remained distinctively Maya (Culbert 1991c; Henderson
1981: 137–38). Inka state architecture grew out of local forms of rural con-
struction, although Inka stoneworking techniques may have been inspired by
monuments created much earlier by states in the Lake Titicaca region. Palaces
and major public buildings dating from the reigns of successive Inka kings can
be distinguished stylistically, and these differences may have served to identify
the accomplishments of individual rulers in a non-literate society (Niles 1993:
155–64; 1999). Egyptologists can likewise differentiate the art styles of succes-
sive reigns, although the monarchs who sponsored these works also identiﬁed
themselves by having their names engraved on them. This suggests that
artists and architects, as well as their patrons, in early civilizations approved of
and may have encouraged limited innovation within well-established artistic
canons.
In Egypt, the collapse of the central government at the end of the Old King-
dom massively disrupted the work of skilled artisans and temporarily ended
high-quality artistic production. Yet basic styles survived, and, as political unity
was restored, the artistic achievements of the past were successfully emulated.
In China the expansion of the Zhou kingdom was accompanied by an effort
to emulate the artistic and architectural achievements of the Shang rulers.
At the same time, however, the Zhou developed their own distinctive styles
(Hsu and Linduff 1988: 311–18). The introduction of many forms of highland
Mexican art and architecture into the Maya lowlands during the Postclassic
period is believed to have been associated with signiﬁcant ethnic movements
(Henderson 1981: 206–16). In general, however, the art and architecture of

Elite Art and Architecture
583
early civilizations appear to have been characterized by continuities in cultur-
ally speciﬁc styles.
More cross-cultural uniformity is evident in functional aspects of art and ar-
chitecture. The materials that were locally available played a signiﬁcant though
not determining role in the choice of building materials. At the same time, ex-
otic materials were often favoured for manufacturing elite luxury goods. A
limited range of engineering options restricted the structure and hence the
shape of buildings. No large domed buildings were erected in any early civi-
lization, and tall buildings consisted mainly of solid platforms. In the Valley of
Mexico and Mesopotamia and among the Maya imposing truncated pyramid-
temples evolved from simple house platforms originally intended to raise ordi-
nary dwellings above ﬂood waters or damp soil. Shang ancestral temples were
built on the same low stamped-earth platforms as upper-class residences, and
all Egyptian, Inka, and Yoruba houses and temples were built at ground level.
In Egypt, grave mounds provided the inspiration for pyramids and mastabas,
which were largely of solid construction.
Monumental buildings belonged to a limited range of types: palaces, tem-
ples, tombs, fortiﬁcations, and various combinations thereof. The ﬁrst three
were thought of as different kinds of houses. Large buildings were not de-
signed to be public amenities – the closest approximation to such a structure
being the Inka kallanka. This limited range of functional types reﬂected the
evolutionary proximity of early civilizations to small-scale societies, in most of
which houses were the only signiﬁcant structures.
Most of the two-dimensional state-sponsored art in early civilizations, when
it was representational, portrayed the activities of rulers. Kings were shown
worshipping the gods and, often single-handedly, conquering enemy peoples.
The requirements of Egyptian upper-class tombs encouraged the development
of elaborate art portraying the production of food and other goods and the pre-
sentation of these goods to dead tomb owners and their families. Not all early
civilizations were, however, committed to the production of representational
art. Shang two-dimensional art concentrated on abstract and highly symbolic
portrayals of animals and comparable Inka art on elaborate geometrical pat-
terns. One cannot predict either the style or content of the art that will be found
in any particular early civilization. Yet, while stylistically art and architecture
vary entirely idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another, structurally
and thematically they display not idiosyncrasy but weak-to-moderate degrees
of cross-cultural regularity.

25 Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
L
ifestyle and culture sharply distinguished the upper classes from com-
moners in early civilizations. The upper classes lived in larger, more
imposing, and often cleaner houses, were waited on by servants who attended
to their comforts, ate more nutritious food, wore costlier and showier cloth-
ing and jewellery, were more fastidious about their personal appearance and
hygiene, and cultivated more reﬁned manners. Behavioural stereotypes were
dramatically displayed in the upper-class tomb art of Old Kingdom Egypt,
where the calm, dignity, and physical perfection of the upper classes were
contrasted with the quarrelsomeness, rustic manners, dishevelled appearance,
and occasionally malnutrition and physical deformities of the lower classes.
The upper classes often spoke either a more reﬁned version of the na-
tional language or a completely different language from most of their subjects.
The Aztecs contrasted macehuallatolli, the form of Nahuatl spoken by com-
moners, with tecpillatolli, the form spoken by the nobility and at the royal
palace (Davies 1980: 216; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 140; Marcus 1992a: 528). While
the Classic Maya spoke Cholan Mayan in the southern lowlands and Yucatec
Mayan farther north, their writing recorded a prestige version of Cholan that
developed in the Peten and appears to have been adopted by the upper classes
throughout the Maya region (Henderson 1981: 50–52; Houston, Robertson,
and Stuart 2000). It is now agreed that emesal was a reﬁned, not a women’s,
dialect of Sumerian (Oppenheim 1964: 371). Egyptians studying to be scribes
had to learn the written version of their language, which was based on Old
Kingdom and later Middle Kingdom forms that over time diverged increas-
ingly from everyday speech. Written Egyptian was also presumably based on a
reﬁned version of the language spoken at the royal court and intended to tran-
scend regional dialects among ofﬁcials and administrators. Knowing written
Egyptian presumably inﬂuenced the language that was spoken by the educated
classes in much the same way that knowing modern literary Arabic modiﬁes
584

