Kingship
73
various words, a sound understanding of kingship in early civilizations can
only grow out of a detailed comparative study of the concepts of kingship of
particular early civilizations.
In recent years it has been suggested that some early civilizations may have
lacked monarchs, but the proposed examples, which include the Teotihuacan
state in the Valley of Mexico in the ﬁrst millennium a.d. (Cowgill 1997) and the
IndusValleycivilization(Possehl1998),arearchaeologicalonesforwhichthere
is no contemporary written documentation. The main argument advanced in
favour of the absence of kings is the lack of representation of rulers in the
iconography of these states. There is, however, a conspicuous lack of royal
portraiture in the surviving art of Shang China and the Inka. For the Shang,
there is no evidence that kings, who feature prominently in written records,
were ever represented in art. We know, however, from historical sources that
life-size statues of Inka rulers hammered from sheets of gold were objects of
veneration. All these statues were melted down by European invaders in the
sixteenth century. Likewise, in the Valley of Mexico, clearly identiﬁed royal
representations appear to have been infrequent during the Late Aztec period
and were associated mainly with larger and more centralized states. Hence
a dearth of royal portraiture in some early civilizations does not indicate an
absence of kings. Furthermore, each of the Yoruba states, in which much of
the political power is known to have been formally shared among the heads of
various leading families, had a divine king.
It therefore seems reasonable to conclude that all early civilizations probably
had monarchs, even if kingship was deﬁned somewhat differently and the
actual political power exercised by such rulers varied considerably from one
to another. While some small, non-state societies may have survived within or
on the borders of city-state systems, republican forms of sovereignty within
states, whether they took the form of despotisms, oligarchies, or democracies,
arose from and replaced monarchies. The universality of kings in our sample
suggests that in all early civilizations political power was represented in a
personal manner. Hallpike (1986: 282) has observed that monarchs provided
a concrete and hence easily understood way to represent supreme authority
at the state level.
Early states also had kings. There are examples, in Hawaii and among the
Zulu, of the evolution of kingship as the political power of certain chiefs in-
creased (Flannery 1999). In the early civilizations, however, supreme power
was less charismatic, more institutionalized, and more routinely transmitted
from one generation to the next. As a result, the ofﬁce of kingship grew ever
more important by comparison with the particular incumbent of that ofﬁce.
Sovereigntyneverthelesscontinuedtobeviewedasanattributeofanindividual

74
Sociopolitical Organization
person. Even though kinship was no longer the only or even the most important
principle structuring society, kings styled themselves fathers to their nations,
a metaphorical status that combined concepts of benevolence and authority
(Trigger 1985b). Kings were regarded as responsible for the general well-being
of their realm, and their duties included maintaining internal order and pros-
perity, defending their kingdom from foreign enemies, and managing relations
with the supernatural.
Kingship provided the ultimate level at which conﬂicts were resolved and
decisions were made about general policy, although this was often done in
the king’s name rather than through his personal intervention. Maintaining
public order required ensuring that farmers remained submissive to the state,
produced food surpluses, and paid taxes and rents. It also involved mediating
and resolving conﬂicts among the ruling classes that threatened the unity of
the state. Kings were normally supreme military commanders. Although in
Oyo and other Yoruba states military leadership was monopolized by a chief
ofﬁcial from a leading non-royal lineage, Yoruba kings formally declared war
and were held to be supernaturally responsible for the success or failure of
military campaigns (R. Smith 1969: 120). It was believed that, if an army were
defeated, the king had failed to perform his supernatural role, and regicide
or royal suicide sometimes followed (Ajisafe 1924: 21). While the powers of
kings varied, kingship constituted a focus that was essential for coordinating
and managing matters of general concern.
qualifications for kingship
In all early civilizations male monarchs were preferred, and in at least ﬁve
(Mesopotamia, China, the Valley of Mexico, Inka, and Yoruba) it appears that
only males were allowed to rule. Among the Yoruba, references to female obas
are conﬁned to the early and largely mythological period (Denzer 1994: 8).
The only female ruler reported in Mesopotamia was Ku-Baba, the reputed
ﬁrst ruler of Kish, who was also a goddess (Lerner 1986: 59). Occasionally
female monarchs ruled Egypt, and the late Egyptian historian Manetho said
that it had been agreed in very early times that women might rule. Never-
theless, female monarchs generally were installed only during dynastic crises,
and their reigns were regarded as contrary to the normal order. They also
contradicted Egyptian religious dogma, which viewed kingship as transmit-
ted directly from the god Osiris to his son and reincarnation Horus. The
goddess Isis, wife of Osiris and mother of Horus, was solely the means by
which divine kingship renewed itself (Troy 1986). It is uncertain whether the
female Maya rulers reported at Piedras Negras, Palenque, and Naranjo were

Kingship
75
monarchs in their own right or merely regents for juvenile male rulers (Graham
1991: 473).
A king symbolically embodied a polity’s identity and reconciled the conﬂict-
ing interests within it. The normal pattern of political and religious leadership
in the Valley of Mexico was based on a principle of dual authority that re-
ﬂected the primordial order of the universe. Yet the tlatoani, who represented
the male cosmic principle, predominated and was the de facto paramount ruler
of each city-state (Rounds 1983). In the 1960s some anthropologists theorized,
on the basis of the Aztec example, that all early civilizations had two or more
kings who shared power and reigned at the same time. Zuidema (1964: 127)
suggested that the Inka had a pattern of dual kingship, with the leader of the
dominant royal moiety acting as the primary ruler, but it is now clear that at
the highest level the Inka speciﬁcally rejected the general principle of moiety
co-leadership in favour of a single ruler (Gose 1996b). Some kingdoms in the
Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba simultaneously had multiple kings,
but these were inevitably small, poorly integrated states made up of a number
of groups each of which followed its own leader.
Kingship was hereditary in practice in all seven early civilizations and hered-
itary in theory in all except perhaps the Sumerian parts of Mesopotamia. This
arrangement reﬂected the generally stable, institutionalized nature of leader-
ship in early civilizations. Kingship tended to pass from father to son or from
older to younger brother before descending to the next generation. In some
states, such as the Asante kingdom of northern Ghana which developed as re-
cently as the eighteenth century, royal ofﬁce was inherited matrilineally. Yet,
even in this matrilineal society, kings sought to marry in ways that would ensure
that their sons or grandsons would succeed them (Wilks 1975). Because most
kings had to play an active role in governing early civilizations, the inheritance
oftheroyalofﬁcewasrarelydeterminedstrictlybymaleprimogeniture.Choice
was required to maximize the likelihood that each king would be followed by
a capable successor. Under these circumstances, various selection procedures
were used to determine the succession. There was variation from one early
civilization to another in deﬁning both the group from which a successor might
be chosen and how and by whom the selection was made.
Among the Classic Maya, kingship appears normally to have passed from a
ruler to a son by his principal wife. Recent studies of Maya royal genealogies
eliminate the suggestion that in the Early Classic period Maya kingship had ro-
tated among a number of different patrilineages (A. Miller 1986: 41). The pres-
tige of both parents’ patrilineages played a role in establishing the hereditary
status of an heir, thereby weakening the chances of succession by a king’s sons
born to women other than his principal wife. It is unclear, however, whether

76
Sociopolitical Organization
there was a preference for male primogeniture. The Maya practiced special
heir-designation rituals, apparently in an effort to ensure a stable succession.
This suggests the possibility that an eldest son’s right to kingship might be
called into question. It has also been argued that the custom of holding Maya
rulers captured in battle as prisoners for long periods before killing them was
intended to induce instability in their kingdoms by preventing their sons from
formally succeeding them in the interim (Schele and Freidel 1990: 194).
In Mesopotamian city-states, kingship likewise regularly passed from a ruler
to his son. Nevertheless, the succession had to be sanctioned by a city’s patron
deity, whose will was determined by oracles and divination. Urukagina of
Lagash, who did not become ruler by inheritance, boasted that his city’s god
had selected him to be king from among thirty-six thousand male citizens
(Postgate 1992: 268). Some early kings are also reported to have been selected
or approved by popular acclaim. It was envisaged that a king could be unseated
by an uprising of his own subjects, who were carrying out the wishes of their
city god. J. N. Postgate (1992: 270) suggests that patrilineal descent was not
an exclusive or adequate qualiﬁcation for kingship and that Sumerian ideology
did not admit of a hereditary right of royal succession (see also Mander 1999;
Steinkeller 1993).
Both in Egypt and among the Inka, kingship was passed down from father
to son, with the heir being designated by the ruling monarch. Ideally the heir
was a son of the king’s chief wife, but in exceptional circumstances such sons
could be passed over in favour of a more capable son by a secondary wife. Even
when an heir was designated well in advance, conﬂict over the succession might
break out following a king’s death, with different factions of the royal family
and the upper classes supporting rival candidates. To further ensure a peaceful
succession, Egyptian and Inka kings sometimes installed their preferred heirs
as junior rulers during their own lifetimes. Often the junior king took command
of the army as a deputy for his elderly father. Aged or weak monarchs in both
civilizations were sometimes killed or deposed by ambitious sons seeking to
prevent another brother or half-brother from being named as successor. In
Egypt it was essential for a new king to perform his predecessor’s burial rituals
in order to validate his claim to the throne (Shafer 1997b: 283 n. 16, 287–88
n. 52). Among the Inka the previous ruler’s choice of an heir was conﬁrmed
by a council of high ofﬁcials, by oracles from the sun god that were delivered
through the high priest of that deity, and by the oracle priests who spoke for
previous kings (Kendall 1973: 72–73; Patterson 1991; Rostworowski 1999). In
both states the transfer of royal ofﬁce was regarded as an event by which both
the cosmic and the political order were ﬁrst threatened and then ultimately
renewed.

Kingship
77
The Aztec king was selected, often amidst considerable rivalry, from among
the brothers or sons of the dead king by a council made up of the four highest
ofﬁcers of the state (van Zantwijk 1994). These ofﬁcials were usually mem-
bers of the royal family, and the new king was one of them. The cihuacoatl,
acting as regent, also played a role in the selection. It is reported that in
the formative period of the Aztec monarchy the election of a new king had
been conﬁrmed by all the men and women of the state (Dur´an 1964: 40–
41), but later the people merely acclaimed the new ruler. As the Aztec state
grew more powerful, succession shifted from a father-to-son pattern to one in
which the kingship often passed from one brother to another before descend-
ing to the next generation. This change is believed to have been intended to
increase the number of experienced adult candidates from whom a new ruler
might be selected. The new procedure favoured the appointment of a member
of the royal family who was already militarily and politically successful. As the
Aztec state came to dominate more neighbouring kingdoms, such qualities
were increasingly valued in a leader (Rounds 1982).
It has been suggested that in the Shang Dynasty kingship may have rotated
between two patrilineal branches and ten matrilineal divisions of the royal
clan (K. Chang 1976: 84). (Simpler rotations occurred among branches of
royal families elsewhere, including Yoruba ones and that of the early medieval
Scots [Whitaker 1976].) Yet there is no conclusive evidence that such a circu-
lation of kingship occurred in Shang China (Vandermeersch 1977: 284–93).
At ﬁrst kingship appears to have passed from older to younger brothers of a
single lineage before descending to the eldest son of the eldest brother. Later,
kingship passed from father to son, with a strong preference for primogeniture
(Chˆeng 1960: 216–17). This trend – the opposite of what happened among the
Aztec – may have reﬂected a need to balance the strong emphasis on seniority
as a source of higher status with a growing need for rulers who were in the
prime of life as military leadership became more important. Strictly fraternal
succession, with little possibility of passing over any but the most hopelessly
incapable candidates, would have encouraged a rapid succession of aged rulers.
The Yoruba king was chosen from among the male descendants of previous
rulers by hereditary ofﬁcials who belonged to the most important non-royal
patrilineages, acting in consultation with prominent members of the royal clan.
Kingship frequently rotated among two or more lineages or branches of the
royal family, so that a king was rarely succeeded by his own son. The state
council could order an unsuccessful king to commit suicide or to be slain
by his palace staff, but kings in turn had to conﬁrm the appointment of new
members to this council (Bascom 1969: 30–33; Pemberton and Afolayan 1996:
76–79). The obas of Benin, who had gone farther than any of the Yoruba kings

78
Sociopolitical Organization
in reducing the powers of their state council, also established a direct father-
to-eldest-son inheritance of kingship, which accorded with the general Edo
rule of inheritance. In contrast to Yoruba kings, the oba of Benin also could not
be deposed by his chief councillors (Bradbury 1957: 40–41). Like the ancient
Egyptian kings, a new king of Benin had to validate his succession by burying
his father and performing elaborate installation rituals. Inability to fulﬁl these
requirements might disqualify an incompetent elder son from becoming king.
In Oyo and some other Yoruba states, the king’s biological mother was killed
or expected to commit suicide at the same time that her son was ‘reborn’ as
king (S. Johnson 1921: 56) and was replaced by a woman who was appointed to
be the ofﬁcial queen mother (iya oba) (Law 1977: 70–71). In Benin, the king’s
mother was not killed but installed in a palace at Uselu, just outside Benin
city, where she wielded considerable power. She and her son, who was now
a divine ruler, were, however, never allowed to meet again (Ben-Amos 1983;
Bradbury 1973: 55).
Thus in early civilizations sovereignty was embodied in an individual, and
the stability of kingship was both guarded and symbolized by the continuity
of royal ofﬁce within a single family. In more powerful royal families, king-
ship tended to be inherited either fraternally or generationally within a single
lineage, but in some weaker ones it rotated among a number of lineages that
claimed descent from a single remote ancestor. While such rotation has been
explained as a device for holding together extensive kingdoms in the absence
of centralized authority (Whitaker 1976), this cannot account for the practice
in Yoruba city-states. Among the Yoruba, rotation perhaps mitigated compe-
tition among branches of royal families that might have torn states apart and
resulted in the out-migration of defeated candidates for royal power and their
supporters. The relatively low population density of the Yoruba facilitated such
movement.
Because kings in early civilizations, unlike modern constitutional monarchs,
had to be able to govern effectively and often provide personal military lead-
ership, it was highly desirable that they be adult and competent males. For
that reason, it was also desirable that a selection be made among a number
of rival candidates. Where kings had more power, kingship was inherited ac-
cording to male primogeniture or the reigning monarch decided which of his
sons should succeed him. In other cases, decisions about the succession were
made either by representatives of the royal family or by powerful members
of the upper class. Even where the heir was speciﬁed by primogeniture, the
need to perform various rites in order to become king ensured that a new ruler
either could govern effectively or was controlled and supported by people who
could.

Kingship
79
the sacred character of kingship
Although individuals, families, and small communities often had patron deities
with whom they communicated either directly or through the spirits of their
dead ancestors, ordinary human beings had only limited contact with the su-
pernatural. The king, standing at the apex of society, constituted the most
important link between human beings and the supernatural forces on which
the welfare of both society and the universe depended. These relations were
mediated by rituals that only kings or their deputies were able to perform.
Only the Shang rulers were able to sponsor the scapulimantic divination
rituals (divining according to the cracks that appear on burnt bones) that al-
lowed them, through their dead ancestors, to communicate with their high
god, Shangdi. These divinations also made possible the correct sacriﬁces that
ensured good crops and the welfare of the realm (K. Chang 1983: 44–45).
Maya kings sought, by ritually shedding their own blood or ingesting hallu-
cinogenic substances, to enter into trance states that would permit them to
communicate with the spirits of their dead ancestors and with cosmic deities.
In Egypt ofﬁcial doctrine maintained that only the king could make offerings
to the gods in temples throughout Egypt, to the royal ancestors, or even to
dead commoners in their graves. The ritual formula that transferred offerings
to the life-force (k3) of a dead person described them as ‘a gift that the king
gives’. Thus, in theory, even the water that a farmer poured onto the grave of a
dead relative passed into the spirit world as a gift from the reigning monarch,
whose presence caused Egypt to prosper (Gardiner 1950: 170–73). It has been
suggested that in Egypt prolonged natural catastrophes at certain periods may
have led to the slaying or deposing of kings who were judged incapable of
sustaining the cosmic order (B. Bell 1971).
Their being regarded as the embodiment of the strength and vitality of
the kingdom led to an emphasis on the health and vigour of individual kings.
Egyptian pharaohs, after a thirty-year reign and at frequent intervals thereafter,
celebrated a Sed ritual (h
• b sd) in the course of which they symbolically died
and were reborn. This ritual was believed to renew an aging ruler’s physical
and mental powers (Gohary 1992). Egyptians believed that a similar renewal
took place when an old king died and was replaced by his son. In general, the
iconography of kingship in early civilizations emphasized youth, prowess, and
martial skills. Egyptian kings were rarely, if ever, portrayed as old or feeble.
Because of their close association with supernatural forces kings were as-
cribed various divine attributes. The most extreme claims about the divinity
of kings were made in large territorial states, where direct contact between
the ruler and most of his subjects was very limited. Because royal authority

80
Sociopolitical Organization
was necessarily mediated through multiple levels of ofﬁcials, the ruler was
perceived as a remote being who affected people’s lives in much the same way
as deities or natural forces (thought to be the same), and this made it easier
for ordinary people to accept the notion of the divinity of rulers.
The Egyptian state placed special emphasis on the king’s being the son or
earthly manifestation of the solar-creator god and hence a universal ruler. Like
thesun,thekingexperiencedendlesscyclesofdeathandrebirth.Kingsclaimed
to be the earthly manifestation of all the major Egyptian gods, each of whom
wasassociatedwithaparticularcommunityinEgyptandidentiﬁedinthatplace
as the creator deity. By nourishing all these gods as a son nourished the spirits of
his dead ancestors, the king played a key role in maintaining the cosmic order
(Frankfort 1948; Silverman 1991: 56–71). Living kings, alone of human beings,
were referred to as gods (ntr) during their lifetimes (Hornung 1997: 301). It
was as a direct result of the supernatural power of kings that the enemies of
Egypt were defeated and the Nile River ﬂooded each year. Yet kings appear to
have been viewed as divine only in the sense that their bodies, like cult images
in the temples, were receptacles which various gods could enter. An individual
king became endowed with such power as a consequence of enthronement
rituals which involved his puriﬁcation, ritual rebirth, and crowning by the gods
(L. Bell 1997: 140; Goebs 1998: 340). As a consequence of these rituals, each
successive king represented the rebirth and earthly renewal of the previous
monarch (and ultimately of Horus), while dead kings were identiﬁed with
Osiris, the unchanging ruler of the realms of the dead. It may be as the earthly
incarnation of divine power that the reigning king was referred to as ntr nfr,
which is conventionally translated ‘beautiful god’ but may have meant ‘young’
or ‘reincarnated’ god (Hornung 1982: 138–42; Malek 1997: 227).
Egyptian Kings were believed to be so charged with supernatural power
that simply touching them or their regalia without taking ritual precautions
could cause serious injury. Yet, while they regulated the cosmos, they were not
expected to perform miracles. If a trusted adviser became ill, the king ordered
a royal physician to attend him. An elaborate funerary cult was maintained
for each dead king in the expectation that, as the unchanging (dt) form of
supernatural power, dead kings could bestow supernatural blessings on Egypt.
Despite many scholarly suggestions to the contrary, it is clear that even in the
Old Kingdom all dead human beings became dt forms, even if only very minor
ones. Thus the difference between dead commoners and dead kings was the
extent of their supernatural power rather than a difference in kind (O’Connor
and Silverman 1995).
Subjects of the Inka kings were taught that the king was a descendant
and earthly manifestation or counterpart of the sun god, Inti, and perhaps

Kingship
81
of the older creator god, Wiraqucha, as well. The sun was regarded as the
immediate source and repository of power for each Inka ruler. As in Egypt,
the cosmic order was thought to be re-created with each successive reign
(MacCormack 1991: 117). The transformation in the king’s nature that resulted
from his installation rituals required him to remarry his chief wife, who now
became his queen (quya [coya]), a practice that led many Spanish chroniclers
to believe that an Inka ruler married his chief wife only after becoming king
(MacCormack 1991: 125). Two hundred or more boys and girls were sacriﬁced
throughout the kingdom as part of the royal enthronement rituals (Kendall
1973: 197). If the king became ill at any time, four llamas and four children
were killed and large amounts of cloth burned to ensure his recovery (Murra
1980: 58).
Both living and dead Inka monarchs were viewed as playing key roles in
promoting agricultural fertility and military success, activities that were closely
linked in belief and ritual. Dead kings were believed to be reunited with
the sun, although their mummiﬁed bodies, which maintained their personal
identities, continued to be clothed and offered food as if they were alive.
Each dead king was a locus of supernatural power and an important source
of oracular pronouncements on political matters. Living and dead kings were
thus regarded, as was the sun itself, as a source of life and prosperity for their
descendants and for the Inka state as a whole (Gose 1996a). As in Egypt,
the dead ancestors of ordinary people also looked after the welfare of their
descendants; what distinguished dead kings in this regard was the source and
extent of the power.
In China, the Shang kings performed sacriﬁces to Shangdi. Whether the
god was the apical ancestor of the Shang royal clan as many experts believe,
as the senior living descendant of the royal ancestors – whose spirits alone
were able to communicate and intercede with Shangdi – the king was uniquely
qualiﬁed to manipulate supernatural power in order to promote the well-being
of the whole nation (K. Chang 1983). Kings referred to themselves as y¨u i ren
(I, the unique [foremost] man), using the status-neutral term applied to males
(ren) of any rank (Wheatley 1971: 52). Later Chinese kings, including those
of the Zhou Dynasty, did not claim divine status, although they bore the title
‘Son of Heaven’, tian (sky) having either replaced Shangdi or become a new
name for him (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 320–21). The spirits of dead kings were
regarded as extremely powerful and were consulted through divination. Their
cults were aligned with that of the ten different suns that were believed to
shine on the world on successive days in a ten-day cycle, each being identiﬁed
with a particular sun. Dead kings were offered human and animal sacriﬁces
just as were the spiritual forces inherent in the natural world.

82
Sociopolitical Organization
Among the other civilizations in our sample, which were composed of much
smaller states, there was considerable variation in the extent of deiﬁcation
ascribed to rulers. The Yoruba kings shared political authority with the title-
holders of powerful non-royal patrilineages. Yet kingship was regarded as a
divine ofﬁce, and kings were believed to possess extraordinary supernatural
powers that enabled them to ensure the fertility of their realm and the well-
being of its people (Bradbury 1973: 74). Kings were venerated as the vehicles
through which divine power was channelled into the human world, animat-
ing human beings as well as plants, animals, rivers, and the atmosphere. To
protect people from their supernatural powers, kings were ritually secluded
in their palaces. While each Yoruba state carefully remembered the names of
its successive individual rulers, royal power was viewed as a continuous pres-
ence. Each successive ruler was endowed with an unbroken continuity of such
power and spoke of what his royal predecessors had done as if their deeds
had been his own (K. Barber 1991: 51). An oba’s authority was described
as ‘unchallengeable’ and his power ‘like that of the gods’ (Pemberton and
Afolayan 1996: 1). In Benin asserting that the king performed human acts
such as eating, sleeping, washing, or dying was an offence punishable by death
(Bradbury 1957: 40).
Only Yoruba kings could perform the rituals that were crucial for the well-
being of their land and people. The powers of dead kings were transmitted
to their successors in rituals that involved the new king’s ingesting small por-
tions of his predecessor’s body. Nevertheless, individual kings who grew senile
or whose behaviour seriously displeased their councils might be slain. Many
Yoruba still believe that gods take possession of ordinary humans for brief peri-
ods and speak and act through them as ordinary worshippers enter into trance
in the course of rituals. Kings, it would seem, were believed, in the course
of their installation ceremonies, to become possessed of the power of various
deities, which remained with them for the rest of their lives or so long as they
remained healthy and ritually pure. These rituals were accompanied by human
sacriﬁces intended to increase the power of the king. While the spirits of all
dead Yoruba were venerated by their descendants, who sought to beneﬁt from
their supernatural protection and support, the spirits of rulers were the objects
of especially elaborate cults. Because their power beneﬁted the living ruler,
as did the power of cosmic deities, it helped to sustain the entire realm
(Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 73). The cult of royal ancestors was most
elaborate in Benin, where each dead king was provided with a separate ritual
compound (ugha) with its own altar (Bradbury 1957: 55). Yet here too royal
power, although supernatural in origin, tended to be quantitatively rather than
qualitatively different from that of other people.

Kingship
83
The Maya term for ‘ruler’ that was commonly used after a.d. 400, k’ul ahaw,
has been interpreted as signifying a leader with divine power or godlike status.
Maya rulers wore the costumes and attributes of various gods and bore names
that incorporated references to numerous deities. At Tikal these references
often were to Kawil, a god of fertility and dynastic continuity; at Naranjo they
were to Chak, the storm and rain god (Houston 2001; Martin and Grube 2000:
17). They may have been thought to receive supernatural powers in the course
of installation or heir-designation rituals. There is, however, no evidence that
they were believed to be gods. Dead rulers, in contrast, were identiﬁed with
ancestral heroes and major cosmic deities, apparently while retaining their
own personalities, and were worshipped in elaborate mortuary temples that
each king had erected for that purpose (Freidel and Schele 1988a; Houston
and Stuart 1996).
Finally, the Maya appear to have believed that, while rulers died, kingship
was eternal. The succession of Maya rulers resembled the periodic deaths and
rebirths of the gods who had presided over the universe in successive cycles
since the beginning of time. Every Maya king symbolically re-emerged from
the underworld at the time of his accession to direct the social order and passed
back into the underworld, as the sun did at the end of each day, at the time
of his death. The notion of royal sons’ giving rebirth to the fathers who had
engendered them has been described as the central mystery of ofﬁcial Maya
religion (Freidel, Schele, and Parker 1993: 281). Yet, by Late Classic times this
cyclical renewal was iconographically less important than chronicling the linear
succession of speciﬁc rulers in each Maya city-state. This was made possible
by the invention of the calendrical long count, which permitted short cycles of
time to be viewed as segments of an endless, ongoing series (A. Miller 1986).
The Aztec and the other inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico believed that
deities entered and possessed the bodies of their worshippers for varying
lengths of time. At the installation of new kings, elaborate rituals were per-
formed in the course of which the king was dressed in the regalia of major
cosmic deities. These rituals were intended to ensure that the powers of these
deities came to reside in the king and allowed him to ensure good harvests,
lead armies to victory, and govern the state wisely (Clendinnen 1991: 78–81;
Townsend 1989). The Aztec king was identiﬁed as the surrogate of Xiuhte-
cuhtli, the creator and ﬁre god, who, as a manifestation of Ometeotl, con-
trolled the central axis of the universe. Having this supreme ancestral deity
as his patron did not, however, prevent the Aztec king from identifying with
other major deities who were Xiuhtecuhtli’s progeny (Heyden 1989: 39–41).
In this manner Aztec kings became divine (teotl) even if they were not
regarded as gods. It was said that their lips and tongues became those of

84
Sociopolitical Organization
gods, since the gods spoke through them, and that they were the ears, eyes,
and fangs of the gods (Townsend 1992: 205; L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 398–99).
Once installed, a monarch was expected to launch a military campaign that
would demonstrate his newly acquired powers and produce a large number
of prisoners for the sacriﬁce to the gods that would complete his installation.
At their funerals, Aztec kings were again dressed in the costumes of leading
cosmic deities, one on top of the other, in order to be identiﬁed with these gods
prior to cremation (Heyden 1989: 41). The human sacriﬁces that are reported
to have been made at regular intervals to strengthen King Mochtezuma II’s
tonali soul (the source of his vigour and rationality) may have been intended
to nourish the special divine powers dwelling within him (Clendinnen 1991:
82). While Aztec kings were treated with great reverence, there is no evidence
that they were thought to be different in essence from other members of the
hereditary nobility (Read 1994). Instead, they were men in whom supernatural
powers manifested themselves to a unique degree. Although the ashes of dead
kings were interred in the platform of the chief state temple, there was no
state cult of dead kings.
Mesopotamian concepts of kingship likewise were grounded in religion. The
Sumerians believed that the gods had invented kingship as the most effective
means for governing themselves and had then transmitted it to humans. Joan
Oates (1978: 476) argues that the position of king (en or ensi) had evolved from
a paramount male temple ritual ofﬁce most commonly associated with female
deities who were the patrons of city-states. In cities where the chief patron
deity was male and therefore the en priest was female, kingship passed into
the hands of a lugal (literally ‘big man’), whose ofﬁce may have been derived
from that of a part-time military leader. Only after the Early Dynastic period
did these titles begin to form a hierarchy in which lugal, now construed to
mean ‘hegemon’, took precedence over ensi, meaning ‘city ruler’ or ‘governor’
(Hallo 1957).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian rulers were viewed as human beings occu-
pying much the same position in relation to a city’s patron deity as the steward
or foreman of an estate owner. The power that a ruler enjoyed as a result of
the approval and support of the gods was symbolized by his being invested
with the divine emblems of kingship – a crown, the throne of life, the sceptre
of justice, and a mace to control the people – that were believed to have been
sent to earth with kingship itself (Postgate 1992: 261–63).
It was the duty of Mesopotamian kings to ensure that deities were well fed,
clothed, and housed. They risked divine punishment if they failed to carry out a
god’s wishes. A prudent king might, however, reasonably expect the favour and
protection of his city’s patron deity in return for his personal good behaviour

Kingship
85
and diligent conduct of his city’s affairs. Kings received divine revelations and
commands in dreams and visions. To avoid unwittingly offending the gods,
they constantly sought through divination to ascertain the will of deities. The
only inherently supernatural aspect of kingship was that kings, together with
female priests or women of the royal household, impersonated major deities
during the annual New Year’s rituals that were associated with fertility and
cosmic renewal. Presumably the power of these deities entered into the king
and other participants during this brief period (Postgate 1992: 265–66).
Ironically, Mesopotamia, the civilization whose kings were perceived as most
human, was the only one whose legends portrayed proud or impious kings
taunting and insulting deities (Pritchard 1955: 84). These tales, however, illus-
trated that it was impossible for even the most ambitious humans to oppose
the gods or acquire their powers. Mesopotamian rulers sometimes sought to
escape divine wrath when they learned about it through divination by tem-
porarily appointing a person of humble origin as a substitute king whose death
might assuage the anger of gods. Such a substitute was slain after the danger
had passed (Frankfort 1948: 262–65).
During the Akkadian dominance over Mesopotamia (2350–2190 b.c.) and
again in the Ur III period (2112–2004 b.c.), hegemonic kings attempted to
claim divine status. Their names were written after the classiﬁcatory sign
(taxogram) that indicated a god, they were shown wearing horned headdresses
like those of gods, and legal oaths had to be sworn in their names as well as
those of deities. Some of these kings also established elaborate mortuary cults.
It may have been in this context that some of the more celebrated rulers of
the Early Dynastic period, such as Gilgamesh, who was claimed as an ancestor
by the Ur III kings, began to be described as gods or demigods. Yet these
claims failed to win widespread acceptance, and later, more powerful kings
such as those of Assyria shunned such pretensions. Once the human status
of kings had been established, it was impossible even for the most successful
hegemons or hereditary rulers to transcend it (Engnell 1967; Frankfort 1948:
297–99; Postgate 1992: 266–67).
The rulers of early civilizations invariably claimed divine support, and most
of them were believed to be endowed with divine powers. The most far-
reaching claims were made in Egypt and among the Inka, both large states
in which rulers tended to be remote from their subjects, but even here the
human nature of the individual ruler was acknowledged. Strong claims of
divinity in rulers were made among the Yoruba, whose heads of state were rit-
ually secluded from their subjects. The weakest claims were found among the
Mesopotamians, who in Early Dynastic times had become the most urbanized
people in our sample and therefore the best able to observe their rulers at

86
Sociopolitical Organization
close range. The failure of Mesopotamian hegemons to achieve divine status
suggests that historical as well as functional factors helped to shape the image
of kings in these societies.
Kings also claimed to be the descendants of major cosmic deities. According
to one version of Egyptian cosmology, at the beginning of time Egypt had
been ruled by Atum or Re (the solar-creator deity), and he was followed in
succession by his son Shu (air), Shu’s son Geb (the earth), and Geb’s son
Osiris. Each of these deities had in turn withdrawn into a cosmic realm, leaving
Osiris’s son (or reincarnation) Horus to rule Egypt. All later Egyptian kings
were linear descendants of Horus, who, after death, became identiﬁed with
Osiris, the quintessential dead ruler (Meeks and Favard-Meeks 1996: 16–32).
The Inka kings maintained that the sun god was the divine ancestor of their
dynasty, his beams having engendered (either at Lake Titicaca or in the caves
of Paqariktambo, near Cuzco) four pairs of males and females from one of
which the Inka royal family was descended (Urton 1990). The Shang rulers
belonged to the senior descent line of the Zi clan, which, according to a legend
recorded at a later date, was descended from a mortal woman who had been
made pregnant by a black bird that may have been Shangdi and was perhaps
also identiﬁed with the sun (K. Chang 1976: 167). Yoruba kings each claimed
to be descended from one of the sixteen sons of Oduduwa, the god who had
lowered himself from the sky on an iron chain to create the world (Bascom
1969: 10–12). In Benin a descendant of Oduduwa replaced a previous dynasty
of ogiso (sky kings) that had been deposed for misrule (Ben-Amos and Rubin
1983: 21; Egharevba 1960: 1–6). The Aztec rulers and the nobility in the Valley
of Mexico traced their descent from an incarnation of the god Quetzalcoatl,
who had ruled at the ancient city of Tollan (M. E. Smith 1996: 37–38). Maya
rulers likewise traced their lineages back to one or more major deities of their
pantheon (Houston and Stuart 1996: 290). The blood of Maya kings and of the
descendants of kings was believed to be specially charged with supernatural
power. Only Mesopotamian kings did not normally claim descent from the
gods.
These claims established a genealogical afﬁnity between kings and cosmic
deities. They also implied that kings differed from commoners in origin and
nature. Myths of this sort did not, however, clearly distinguish kings from
hereditary nobles who were descended from earlier rulers. In the case of the
Aztec and Inka nobility or the Yoruba royal clans, these descendants might
be quite numerous. A Shang or Zhou king was further distinguished as the
highest-ranking member of the senior lineage of the royal clan, which en-
dowed him with indisputable genealogical superiority and ritual power. The
Egyptians claimed that individual kings were fathered by the sun god, Re, who

Kingship
87
had taken possession of the reigning king’s body at the time of their procreation.
While rulers such as the New Kingdom Pharaoh Ramesses II might boast that
their divine conception had set them apart from other humans even when
they were still in the womb, the only proof that they had been conceived in
a special manner was their eventual succession to the throne (Hornung 1982:
142). Claims like these generally emphasized not kings’ uniqueness but their
leadership roles, and they appear to have given kings powers that were greater
than but not inherently different from those possessed by other humans. It
was installation rituals that played the pivotal role in endowing kings with the
supernatural powers that set them apart from other people. In the course of
these rituals, which generally involved fasting, penance, and being invested
with diverse regalia associated with deities, kings were identifed with vari-
ous gods and acquired their divine powers. Egyptian and Yoruba rulers and
perhaps others also became reincarnations of their predecessors. The sacred
powers acquired in the course of these rituals were henceforth symbolized
by the veneration with which rulers were treated, by the distinctive costumes
they wore, and by the special regalia, such as crowns, staffs, and royal thrones
or stools, that they alone were permitted to use. Like the kings themselves,
these objects were often thought to be charged with supernatural power. While
Mesopotamian kings were normally not believed to possess supernatural pow-
ers in their own right, even they enjoyed the special protection and support
of the tutelary deities of their city-states. Installation rituals transformed kings
into intermediaries between the human and the divine.
As individuals, kings remained human and mortal, but as incumbents of a
sacred ofﬁce they were set apart from all other humans as the result of having
acquired unique supernatural powers. These powers enhanced their authority
but also tended to delimit the scope of what they could do (Postgate 1992:
274). Supreme political power was universally understood and expressed in
religious terms. Kings, like the cosmic gods, possessed powers to assist and
harm human beings. To their subjects these powers must have resembled the
immense forces that were inherent in the natural realm.
Some early civilizations emphasized possession of supernatural powers more
than others. Those that most stressed such powers tended to be ones in which
states were larger and kings more remote from most of their subjects. Yet the
failure of increasingly powerful Mesopotamian kings to achieve recognition for
claims to possess divine powers reveals that cultural traditions played a major
role in determining to what extent kings were regarded as divine. Neverthe-
less, in Mesopotamia no less than in other early civilizations, political power
was conceptualized in supernatural rather than simply political or economic
terms.

88
Sociopolitical Organization
retainer sacrifice
An interesting indication of how kings were viewed in early civilizations is the
extent to which retainers and other human victims, willingly or unwillingly,
were slain at the funerals of kings and high-ranking members of the nobility.
There is evidence of retainer sacriﬁce in the early phases of both Egyptian and
Mesopotamian civilizations. Hundreds of female and male servants, as well as
artisans, were slain and buried around the Egyptian royal funerary complexes
of the First Dynasty at Abydos and in smaller numbers around the tombs of the
highest-ranking ofﬁcials at Memphis (Edwards 1985: 23). Substantial numbers
of retainers were interred in what are generally considered to have been Early
Dynastic royal burials at Ur in Mesopotamia, although the female burials may
have been those of high-ranking en priestesses rather than queens (Pollock
1999: 211). Some memory of this practice may survive in later Mesopotamian
epic poetry, which speaks of servants’ accompanying deceased rulers to the
underworld (Kramer 1963: 130). Yet these sorts of killings do not appear to
have persisted for long in cultures in which human victims were not regularly
sacriﬁced to the gods.
Among the Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba, who regularly made human sacriﬁces
to deities, human victims were slain in the course of high-status funerals.
Human sacriﬁce was regularly part of the burial rituals of Yoruba and Benin
kings (S. Johnson 1921: 44, 55). At Benin members of the oba’s bodyguard were
among those slain. In addition, wives and slaves of rulers committed suicide
so that they could continue to serve them after death (Egharevba 1960: 76;
Lucas 1948: 256). Human victims were also periodically sacriﬁced as part of
the cult of deceased kings (Bradbury 1957: 39, 55).
The Shang interred up to several hundred humans in royal graves. While it
has been suggested that most of these victims were foreign captives, archaeo-
logical data indicate that they represented a cross-section of royal retainers –
women, ofﬁcials, guards, and servants – as well as some prisoners of war. The
latter were often decapitated or dismembered and had their hands tied behind
their backs at the time of death (Keightley 1969: 369–77). Human beings were
also sacriﬁced periodically, along with various domestic animals, and buried
around the graves and ancestral temples of deceased members of the royal
family. These practices appear never to have been extensive at the Zhou court,
even during the Shang period, and died out completely during the succeeding
Zhou Dynasty (Chˆeng 1960: 69–79; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 172).
It is reported that when an Inka king died, his favourite secondary wives,
servants, and some ofﬁcials were strangled, many of them voluntarily. In addi-
tion, one thousand boys and girls ﬁve to six years old, many of them children

Kingship
89
of the non-Inka provincial nobility (Betanzos 1996: 131–33), were assembled
and buried in pairs throughout the kingdom. Among the Shang and the Inka,
retainer sacriﬁce was practised on a much smaller scale at the burial of major
ofﬁcials.
Whatever the purposes served by the killing of humans in funerary contexts,
it is clear that it was not a unitary phenomenon. Some killings appear to have
been, like animal sacriﬁces, blood offerings intended to strengthen the soul
of the dead person with the victim’s life-force. This appears to have been the
case with the humblest Shang and Inka funerary killings. At least some Yoruba
human sacriﬁces made after the time of burial were charged with carrying
messages and requests for supernatural assistance to the deceased (Connah
1987: 145), but these sacriﬁces also appear to have been intended to nourish
and strengthen the spirit of the dead person. Sacriﬁces of this sort closely
resembled those made to cosmic deities. In other cases it seems that household
servants and ofﬁcials were buried with, or near, a dead king or member of the
upper class so that their souls might accompany and continue to serve that
person. The killing of people, whether to nourish or to serve the dead, was a
form of conspicuous consumption and thus a striking symbol of the deceased’s
high status, but its restriction to societies in which human beings as well as
animals were regularly sacriﬁced to the gods suggests that it was associated
with the equation of kings (including dead ones) with supernatural power. It is
also signiﬁcant that a more restrained form of retainer sacriﬁce was practised
by high ofﬁcials in societies where it was an attribute of royal burial practices,
Mesopotamia being the exception. While kings were publicly recognized as
being politically and symbolically unique, they were also identiﬁed in terms of
ritual treatment as members of the upper classes.
validating power
Kings everywhere validated their claims to both temporal and supernatural
power through their lavish lifestyles. Regardless of the extent of their power,
kings, high ofﬁcials, and their families lived in splendid palaces, wore magnif-
icent clothes and elaborate jewellery, and were served by a large number of
retainers. They also entertained lavishly and bestowed rare and valued presents
on their principal supporters. The style and customs of the royal court set a
standard that other people emulated to whatever extent they could afford and
the law permitted. The wealth of kings provided visible evidence of their high
social standing and the power of their kingdoms. At the same time kings were
assiduous in their public and private devotions to the supernatural: building
temples, making elaborate sacriﬁces to the gods, and presiding over lavish

90
Sociopolitical Organization
rituals that ensured the proper functioning of the universe and the welfare of
society.
They also had to guard their personal authority in their relations with others.
Their interactions with their subjects were heavily ritualized and governed by
special etiquette. Among the Inka, for example, even the highest ofﬁcials had
to wear simple clothes, go barefoot, and carry small sacks on their shoulders
when they were granted an audience with the king (Rowe 1944: 259). Among
the Aztec and elsewhere, making eye contact with the ruler was forbidden.
Kings tended to spend much of their time in the private apartments of their
palaces, to which few people other than their servants had access, granting
audiences to only a select few of their subjects and appearing in public only in
connection with major rituals and communal festivities. Royal seclusion was
carried farthest among the Yoruba, whose kings rarely left the inner quarters
of their palaces and appeared in public only with their faces hidden by the
beaded fringe of their crowns (Bascom 1969: 30–31).
To protect their supernatural powers and maintain their ability to com-
municate with and inﬂuence the supernatural, kings were expected to ob-
serve various taboos and penances. Major rituals sometimes required puriﬁ-
cation, fasting, sexual abstinence, and staying awake for long periods. Maya
rulers subjected themselves to painful blood-letting to induce trances that
facilitated communication with the supernatural (Schele and Miller 1986).
Mesopotamian kings had their faces ritually slapped once a year by the high
priest of their city’s patron deity to remind them of the need for humility in
their relations with the gods (Kuhrt 1987: 33).
Kings also had to be able to manage the political affairs of their kingdoms
effectively. Many kings led armies into battle, and their ability to defeat foreign
enemies both reﬂected and reinforced their political power. In centralized
states powerful kings could, if necessary, use force to maintain public order
and keep both ofﬁcials and subject peoples under control. Where power was
less centralized, kings had to rely more on their persuasive and diplomatic skills
(Apter 1992). The political role of kings in preindustrial states was summarized
in an observation that Arab writers attributed to the sixth-century-a.d. Persian
monarch Khosrow I. He is supposed to have remarked that a kingdom could
prosper only if its ruler had the skill to curb the rapacity of his ofﬁcials so
that agriculture and craft production might ﬂourish and support the taxation
system on which royal power depended (R. McC. Adams 1965: 71). Even an
astute Yoruba king could transcend the severe physical and political limitations
of his ofﬁce to curb mutually destructive competition among rival members of
the upper classes and enhance his own authority.

Kingship
91
Finally, it is we, not the people who lived in early civilizations, who differ-
entiate between political and sacred power. The Yoruba believed that a king
who channelled supernatural energy into the human realm played no less a
role in defeating foreign enemies than did the non-royal hereditary ofﬁcial
who led the state’s armies. The New Year’s rituals that played a major role in
Mesopotamian state religious observances, by reenacting and thus renewing
the creation of the world and the establishment of kingship among the gods,
afﬁrmed the parallelism between the earthly realm and that of the celestial
deities on which the prosperity of the earth depended (Hooke 1958). In Egypt
the same verb (h˘
ı) designated the appearance of a king in glory upon his throne
and the dawn, and the generational cycle by which a young king succeeded
an older one complemented the daily birth, death, and rebirth of the sun and
the annual Nile ﬂood. Royal succession was as essential as these natural cycles
because it renewed the cosmic power by which the gods and hence the uni-
verse, no less than Egypt itself, were maintained (Frankfort 1948: 148–61). In
a culture in which kingship was perceived to be ‘a power like that of the gods’
and essential for maintaining the cosmic order, such parallels embraced both
the central ideology and the practical role of kingship.

6 States: City and Territorial
A
state is a politically organized society that is regarded by those who
live in it as sovereign or politically independent and has leaders who
control its social, political, legal, economic, and cultural activities. Two sorts
of state appear to have been associated with early civilizations: city-states and
territorial states.
The term ‘city-state’ has long been employed to describe the polities of
Classical Greece, Renaissance Italy, and parts of ancient Southwest Asia
(Griffeth and Thomas 1981). J. Eric Thompson (1954: 81–82) designated Clas-
sic Maya polities as city-states in the mid-twentieth century. More recently,
city-states have been identiﬁed as the normal form of early state (Nichols and
Charlton 1997) or as one of two types of state that prevailed from antiquity
until the nineteenth century (Hansen 2000). City-states were relatively small
polities, each consisting of an urban core surrounded by farmland containing
smaller units of settlement. In territorial states a ruler governed a larger region
through a multilevelled hierarchy of provincial and local administrators in a
corresponding hierarchy of administrative centres. The distinction between
these two types of states, as they are associated with early civilizations, rests
not only on the size of territories but also on differences in the nature of their
urban centres and in their economic and political organization. Each of the
civilizations being studied consisted of city-states or territorial states but not
both.
The distinction was foreshadowed when Childe (1928; 1934) ﬁrst contrasted
the development of civilization in Egypt and in southern Mesopotamia. He
noted that in southern Mesopotamia monumental architecture, luxury crafts,
and writing had developed within a network of small city-states, while in Egypt
similar developments had occurred under the sponsorship of a single royal
court, all the tiny chiefdoms and early states that had evolved along the Nile
River north of Aswan during the late fourth millennium b.c. having been
92

States: City and Territorial
93
united under the enduring sovereignty of a divine monarch. He attributed this
difference to variations in natural settings and in the techniques devised to
extract surpluses from peasant producers. This distinction was adopted and
extended by Henri Frankfort (1956) and more recently by Charles Maisels
(1990).
Many anthropologists do not accept this dichotomy. The majority of these
see civilizations as evolving in a unilinear fashion from something resembling
ColinRenfrew’s(1975)early-statemoduleintocity-states,territorialstates,and
ﬁnally empires (Allchin 1995; Renfrew 1997; D. Wilson 1997; Yoffee 1997).
In this scheme, city-states and territorial states constitute successive stages
in the development of larger and more complex polities rather than alterna-
tive forms of political organization that occur at the same level of complexity.
Michael Mann (1986), who emphasizes the logistical problems inherent in con-
trolling preindustrial societies, argues that small city-states were of necessity
typical of early civilizations, although he acknowledges that ancient Egypt and
China developed larger and more unitary states at an early period. It has also
been argued that the hegemonic patterns in both Mesopotamia and the Valley
of Mexico provide examples of city-state systems evolving towards territorial
states (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 163).
Marcus (1998: 92) maintains, in contrast, that the ﬁrst states to appear in
any region were territorial states, most of which later broke apart to produce
clusters of city-states. She regards it as unlikely that a group of chiefdoms could
evolve directly into a set of city-states. The development of extremely large
urban centres at very early stages of civilizations such as Uruk in prehistoric
Mesopotamia, Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico, and El Mirador in the
Maya lowlands offers apparent support for this scenario. While much remains
to be learned about how the earliest civilizations developed, the long persis-
tence of both types in different regions of the world suggests that territorial
states and city-states are stable alternatives rather than sequential stages in the
development of more complex societies.
I agree that larger political entities must have evolved from small-scale
beginnings. Yet it appears that the rate at which greater size and complex-
ity developed differed signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another, as
did the relations among political and cultural variables. In trying to impose a
unilinear scheme on the development of Egyptian and Mesopotamian civiliza-
tions, Steward (1949) was forced, by the primary importance that he accorded
to political criteria, to equate the Late Predynastic period, which immediately
preceded the political uniﬁcation of Egypt, with the Early Dynastic period that
preceded political uniﬁcation in Mesopotamia. Yet in Egypt the Late Predynas-
tic period preceded the development of signiﬁcant monumental architecture

94
Sociopolitical Organization
or an elite art style, while in Mesopotamia these features were already present
long before the Early Dynastic period. Renfrew’s early-state module, a political
unit occupying approximately ﬁfteen hundred square kilometres with a popu-
lation averaging about ten thousand people and a principal settlement near the
centre, resembles a small early city-state, but it fails to capture the consider-
able variation in size and political organization that was exhibited by the early
states that European explorers encountered in places such as Buganda, South
Africa, Hawaii, and eastern North America (Claessen and Skaln´ık 1978; Cohen
and Service 1978; Haas 1982). The evidence suggests much greater diversity
in political organization than can be accounted for by a unilinear evolutionary
model. The distinction between city-states and territorial states is an attempt
to recognize that diversity.
city-states
Early city-state civilizations consisted of a network of adjacent, self-governing
city-states. City-states rarely occurred in geographical isolation in early civi-
lizations, although in later periods in the Middle East isolated cities such as
Petra and Palmyra developed along trade routes. The territory controlled by a
small city-state might be less than ten kilometres across, although exceptionally
wealthy or powerful city-states might exceed one hundred kilometres in diame-
ter. City-states also varied in the concentration of their settlement. Contrary to
Anthony Giddens’s (1981) claim that carefully delineated boundaries between
polities are associated only with modern nation-states, boundaries between
early city-states were clearly demarcated by natural features, artiﬁcial mark-
ers, or walled fortiﬁcations. Sentinels or armed guards were often stationed
at such frontiers (McAnany 1995: 85–89). Most city-states had populations
of between ﬁve thousand and twenty thousand people, but some hegemonic
city-states were considerably more populous.
In our sample there are four examples of city-state civilizations: south-
ern Mesopotamia, the Yoruba and Benin states of West Africa, the Valley of
Mexico, and the Classic Maya. Agricultural settlement is documented in south-
ernMesopotamiabyatleasttheﬁfthmillenniumb.c.(Redman1978)(Fig.6.1).
For the Uruk period, between 3500 and 3200 b.c., there is evidence of in-
creasing social stratiﬁcation, organized warfare, urban centres, and a city-state
system. There is also evidence of large public buildings, monumental art,
bronze-casting, cylinder seals, and the earliest record-keeping. By far the
largest city in southern Mesopotamia at this period was Uruk (Erech), which
in the Late Uruk period occupied one hundred hectares and by Early Dy-
nastic I times had expanded to four hundred hectares and may have had a

States: City and Territorial
95
50 E
45 E
40 E
50 E
45 E
40 E
35 N
30 N
35 N
30 N
Persian
Gulf
D
i
yal
a
R
i
v
e
r
Tigris
R
iv
er
E
u
p
h
r
a
t
e
s
R
i
v
e
r
see detailed
 map
0
100 km
50
Tig
ris
Ri
ver
E
u
ph
r
ates
Ri
ve
r
Babylon
Kish
Larak
Nippur
Abu
Salabikh
Isin
Adab
Shurupak
Umma
Girsu
Lagash
Larsa
Uruk
Ur
Eridu
Babylon
Ur
H
a
wr el Hammar
Some major city-states
of 3rd millennium B.C.
Southern
Mesopotamia
Southern
Mesopotamia
N
i
g
er
R
iv
er
Benin
5 E
5 E
5 N
5 N
10 N
10 N
Atlantic
Ocean
Yoruba Civilization
(Water courses modern)
Dzibilchaltun
Coba
Calakmul
Tikal
Naranjo
Seibal
Copan
Quirigua
Piedras
Negras
Tonina
Palenque
Palenque
Caracol
Caracol
20 N
15 N
20 N
15 N
105 W
100 W
95 W
90 W
105 W
100 W
95 W
90 W
Triple Alliance tributary
system and Classic Maya cities
Some Classic Maya centres
Tributary States
0
15 km
5
10
Cauauhtitlan
Xaltocan
Teotihuacan
Texcoco
Chalco
Colhuacan
Coyohuacan
Tlacopan
Azcapotzalco
Tenochtitlan
Lake
Texcoco
Detailed Map of Centre
of Basin of Mexico
Some other city-states
Chinampa zone
Major allied city-states
Causeway
Dyke
0
400
800 km
General Scale
Triple Alliance tributary
system and Classic Maya cities
Tenochtitlan
Colhuacan
Gulf of Mexico
Pacific Ocean
Tenayuca
see detailed
 map
Old Oyo
Ijebu
Owo
Ogbomoso
Ogbomoso
Egbe
Owo
Ife
Ijebu
Old Oyo
Some major cities
Oyo tributary
system ca. 1780
6.1. Maps of city-state civilizations at common scale (same scale as map 6.2).

96
Sociopolitical Organization
population of forty thousand to ﬁfty thousand people (R. McC. Adams 1981:
71, 85). The Uruk period thus witnessed the development of early civiliza-
tion in southern Mesopotamia. While there has been some linguistically based
speculation about ethnic changes prior to the Uruk period, there is striking
continuity in the culture of southern Mesopotamia from Uruk times into the
historical period. Yet archaeological data indicate that social and political or-
ganization may have altered radically at the end of the Uruk period, which
some scholars interpret as a time of severe political disruption (Pollock 1999;
Yoffee 1995: 286–88). A city-state system persisted in southern Mesopotamia
for over ﬁfteen hundred years, until lasting regional uniﬁcation was brought
about following the Old Babylonian dynasty.
Possibly beginning as early as the Uruk period, the inhabitants of some
thirty city-states recognized southern Mesopotamia as a region (kallam) that
possessed cultural unity, although it may already have been seen as divided
into a largely Sumerian-speaking region (kiengi) in the south and an Akkadian-
speaking region (kiuri) in the north. From early times the temple of Enlil in
Nippur, a city that marked the division between these two territories, may
have been, if not the centre of a league of city-states, at least a neutral location
where representatives of these city-states could meet to regulate their affairs
(Maisels 1999: 160–63; Postgate 1992: 34–38; Van De Mieroop 1999: 222–24).
Although the archaeological documentation is less extensive, Yoruba civiliza-
tion evolved from a West African village society based on a largely indigenous
agricultural complex. The origin of Ile Ife, which has remained the ritual cen-
tre of Yoruba civilization, appears to date at least from the ninth century a.d.
Ife was at the apogee of its political power and prosperity from the eleventh
to the ﬁfteenth centuries. About this time another city, Oba, ﬂourished to the
northwest, possibly at the site of Esie. By the ﬁfteenth century Owe rivalled Ife,
and for two hundred years it was the cultural link between Ife and the emerg-
ing state of Benin (Edo), which, although Ewe-speaking, became in terms of
its upper-class culture an integral part of the Yoruba sphere. In the sixteenth
century, the city-state of Oyo, in the northwest, became dominant, exerting its
power for the next two hundred years over Yoruba states to the south and east
of Ife but never seeking to control Ife itself. In the south, Ijebu Ode controlled
the coast between Benin and Lagos from the ﬁfteenth to the eighteenth cen-
tury (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 1–2). In the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, Oyo and Benin were the most powerful states. Thus civilization
has ﬂourished in the Yoruba region in the form of a series of city-states for
over one thousand years (Connah 1975; 1987; Ryder 1969; 1984; Shaw 1978;
Willett 1973). Some Yoruba urban centres have persisted throughout that pe-
riod, others have come into existence or disappeared, and still others have

States: City and Territorial
97
moved to safer locations. In historical times the Yoruba region had twenty or
more kings and more than one hundred subordinate rulers of towns or groups
of villages (R. Smith 1969: 8).
The pattern of city-states recorded in the Valley of Mexico in the early
sixteenth century was the most recent of a series of city-state conﬁgurations
beginning about 650 b.c. By that time the valley had a series of well-deﬁned
settlement hierarchies, the top level of which consisted of sites with several
thousand inhabitants and civic-ceremonial architecture. By 350 b.c. Cuicuilco,
in the southwestern quadrant of the valley, covered at least four hundred
hectares, had a population estimated to have been about twenty thousand,
and contained temple platforms up to twenty metres high. Teotihuacan, in
the northeast quadrant, probably equalled or exceeded Cuicuilco in size and
population. From this point on, periods in which one or a few powerful city-
states dominated regional settlement patterns alternated with periods in which
city-states tended to be more equal in size and power. Centralization was
characteristic of the period between a.d. 100 and 750, when Teotihuacan was
dominant, the period between 950 and 1150, when Tula was the leading centre,
and the Late period, when the Aztec and their Texcocan allies became the most
powerful and populous of some forty to sixty city-states in the valley (Charlton
and Nichols 1997b; Hodge 1984). While the Aztec state of Tenochtitlan may
have had a population of two hundred and ﬁfty thousand, most other states
had between ﬁve thousand and ﬁfty thousand inhabitants.
It is not clear how much ethnic continuity there was in the Valley of Mexico
over this two-thousand-year period. It is also unknown how long Nahuatl-
speaking people have lived in the region. Strong cultural continuity resulted
from new arrivals’ assimilating local cultural traditions. The Aztec’s own his-
tory of their city-state offers an ofﬁcial account of the evolution of Tenochtitlan
from the time when landless Nahuatl-speaking immigrants established it as a
semirural community in 1325 until it had become the dominant city-state in
the valley in the mid-ﬁfteenth century. While the Aztec claimed to have come
from the north, they quickly adopted local institutions and cultural patterns.
Similar but less detailed information is available concerning the older city-
state of Texcoco. Despite varying degrees of hegemony and efforts by rulers to
control and sometimes even to absorb neighbouring city-states, there is no ev-
idence in the Valley of Mexico, any more than among the Yoruba, of city-states’
being replaced by territorial ones. Nor does the extraordinary compression of
population into one major urban centre during the Teotihuacan period support
the idea that city-states developed from a primordial territorial state.
Classic Maya civilization grew out of a tradition of urbanism and monumen-
tal architecture that had become widespread in the Maya lowlands during the

98
Sociopolitical Organization
Late Preclassic period (400 b.c.–a.d. 250), but some of its most distinctive fea-
tures, such as its calendrical long count, stela complex, and increasing focus on
kingship, ﬁrst appeared in the Tikal area in the third century a.d. and gradually
spread from there. Among the Maya a state was identiﬁed by the presence of
a sacred king, but where an administrative centre lacks monumental art and
hence ofﬁcial texts there is no way to determine whether its head was a minor
king who lacked the resources or authority to erect stone monuments or a sub-
ordinate, non-royal ofﬁcial. Therefore it cannot be determined whether small
centres remained kingdoms and were merely rendered tributary to powerful
neighbours or whether they were organically incorporated into larger states.
(A similar uncertainty would apply to the Valley of Mexico in 1519 were it not
for extensive Spanish documentation.) In Late Preclassic times El Mirador
was the largest Maya urban centre. In the Classic period Tikal appears to have
been the most powerful city-state until a.d. 562, when it was encircled and
defeated by an alliance of Calakmul and other city-states, including Caracol.
Calakmul remained the most powerful state until a.d. 695, when it in turn was
defeated by Tikal. After a.d. 750 power appears to have been shared among
a growing number of smaller independent centres (Folan et al. 1995; Sharer
1996).
Assuming that each Maya site that had its own emblem glyph was a separate
state, Peter Mathews (1991: 29) argues that in Late Classic times there were
sixty or more Maya city-states, each controlling about twenty-ﬁve hundred
square kilometres. Any larger units took the form of short-lived tributary sys-
tems in which defeated states remained self-governing. Marcus (1976; 1992b;
1993) has suggested that only polities much larger than this would have been
true states, smaller ones having been de facto chiefdoms. While some Yoruba,
especially in the northeast, lived in chiefdoms, documentary evidence indi-
cates that many small political units, both among the Yoruba and in the Valley
of Mexico, were organized as states. Marcus also argues that the large num-
ber of Maya kingdoms documented after a.d. 750 indicates not that existing
kings were beginning to erect monuments but that the governors of outlying
provinces of large states were declaring their independence and becoming
kings in their own right.
R. E. W. Adams (1986: 437) has proposed that in Late Classic times there
wereonlyeightMayaregionalstates,eachextendingoveraboutthirtythousand
square kilometres. Other Mayanists have envisioned some thirty states, each
averaging about eight thousand square kilometres (Chase and Chase 1996:
805). Some of the largest of these states had at least two levels of regional
centres above that of villages. In the course of their development, dominant
centres appear to have subordinated neighbouring minor polities by removing

States: City and Territorial
99
their sacred rulers or preventing their emergence. Less complete integration
would have created states that were precarious unions of small polities whose
rulers continued to nurture hopes of independence. The extraordinary ﬂour-
ishing of major Maya centres suggests that more complete integration was
frequently achieved. This pattern was very different from the one associated
with the growth of Mesopotamian city-states, whereby the populations of most
surrounding communities were incorporated into evolving central urban com-
plexes (Adams and Nissen 1972). The largest Mayan state was probably Tikal,
which may have controlled 21,095 square kilometres prior to its defeat and
the loss of some of its dependencies in a.d. 562 (Chase and Chase 1996: 805).
This area may, however, have included some tributary states as well as the
subordinate centres that were an integral part of the Tikal polity.
Although larger Maya centres fought with each another and sometimes
reduced one another to tributary status, it seems that they did not try to in-
corporate each other to form still larger states. Instead they aimed to reduce
rival states to self-governing but tributary status for as long as possible. After
its defeat, Tikal, for example, continued to be ruled by its own sacred king.
This may explain why victorious kings only rarely recorded their successes on
monuments erected in the major polities they had defeated (Webster 1998:
317). The survival of sacred kings at centres such as Tikal during periods of
subordination to other centres and the relative ease with which such states
seem to have freed themselves from domination by powerful neighbours sug-
gest that the control of defeated states by their victorious neighbours remained
weak and indirect.
While Anne Pyburn (1997) is correct that, in terms of size, the distinction
between city-states and territorial states may be arbitrary, Maya polities appear
to fall into the general size range of city-states. They also resemble city-states
far more closely than they do territorial states in terms of social, economic, and
cultural criteria. Comparisons with other city-state systems are complicated
by the unusually dispersed nature of Maya rural and urban settlement and
by our very limited understanding of Maya administrative systems. In having
a more dispersed population and therefore more secondary centres, Maya
states resemble Yoruba ones more closely than they do the compactly settled
city-states of the Valley of Mexico and Mesopotamia.
Each city-state usually had a centrally located capital city. The central loca-
tion of the capital maximized the mutual accessibility of rulers and their sub-
jects, made the capital most easily accessible to rural dwellers, and offered the
city maximum protection against attacks from neighbouring city-states. Urban
centres contained 20 to 80 percent or more of the total population of a city-
state and ranged in size from a few thousand inhabitants to over one hundred

100
Sociopolitical Organization
thousand under exceptional circumstances. In some of the larger city-states
and those with more dispersed populations, the capitals were surrounded by
smaller administrative centres and both of these by numerous subordinate
farming villages or hamlets. Benin is reported to have been surrounded by
several hundred villages, some individually self-governing and others forming
small political groupings or belonging to subordinate chiefdoms (Bradbury
1957: 15). Robin Law (1977: 9) suggests that in the Oyo kingdom the farming
population had been more dispersed during the Old Oyo period than it was in
the nineteenth century, when escalating warfare led people to seek the safety
of the towns. As a result of this relocation, many areas of the countryside came
to be occupied only on a seasonal basis. Elizabeth Stone (1997: 24) has noted
the essentially urban character of the small communities that served as local
administrative centres within city-states.
Where warfare was endemic, a large portion of the farming population of
city-states lived in the main urban centres and worked land as close as possible
to these communities. In Mesopotamia the average city-state was probably
40 kilometres in diameter, about the same size as Renfrew’s early-state mod-
ule. The capitals of adjacent Mesopotamian city-states were often visible from
each other’s ramparts. In the Valley of Mexico, city-state capitals averaged only
7 kilometres apart. Among the Yoruba, the centres of larger city-states, espe-
cially in the more populous south, were located about 40 kilometres from
each other, but the centres of smaller polities (which were not always states)
were much closer together. There was great variation in the size of Yoruba
states. Stephen Houston (1993: 137–38) estimates that large Maya centres
were 40 to 67 kilometres apart and that the mean distance between capi-
tals and subordinate centres was 11.36 kilometres. He argues that city-states
required secondary administrative centres wherever substantial populations
were living more than a day’s walk from a capital and that size alone accounts
for the presence or absence of secondary centres within city-states. Hence,
where individual city-states occupied a small territory or the population was
clustered near the capital, there was no need for secondary centres. Thus, in
Mesopotamia and to a considerable extent in the Valley of Mexico, city-states
tended to consist of urban centres surrounded only by villages. Between 15
and 80 percent of the total population of city-states lived in urban centres.
Members of these societies identiﬁed with the city-state as a whole, not
just with its capital. The Yoruba term ilu, which is usually translated ‘city’,
included the surrounding farmland and designated the entire territory ruled
by an oba (Krapf-Askari 1969: 25–27). The Nahuatl term altepetl or huealtepetl
(big altepetl) likewise referred to an urban centre, its surrounding territory, and
its ruler (M. E. Smith 1996: 163). Sumerian scribes used one word (uru; Akk.

States: City and Territorial
101
¯alum) to designate ‘settlement’ or ‘city’, but many terms to refer to different
kinds of countryside (R. McC. Adams 1981: 137; Van De Mieroop 1999: 10).
The Mesopotamian urban centre and its surrounding farmland were believed
to constitute the estate of its patron deity. The basic geographical focus of
allegiance was the territory that was ruled over by a king or by a tutelary
deity.
Adjacent city-states were in regular contact with one another. While they
were usually self-sufﬁcient in food production, intercity trade was a regular
source of the exotic raw materials needed to manufacture luxury goods and
sometimes necessities and an important source of prestige items. The closer
city-states were to each other and the smaller they were, the more readily
regional economies emerged. Because of their proximity and economic in-
terdependence, city-states also tended to be culturally interdependent and to
share religious beliefs, artistic conventions, and symbolism, especially as these
related to upper-class culture. In Mesopotamia, the city-state of Nippur, which
never aspired to political hegemony, served as a neutral meeting place for rep-
resentatives from other city-states (Postgate 1992: 34). Ife, in its symbolic role
as the world’s ﬁrst city, served as a meeting place for people from all the Yoruba
states; portions of the bodies of dead kings from Benin were brought there for
burial in the place of origin of their divine ancestors (Egharevba 1960: 9). The
rulers and the upper classes of neighbouring city-states also tended to inter-
marry, although such alliances did not prevent warfare as the upper classes of
one city-state sought to enrich themselves at the expense of their neighbours.
Warfare was waged over agricultural land, water rights, and more direct ac-
cess to other resources but above all to force the rulers of weaker states to pay
tribute to the rulers of stronger ones. These varied contacts, which either took
place among the upper classes or were carried out for their beneﬁt, constitute
examples of what Colin Renfrew and John Cherry (1986) called peer-polity
interaction.
Despite their cultural similarities, the inhabitants of adjacent or even single
city-states did not always speak the same language. The Yoruba spoke a single
language that had various dialects (Adetugbo 1973), but Yoruba civilization
embraced the Ewe-speaking Edo people of Benin. The Classic Maya spoke
two closely related languages that are ancestral to Cholan and Yucatec Mayan,
currently spoken in the southern lowlands and the Yucatan Peninsula. These
languages became distinct from other Mayan languages prior to 1500 b.c., and
the southern lowlands appear to have been Cholan-speaking prior to a.d. 1000
(Henderson 1981: 50–52; Houston, Robertson, and Stuart 2000).
Nahuatl was the most widespread language in the Valley of Mexico in
the sixteenth century a.d., being spoken in the dominant city-states of

102
Sociopolitical Organization
Tenochtitlan and Texcoco and smaller neighbouring states in the southern
part of the valley. Other states were composed of Otomi-speakers. While
pejorative ethnic stereotypes abounded, wards of peoples speaking foreign
languages or belonging to different ethnic groups lived amicably alongside
the dominant local people in Tenochtitlan and many other highland Mexican
cities. These enclaves often consisted of families of skilled craft workers who
had been attracted to major centres by enhanced opportunities for obtaining
exotic raw materials and selling their wares. The local upper classes welcomed
such groups because of the special skills they brought with them (Brumﬁel
1994; van Zantwijk 1985: 132–34).
Both Sumerian- and Semitic (Akkadian)-speakers lived in southern
Mesopotamia during the earliest period from which readable records sur-
vive. In general, Akkadian appears to have been more commonly spoken in
the north and Sumerian in the south, but speakers of the two languages lived
alongside each other in most Mesopotamian city-states, with the linguistic mix
differing from one state to another. Some southern city-states had rulers with
Semitic names from earliest times (Postgate 1992: 35–38). The disappearance
of Sumerian as a spoken language by about 1800 b.c. (Crawford 1991: 10) has
been attributed to the gradual ecological decline of far-southern Mesopotamia,
where most Sumerian-speakers lived. It may also be related to the problems
that Sumerian-speakers encountered in reproducing themselves in the dense
and probably unhealthy urban centres that most of them seem to have inhab-
ited during the Early Dynastic period. Unlike the Akkadian-speaking urban
dwellers, who were surrounded by Semitic-speaking agricultural and pastoral
peoples to the north and east, the Sumerians do not appear to have been able
to recruit large numbers of people speaking their language from rural settings
(McNeill 1976: 55–57). The widespread presence of speakers of more than
one language in Mesopotamian and highland Mexican city-states indicates
that membership in a city-state was based primarily on loyalty to a ruler and
to civic and local religious institutions rather than on ethnic criteria. Yet, in
Mesopotamian mythology, the creation of different languages was one of the
means by which the gods weakened humans by sowing discord among them
(Kramer 1981: 357).
The more people lived in large urban centres, the greater was the incentive
to reduce bulk transportation costs by growing as much food as possible nearby.
When considerable numbers of full-time or part-time farmers lived in urban
centres, agricultural production was intensiﬁed on adjacent land in order to
reduce not only transport costs but also the time farmers spent travelling
between their homes and their ﬁelds. There was also a tendency for farmers
who maintained their principal residences in the city to live during periods of

States: City and Territorial
103
peak agricultural labour in temporary shelters or small houses near the ﬁelds
they were cultivating. In the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya food was
also grown within urban centres in kitchen gardens attached to residences.
Even the Maya upper classes had their dependents grow food in gardens that
surrounded their urban residences.
Full-time and part-time artisans tended to live in urban centres in order
to be as close as possible to a large clientele and to suppliers of the exotic
raw materials that many of them needed for their work. Potters, smiths, ﬂint
knappers, and practitioners of other crafts that were polluting or produced
much waste material sometimes lived and worked in nearby rural villages,
where the smoke associated with their activities was less bothersome, waste
was disposed of with less trouble, and fuel was easier to obtain. Even these
sorts of craft workers were, however, found in urban centres, especially if the
materials they worked, such as copper, tin, or obsidian, had to be obtained from
abroad or their products were intended mainly for a wealthy urban clientele
(Schwartz and Falconer 1994; Stone 1990; 1997).
The presence of large numbers of artisans in a single urban community
encouraged craft specialization. Urban markets expanded to facilitate the ex-
change of goods among craft workers, urban and rural farmers, and the urban
upper class. Such markets also facilitated trade among neighbouring city-states
and the exchange of locally manufactured goods for raw materials from less-
developed regions. Market exchange made the products of craft specialists
accessible to all who could afford them, except where sumptuary laws banned
the possession of certain types of luxury goods by the lower classes. Making
the products of craft specialization widely accessible encouraged further craft
specialization, and this in turn may have promoted technological efﬁciency by
making higher-quality implements more widely available.
City-states were generally small enough that all the leading people knew
one another personally. While each city-state was headed by a monarch, royal
powers varied widely from one civilization and one state to another. In general,
power tended to be shared to varying degrees among different institutions, as
well as among the heads of leading families and the wealthiest people, who
were often the same individuals. Policies were decided and issues resolved in
councils.
Thedivinepowersascribedtomonarchsweregenerallylessextensiveincity-
states than in territorial ones. Claims to possess such powers were heightened,
however, not only by the greater effective power of individual rulers but, as
among the Yoruba, by the extent to which rulers were secluded and therefore
unable to exercise power directly. In Mesopotamia, however, a ruler’s personal
strengths and weaknesses seem to have been familiar to everyone.

104
Sociopolitical Organization
territorial states
In other early civilizations territorial states developed at an early stage in the
evolution of social, economic, and cultural complexity (Fig. 6.2). Rather than
quickly disintegrating, as most early states did, they became the focus for the
development of civilizations marked by distinctive political and economic in-
stitutions and by a sharply demarcated upper-class lifestyle. Territorial states
had to construct elaborate administrative hierarchies which were subject to a
considerable degree of centralized control. Sometimes there was a close corre-
lation between a single territorial state and a distinctive civilization, especially
where the state had sharply deﬁned ecological boundaries, as was the case with
Egypt or the Andean highland core of the Inka kingdom. Where there were
no clear ecological boundaries, however, it was possible for several coexisting
territorial states to have generally similar cultures. This appears to have been
the case in northern China.
In the centuries preceding the political uniﬁcation of Egypt, a series of chief-
doms or small early states developed in the northern part of the Nile Valley.
The most important of these polities were located in southern Upper Egypt,
but there appear to have been others in Middle Egypt and the Delta. During
the Late Predynastic period, Egyptian society was characterized by increasing
social stratiﬁcation, economic expansion, and trade, as well as by the develop-
ment of rituals that would later play an important role in Egyptian kingship.
These early states, with their capitals about twenty-ﬁve kilometres apart, prob-
ably resembled in many respects the city-states that had begun to develop in
Mesopotamia in the Early Uruk period. Around 3100 b.c., however, the rulers
of This, one of the major centres in southern Egypt, brought the whole of
Egypt under their rule; a network of competing early states was replaced by
a centralized government which divided Egypt into a series of provinces for
purposes of local administration (T. Wilkinson 1996; 1999). Some unilinear
evolutionists have described the later Egyptian provinces as continuations of
predynastic city-states, but to call them city-states either before or after uni-
ﬁcation is misleading. Many provinces were created as administrative units
long after Egypt had become a territorial state, and the older ones were thor-
oughly transformed by the imposition on them of a higher-level bureaucratic
administration (Goelet 1994: 167).
If local ruling families survived uniﬁcation, they were soon dissociated from
their old territorial power bases and absorbed into the national upper classes.
By Old Kingdom times it was normal for ofﬁcials to hold ofﬁces sequentially
in different parts of the country, with the highest positions to which they
aspired being at the royal court. The only ofﬁces that may have remained

States: City and Territorial
105
0
400
800 km
General Scale
Hatun Colla
Vilcas Waman
Pachacamac
Inkawasi
Tumbez
Santiago
Cochabamba
Cuzco
Jauja
Huanuco
Pampa
Cajamarca
Tumipampa
Quito
Pacific
Ocean
Lake
Titicaca
80 W
20 S
30 S
0
15 S
25 S
5 S
20 S
30 S
15 S
25 S
10 S
0
5 S
75 W
70 W
65 W
Inka Kingdom
(Tawantinsuyu)
Capital
Some major 
administrative centres
Major roads
(after Hyslop 1984)
Frontier
40 N 
35 N
30 N
105 E
110 E
115 E
120 E
105 E
110 E
115 E
120 E
Anyang
Qishan
Zhengzhou
Shangqiu
H
uang
Riv
er
Hu
ai
Rive
r
Yellow
Sea
China
Possible extent of
Shang kingdom
Zhou homeland
Borders of Western Zhou state
Major Shang centres
Bahariya
Oasis
Dakhla
Oasis
Kharga
Oasis
Aswan
Thebes
Abydos
Fayum
Memphis
Pi-Ramesses
Heliopolis
Red
   Sea
Mediterranean Sea
25 N
30 N
35 E
30 E
25 E
25 N
30 N
35 E
30 E
Egypt
Some major 
centres
6.2. Maps of territorial states at common scale (same scale as map 6.1).

106
Sociopolitical Organization
hereditary were those of village headmen. The royal court became the focus for
the development of elaborate art, monumental architecture, literacy, and the
distinctive behavioural patterns that characterized the Egyptian ruling classes
(Frankfort 1956; Strudwick 1985). A common language appears to have been
spoken throughout Egypt prior to uniﬁcation, and this probably made it easier
to promote a sense of national identity.
In the Andean region, chiefdoms and small states had developed along the
Paciﬁc seaboard by at least the second millennium b.c. and in the highlands
somewhat later. More elaborate states were associated with the Moche civiliza-
tion that ﬂourished along the north coast of Peru during the ﬁrst millennium
a.d. The Chimu kingdom, which was centred in the Moche Valley, beginning
in the fourteenth century a.d. controlled most of the north coast of Peru until
it was conquered by the Inka in the 1460s. In the highlands, territorial states
appear to have been established around centres at Tiwanaku and Wari be-
tween a.d. 600 and 1000. These states are believed to have sought to control
mainly key resource areas and may not have been as complexly organized as
the Chimu kingdom (Keatinge 1988; Lumbreras 1974).
When the Inka state developed, probably in the early ﬁfteenth century,
there appear to have been no societies at more than the chiefdom level in
the Cuzco area or the central highlands of Peru. The Inka may have drawn
on surviving remnants of Wari administrative practices, such as their revenue
system (Keatinge 1988: 164), and on Chimu metallurgical technology and
political skills. Their stonework appears to have been inspired by ancient stone
buildings that Inka rulers had seen in the Tiwanaku area. Embarking on a fresh
cycle of Andean state-building in a region that appears to have had no previous
traditions of government on a large scale, the Inka quickly created not only the
largest but the most integrated state constructed by any indigenous people in
the Andean region.
The Inka imposed their administrative system over 984,000 square kilo-
metres and perhaps eight to twelve million people who lived in pockets of
arable land separated by mountains and deserts. They also created a new style
of monumental architecture which, while highly distinctive and imposing, dis-
playsampleevidenceofitsderivationfromtraditionalruralhouses.Inaddition,
they introduced their own distinctive style of urban planning. While the cen-
tral highland core of the Inka state, between Ecuador and Lake Titicaca, bears
the strong imprint of Inka culture, Inka cultural inﬂuence was less intrusive
in coastal regions of Peru, where the highly elaborated forms associated with
older cultures persisted, and in the far south, where only relatively simple
facilities were installed to exploit the mineral resources of thinly populated
regions (Earle 1994).

States: City and Territorial
107
While the highland core was ethnically and linguistically diverse, this was
the region that the Inka were most anxious to weld into a stable political
unit. Nevertheless, even peripheral entities such as the Chimu state were
radically transformed politically in the course of being absorbed into the Inka
administrative system. Ofﬁcials at all levels were required to use Quechua,
which may already have been a lingua franca in the central highlands when
the Inka rulers made it their administrative language (Carpenter 1992: 116–17;
Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 807–9). Hence, while the distinction between
core and periphery is of some heuristic value, the Inka were clearly seeking
to construct an integrated state that stretched from Ecuador as far south as
central Chile. They had been sufﬁciently successful that the Spanish scholar
Bernab´e Cobo (1979: 189), working with sixteenth-century written sources,
described the Inka kingdom as ‘a single republic’.
The Inka rulers divided the territories they conquered into more than eighty
provinces, each ruled by an Inka governor. To produce more or less standard-
sized provinces, they artiﬁcially combined small political groupings and divided
larger states, including the Chimu kingdom, into smaller units. It was not
difﬁcult to dismantle most large states, since chiefdoms that had been recently
incorporated into them had often preserved their sense of identity and were
happy to be liberated. The upper classes of conquered chiefdoms and small
states were co-opted into the new order by being recognized as ofﬁcials at
levels below that of Inka governor. For many of these leaders, the support
they received from the Inka rulers meant an increase in their revenues and
in the coercive power they could exert over their own people. For ordinary
men and women, becoming Inka subjects probably meant producing larger
surpluses than ever before. At the same time, especially in the highlands, the
Inkas’ suppression of local conﬂicts meant that people could often abandon
their hilltop forts and settle near richer valley bottoms, where a wider range
of crops could be grown (D’Altroy and Earle 1985).
In China, by the third millennium b.c. various Lungshanoid cultures of
the Yellow River Valley were characterized by wheel-made pottery, increasing
economic and political inequality, warfare, and the development of ritual prac-
tices such as human sacriﬁce and scapulimancy. Numerous towns surrounded
by stamped-earth walls appear to have dominated smaller settlements spread
across areas of several hundred square kilometres (Yan 1999). None of these
towns exceeded twenty hectares. This suggests the development of complex
chiefdoms or incipient states such as those of Predynastic Egypt or Early Uruk–
period Mesopotamia. Such entities may have had the potential to develop in
the direction of either one or more territorial states or a city-state system.
There is no evidence of royal palaces until the Erlitou phase (2100–1800 b.c.),

108
Sociopolitical Organization
which has been identiﬁed with either the Xia or the early Shang Dynasty of
recorded Chinese history. The oldest known bronze vessels date from this
period (G. Barnes 1993; K. Chang 1986a; 1999; Maisels 1999: 260–341).
The cultural development of the central plain was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by developments occurring to the north, east, and south. During the Erligang
period,contemporarywiththeShangoccupationofZhengzhou,auniformstyle
of bronze casting spread from the central plain over a huge area of northern
and central China and apparently well beyond the borders of any one city-
or territorial state. By the late Shang period, bronze industries very different
from those of the central plain had developed in the Middle Yangzi region,
Sichuan, and other parts of China (Bagley 1999: 208–21).
The Shang state has traditionally been described as a territorial state that
had imposed its rule over the chiefdoms and small states of the central plain,
but some scholars believe it to have been a city-state that had managed to
subdue and extract tribute from a large number of adjacent city-states or a
voluntary federation of city-states (Lewis 1990: 64; Stepugina 1991: 411; Yates
1997). It is possible that the frequent relocations of capitals ascribed to the Xia
and early Shang Dynasties may be a later attempt to construe as a single, linear
succession of kings various rulers who had held power simultaneously (Huber
1988: 75). We now know that later Mesopotamian king lists misinterpreted
the contemporary rulers of various Early Dynastic city-states as dynasties that
had ruled successively over the whole of southern Iraq (Postgate 1992: 26–32).
The later Zhou rulers’ allowing the descendants of the Shang royal family to
continue to hold ofﬁce as the dukes of Song so that they could offer sacriﬁces
to their royal ancestors also suggests a city-state system (Hsu and Linduff 1988:
186).
There is, however, substantial evidence that the Shang kingdom was a ter-
ritorial state that controlled about 230,000 square kilometres. One indication
is the simultaneous use of multiple capitals. It is assumed either that the late
Shang administrative capital was near Shangqiu, in eastern Henan Province,
and that Anyang, some 215 kilometres to the northwest, was a royal ritual and
burial centre (Keightley 1983b: 533; W. Watson 1979) or, as seems more likely
given its more strategic location and its late foundation, that Anyang was the
administrative centre and Shangqiu the ancestral cult site (K. Chang 1980:
210; Chˆeng 1960: 43; Li Chi 1977: 98–104). In either case the late Shang
kingdom clearly had two major centres a considerable distance apart. The
early Shang Dynasty also had two capitals, Bo and Xibo (West Bo), which some
have identiﬁed with the walled sites of Zhengzhou and Shixianggou in Henan
(Maisels 1999: 317–18). (Others have associated Shixiangguo with Tonggong,
another early Shang secondary capital [Zou 1999].) Zou Heng maintains that

States: City and Territorial
109
throughout the Shang Dynasty kings had a number of separate residences
which served as secondary capitals. This evidence suggests that the Shang
ruled over a territorial state that had a core area at least several hundred
kilometres across.
The late Shang rulers led a peripatetic life, travelling with their courts from
one part of their kingdom to another. In the course of their journeys, they
transacted business, sacriﬁced to local deities, hunted, feasted, and joined re-
gional ofﬁcials in putting down local rebellions and waging war against foreign
groups (Keightley 1983b: 552), behaviour typical of the rulers of territorial
states. Rulers of hegemonic city-states required the kings of tributary states
to attend their courts periodically but did not visit tributary states, which
they rightly regarded as dangerous enemy territory (Schele and Freidel 1990:
342). It also appears that writing, chariotry, and large-scale casting of magniﬁ-
cent ceremonial vessels ﬂourished most spectacularly around the Shang royal
capitals.
The oracle-bone evidence from Anyang and later historical records are gen-
erally interpreted as indicating that, until the rulers of a number of regional
states each assumed that title during the Warring States period (481–221 b.c.),
only one ruler was regarded as having the right to be called ‘wang’ (king). While
the Zhou monarchs appear to have called themselves wang prior to overthrow-
ing the Shang kings, this might indicate no more than that, as in Egypt, there
could be rival claimants to the position of universal ruler. In the Western Zhou
period various lords living in the Wei Valley referred to themselves as wang,
suggesting that this title may have been used differently in that region than
it had been in the Shang kingdom (Wang 1999: 242–43). Contemporaneous
Shang inscriptions refer to the same Zhou rulers as ‘hou’ or ‘bo’, which were
major titles but inferior to ‘wang’ in the Shang state.
It appears that, as new areas were incorporated, there was a tendency to
appoint members of the Shang royal clan or other leading Shang families to
rule over them. Populations from core areas were resettled in newly acquired
territories. The establishment of garrison settlements among non-Shang peo-
ples accords with a policy of policing and defending the borders of a territorial
state (Keightley 1979–80: 27). Settlement of border areas may have promoted
the linguistic as well as the cultural assimilation of these areas, resulting in the
spread of the Chinese language into regions where it had not previously been
spoken.
Evidence that Shang culture extended beyond the known borders of the
Shang kingdom does not pose insuperable problems for the notion that it was
a territorial state. In late Shang times, the predynastic Zhou rulers in the Wei
Valley were sometimes subject to the Shang kings and sometimes independent

110
Sociopolitical Organization
of them. They appear to have derived much of their upper-class material
culture from the Shang state and to have emulated the Shang rulers in many
ways. It was later reported that writing was introduced to the Zhou court when
Shang diviners defected there. Of the few sites that have yielded inscribed
oracle bones, all appear to have been associated with the Shang and Zhou royal
families (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 33–67; Rawson 1999: 375–97). This suggests
that these two dynastic lines may have been of special importance in north-
central China, much as later Chinese historians believed. If the Shang kings
hadruledoveraseriesofcity-states,eachstatewouldhavehaditsownking,and
he in turn would likely have had his own diviners. Nor is there stylistic or other
evidence that elaborate bronze vessels were being produced independently
at numerous city-state capitals throughout the Yellow River valley. Western
Zhou elite culture in particular displayed a high degree of uniformity at any
one period. It is unclear whether ritual bronzes were cast in a small number of
government workshops or produced in numerous secondary centres according
to detailed prescriptions (Chˆeng 1963; Kane 1974–75; Rawson 1999; Thorp
1985).
Like the Shang, the predynastic Zhou rulers had multiple capitals. Both
Shang and predynastic Zhou kings appear to have ruled over territorial states
that, after the Zhou rulers broke free of their tributary status, existed brieﬂy
alongside each other until the Zhou conquered their Shang neighbours. The
absence of sharp ecological boundaries to the south and west of the Shang
state allowed more territorial states, such as that of Chu, to develop in that
region. The evolution and functioning of both the Shang and the Western
Zhou polity appear to have resembled the pattern of ancient Egypt more than
that of ancient Mesopotamia. Northern and central China may in the second
millennium b.c. have contained a considerable number of territorial states
(Maisels 1999: 27, 312).
On the basis of the evidence from the early civilizations of Egypt, northern
China, and the Inka, it is possible to identify features that territorial states had
in common and that distinguished them from city-states. First, the total areas
controlled by territorial states tended to be larger than those occupied by city-
state systems. The Valley of Mexico, which was geographically and culturally
distinct from other areas occupied by city-states in highland Mexico, enclosed
some 7,000 square kilometres. Southern Mesopotamia, including both set-
tled areas (never more than 12,000 square kilometres) and adjacent winter
grasslands, covered about 120,000 square kilometres, while the Yoruba states,
together with Benin, occupied about 130,000 square kilometres. The lowland
Maya city-states were spread over 250,000 square kilometres, although most
of the Classic Maya ones were concentrated in the southern half of that area.

States: City and Territorial
111
In contrast, Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt controlled and utilized an area
of about 333,000 square kilometres, of which only 19,000 square kilometres
were not desert. The Shang state at its maximum may have controlled 320,000
square kilometres mainly of rich farmland, but its core was perhaps as small
as 132,000 square kilometres. Finally, the Inka kingdom embraced 980,000
square kilometres, most of which was uncultivable desert, bare rock, or cold
altiplano. Territorial states were able more effectively to control and exploit
non-agricultural land than were city-states.
Second, the cities of territorial states were considerably less populous than
those of city-states. Territorial states were held together by an upper class
whose top stratum consisted of the royal family and the leading families of
the core group that had created and governed the state. Lower-ranking func-
tionaries were recruited from less prestigious members of the core group and
by co-opting high-ranking members of conquered peoples. These rulers and
ofﬁcials, together with their retainers and craft workers, constituted the en-
tire population of urban centres. Because the central government maintained
order and defended the frontiers from external attack, there was no need for
farmers to seek protection there. There is also evidence that the upper classes
sought to isolate themselves geographically from farmers and the lower classes
generally.
Third, the rulers of territorial states had at their disposal much larger sur-
pluses than did those of city-states and were therefore able to create works of
art and architecture on a more massive scale. Egypt’s Great Pyramid was the
largest single construction of the preindustrial era. The Inka erected elabo-
rate stone building complexes at important provincial centres throughout the
twenty-four-hundredkilometre-longcoreoftheirstate.TheShangconstructed
massive, stamped-earth enclosure walls around royal residential complexes, as
well as large palaces. Highly skilled and specialized artisans attached to the
royal court crafted magniﬁcent luxury goods and symbols of authority – bronze
vessels in China, stone vessels and funerary sculpture among the Egyptians,
luxurious cloth and ornaments made of precious metals in Peru. Everywhere
luxury goods included valuable items of personal adornment. A monarch was
able to derive great prestige and reinforce loyalty by bestowing such gifts on
his relatives and ofﬁcials.
Fourth, in territorial states the exercise of royal power required maintaining
a considerable degree of centralized control over the economy. This included
accumulating the surpluses required to support the upper classes, administra-
tion, army, and major construction projects and the production and distribution
of the luxury goods that helped to ensure the loyalty of the king’s supporters.
The size of territorial states necessarily made central political control indirect,

112
Sociopolitical Organization
and therefore it could be challenged or subverted more easily than in city-
states. The Inka and Egyptian rulers controlled foreign trade as well as all
major mining and quarrying projects. While bronze tools were manufactured
in Inka provincial centres, gold objects could not be transported away from
the Cuzco area without ofﬁcial authorization. The central government also
guarded the borders of the kingdom not only against foreign attack but also to
stop dissidents from escaping and to control trade. The Inka, the Egyptian, and
possibly the Chinese rulers fortiﬁed the borders of their kingdoms to control
movement across them. In the early period of the Egyptian state its rulers also
depopulated the regions lying immediately beyond their southern, eastern,
and western borders, apparently resettling many of the foreign peoples who
had lived in these regions in Egypt (Hoffman 1979). The control of borders
‘caged’ the subject populations of early civilizations and made them easier to
control (Mann 1986: 38–40).
Fifth, there was much more continuity in agricultural life in territorial states.
There is archaeological evidence that the uniﬁcation of Egypt was accompa-
nied by signiﬁcant changes in settlement patterns, including the relocation of
many small communities. Some of this relocation may have occurred sponta-
neously as a response to the greater security that followed uniﬁcation; farming
populations that had clustered around major centers, such as Hierakonpo-
lis, may have dispersed, and many farmers may have moved, or been shifted,
north as the Memphis area became administratively important and the hitherto
sparsely populated western Delta was developed (T. Wilkinson 1999: 344–65).
In highland Peru the Inka rulers ordered populations living in fortiﬁed com-
munities on mountaintops to resettle in smaller, open settlements at lower
altitudes and near better agricultural land (Hastorf 1990). There is also ev-
idence of farming groups’ being resettled in Shang and Zhou China as new
lands became available. Because farmers continued to live in villages and close
to the land they worked, however, they remained economically self-sufﬁcient
to a much greater degree and probably preserved the traditions of prestate
village life to a much greater extent than urban-dwelling farmers in city-states
and had less opportunity to develop a desire for goods manufactured in urban
centres. While farmers were fully occupied with agricultural tasks during the
sowing and harvest seasons, they could use the less busy intervening periods
to manufacture the goods they needed (Weber 1976 [1896]: 108).
As a result, in territorial states there was a much larger economic gap be-
tween the upper classes and farmers. The upper classes used goods that were
made by highly skilled, full-time artisans, often from valuable, imported ma-
terials. The rural population continued to use goods that part-time craft work-
ers manufactured from traditional, locally available materials. These products

States: City and Territorial
113
were exchanged at local markets. The main economic transfers between farm-
ers and the upper classes were the taxes and rents that farmers paid to the
government and to landlords. Farmers had few reasons to visit urban centres
or means to obtain luxury goods, except as rewards and gifts from ofﬁcials and
upper-class patrons. They also had less access to new technologies than farmers
in city-states. Agricultural tasks were performed using wood and stone tools,
although artisans who worked for the government were supplied with metal
tools. By contrast, among the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians metal farming
implements became common at approximately the same time that metal tools
became available to full-time craft workers. It would also appear that, because
in territorial states urban centres were smaller, farmers did not have the in-
centive to practice intensive agriculture in their vicinity that they did around
major urban centres in city-state systems.
regional control
Since most of the arguments advanced against the distinction between terri-
torial and city-states turn on the nature of city-state systems, it is necessary to
examine more closely the political structures of such entities.
Confusion has been compounded by historians and political scientists ap-
plying the term ‘empire’ to two very different sorts of domination: integrated
(or direct) and hegemonic (or indirect). Later preindustrial polities sought to
administer conquered states directly, usually in order to exploit them more
ruthlessly. The most ambitious and politically successful of these empires
were eventually transformed into enduring regional states, while others ex-
panded and contracted according to the power of the dominant state. Hege-
monic empires ruled through indirect control, using a combination of force
and persuasion to gain compliance and exact tribute payments from subor-
dinate but still largely autonomous rulers (M. E. Smith 1996: 173–74). To
avoid conﬂating these two very different types of political structures and en-
couraging anachronistic views, I will refer to hegemonic ‘empires’ as tributary
systems.
Recent studies indicate signiﬁcant variations in the sizes and populations of
city-states within a city-state system as well as in particular city-states from one
period to another (Hodge 1984). City-state systems frequently produced one
or more city-states that dominated their neighbours militarily. These are often
referred to as hegemonic city-states. In extreme cases the reallocation of wealth
that such political domination brought about produced primate settlement
patterns that resemble those found in later regional states. Yet, because of the
differences in layout of the urban centres associated with them, such city-state

114
Sociopolitical Organization
systems can easily be distinguished archaeologically from the territorial states
found among early civilizations.
The Aztec, together with their Texcocan and Tlacopan allies, constituted
the so-called Triple Alliance, which they had established in the early 1400s. By
the early sixteenth century this military alliance had come to dominate about
450 city-states, spread over the whole of the Valley of Mexico and much of
central Mexico from the Gulf of Mexico to the Paciﬁc Ocean. Tlacopan was a
minor partner, perhaps included in the alliance primarily for ritual purposes
(Spath 1973), and over time the Aztec came to dominate their Texcocan allies.
Tributary payments were imposed on conquered city-states within the areas
controlled by each of these three states, and tributary rulers were required to
provision alliance armies passing through their territory and to convey trib-
ute from farther away through their domains to hegemonic capitals. Yet, in
general, the Aztec and their allies left local kings in place and intervened only
occasionally in the routine administration of conquered city-states. States lo-
cated beyond the Valley of Mexico tended to be governed internally as before.
If a local king was especially troublesome, the Aztec might replace him with a
more accommodating relative. Only rarely did they replace such a ruler with an
Aztec governor. Even when they did, kingship was usually restored to the local
ruling family as soon as an acceptable candidate, usually a son of the deposed
king, was old enough to rule. Only a few very intractable city-states, located
in crucial areas where alliances with powerful external enemies were possible,
were dismantled. The men and women were killed, their children distributed
for adoption among neighbouring city-states, and the emptied cities repopu-
lated with colonists from the Valley of Mexico under the leadership of lords
who were related to the Triple Alliance kings (Hassig 1988: 174–75, 207–8).
Despite historical accounts of such resettlements, little in the way of Aztec art
or cultural inﬂuence is evident beyond the Valley of Mexico. For the most part,
life continued as before in conquered city-states, except that commoners had
to either work harder to meet tribute payments or accept a lower standard of
living and that it was more difﬁcult to disobey local kings. The Aztec sought to
control distant tributary states by spying on them, mercilessly crushing overt
resistance, and imposing still heavier tribute upon reconquered states (Barlow
1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hicks 1994; Hodge and Smith 1994; M. E. Smith
1986).
Within the Valley of Mexico, the Aztec and their allies intervened to a greater
degree in the affairs of tributary city-states. They politically reorganized a few
smallerandweakerstatesinordertofacilitatetributecollection.Thesechanges
took the form of more effectively centralizing some states and amalgamating
others. The Texcocans went farther than the Aztec by appointing the rulers

States: City and Territorial
115
of nearby tributary city-states to Texcoco’s governing councils, including the
highest-ranking one, which advised the Texcocan tlatoani. This arrangement
did not, however, extinguish the formal independence of these states, which
continued to be ruled by their own kings (Offner 1983). To a greater extent
than outside the Valley of Mexico, the Aztec and Texcocan rulers married their
daughters and those of high-ranking nobles to the kings of subordinate city-
states. By doing so they ensured that eventually many of these rulers were
related to their hegemons. Subordinate kings were required to attend major
religiousrituals,includingcoronationsandvictorycelebrations,inTenochtitlan
and Texcoco. Land that was exchanged as wedding presents made rulers of
tributary city-states increasingly dependent on property located outside their
own city-states and therefore supportive of the larger order created by the
Triple Alliance. Rulers of nearby tributary states were frequently called upon
to supply soldiers for military campaigns outside the Valley of Mexico and
labour and materials for maintaining palaces and undertaking major public
construction projects in the Aztec and Texcocan capitals. The hegemonic states
also used their power to rearrange interstate market cycles and trading patterns
to their own advantage and turned much of the southern wetlands of the Valley
of Mexico into food-producing areas for Tenochtitlan and Texcoco (Brumﬁel
1983; Hodge 1984).
Yet the economic integration of the Valley of Mexico greatly outstripped its
political integration. The most extreme example of political incorporation was
the Aztec’s annexation of the neighbouring city-state of Tlatelolco in the late
ﬁfteenth century. The capitals of these two states had been located alongside
each other on the same island in Lake Texcoco, where both cities had expanded
until they had physically coalesced. Growing rivalry had resulted in the Aztec’s
conquering Tlatelolco and suppressing its ruling dynasty. Yet Tlatelolco re-
tained its civic centre and remained a highly prosperous ﬁfth administrative
division of the Aztec capital. The treatment of Tlatelolco suggests that groups
living in the Valley of Mexico were very reluctant to suppress existing states
(Charlton and Nichols 1997b: 203–4).
Events that occurred during the Spanish conquest demonstrate that even
the Valley of Mexico, which was more politically and economically consolidated
than the rest of the Aztec tributary system, still consisted of a series of city-
states, varying in size and subjected, with varying degrees of willingness, to
the Aztec and their allies. Kings of states located within a few kilometres
of Tenochtitlan allied themselves with the Spanish in order to stop paying
tribute to the Aztec. When the king of Texcoco died shortly before the Spanish
arrived, the Aztec pressured their Texcoco allies to make his young son by
the sister of the Aztec king their new monarch. This resulted in a civil war

116
Sociopolitical Organization
that divided Texcoco. An older half-brother of the new Texcocan king allied
himself with the Spanish in a bid to seize the throne (Offner 1983: 238–41). It is
thus clear that, while the Aztec interfered in the affairs of tributary and allied
states for various political and economic reasons, their ‘empire’ remained a
tributary system imposed on a large number of city-states that had remained
self-governing. Whatever manipulations went on, there does not appear to
have been any concerted plan to transform these states into a larger and more
consolidated political entity.
Like the Valley of Mexico prior to the hegemony of Tenochtitlan, the Yoruba
city-state system was dominated by a small number of powerful city-states.
In the early nineteenth century, Yoruba polities varied greatly in size and
power.Whenthemorepowerfulonesconqueredtheirneighbours,theydidnot
suppresstheirgovernmentsorremovetheirkings,mostofwhomwerebelieved
to be fraternally descended from a single divine ancestor and therefore related
to one another (R. Smith 1969: 109). They did, however, attempt to prevent
subordinate community leaders (bale) from assuming the title of oba or minor
obas from upgrading their status (Apter 1992: 21–22). In the Oyo tributary
system, subordinate obas were not allowed to wear a beaded crown (ade)
or to have eunuchs as retainers (Law 1977: 98–99). Yet, among the Yoruba,
hegemonic states did not interfere routinely in the internal government of
tributary states. Instead, they imposed tribute on their weaker neighbours and
rearranged long-distance trade routes that passed through such states to their
own advantage. Much of the wealth and power of the kingdom of Oyo was
ensured by its controlling trade passing through subject states to the south.
Hegemonic rulers installed ajele (agents) to observe and report the actions of
the kings and governing councils of tributary states. Oyo ajele were inducted
into the cult of Sango, the thunder god and son of Oduduwa, from whom the
Oyo kings traced their descent. Such agents could, in emergencies, become
possessed by Sango and, on that basis, claim supernatural authority superior
to that of the local oba and his councillors. These agents reported to the Otun
Iwefa, the chief Oyo palace eunuch in charge of religious matters, and to the
Sango cult through the ilari, palace messengers and Sango priests (Apter 1992:
20–21).
In the Early Dynastic period southern Mesopotamia was a network of city-
states, each with its own ruler. A number of city-states dominated all or most
of southern Mesopotamia at various times, but there were also periods in
which no single state dominated the region. Some states fought repeatedly
with one another and imposed tribute and heavy reparations on their defeated
neighbours, as well as making minor border adjustments. Hegemonic states
grew richer and more populous and their urban centres expanded as a result

States: City and Territorial
117
of the wealth they obtained in this fashion. There is no evidence, however, that
such states suppressed the governments of conquered city-states or interfered
with their routine internal administration.
EffortsatregionalcontrolwentmuchfartherinMesopotamiathantheywere
to do in the Valley of Mexico as successive hegemons adopted different policies
for maintaining long-term political and economic control. The ﬁrst regional
hegemony in Mesopotamia, apart from an early and perhaps mythologized
one by the kings of Kish (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 141–43; Steinkeller 1993),
occurred when Sargon of Akkad conquered the other southern Mesopotamian
states around 2350 b.c. He replaced their kings with his own followers and
installed Akkadian garrisons in conquered cities. Local ruling families were,
however, soon restored after the collapse of Akkadian power. A second (or
third) round of centralization occurred during the Ur III period. The Ur III
rulers subordinated or replaced rulers of conquered city-states, which they
attempted to control by means of a civilian government largely composed of
prominent local people and a military governor (ˇsagina) who was related to the
Ur royal family (Postgate 1992: 151–52). Building on Akkadian precedents, the
Ur III rulers reserved the title ensi, which in the past had signiﬁed indepen-
dent kingship, for the leader or governor of a subject city-state. These ensis,
appointed by the king, were not allowed to enter into alliances or wage war on
their own. Many of them were, however, former local rulers or close members
of their families, and their posts could be passed from father to son. A subor-
dinate city-state could construe the term ‘ensi’ as evidence of the continuity of
its kingship. A third period of centralized rule was initiated by the Babylonian
king Hammurabi around 1760 b.c. (Postgate 1992: 34–46, 151).
Cultural evolutionists have interpreted the recurrent cycles of uniﬁcation
that began in the Akkadian period as evidence of a transition from city-state
to territorial state, but this interpretation does not account for the strenu-
ous efforts by city-states to resist uniﬁcation. The Akkadian rulers constantly
had to suppress rebellions; the Ur III hegemony, although it was reinforced
by regional economic controls, collapsed quickly; and Hammurabi’s uniﬁca-
tion lasted for only two reigns (Yoffee 1991: 299–300). Elizabeth Stone (1997)
argues that one of the major factors maintaining a city-state form of gov-
ernment in Mesopotamia was the reluctance of those who lived in these
states to abandon a heterarchical pattern of political interaction. Norman
Yoffee (1995: 290–92) has suggested that the earliest tendencies towards po-
litical uniﬁcation were modelled on the tribal organization of society that pre-
vailed in the Semitic-speaking areas of central and northern Mesopotamia and
were resisted by the Sumerian-speaking city dwellers of the south. Elsewhere
(1997:258)heproposesthatMesopotamiancity-stateswere‘neversuccessfully

118
Sociopolitical Organization
absorbed into territorial states until non-Mesopotamian political systems and
non-Mesopotamian ideologies of governance reformulated the social and nat-
ural landscapes of the area’. Hegemony was viewed as a power that the gods
rotated from one city to another until Hammurabi claimed everlasting kingship
for his capital city of Babylon (Jacobsen 1976: 189). The regional kingdoms that
developed after the Old Babylonian period in Mesopotamia did not resem-
ble early territorial states; urban centres retained their identity, administrative
councils, and specialized economic functions within them (Maisels 1990: 172).
Although fewer farmers now had reason to live in cities, their demands for
manufactured goods and services continued to support large urban popula-
tions. Cities also retained numerous privileges and forms of self-government,
although they were now permanently under the control of regional kings. Thus
the cities of Babylonia during the ﬁrst millennium b.c. did not at all resemble
the administrative and court centres of early territorial states.
The longevity of city-state systems and their resistance to political uniﬁcation
is demonstrated by their persistence, despite hegemonic tendencies, for over
a millennium in highland Mexico, among the Maya, and in West Africa until
each of them was subjected to European colonization. In Mesopotamia, city-
states, after successfully resisting incorporation into larger political systems for
more than ﬁfteen hundred years, were not transformed into territorial states
but absorbed into regional kingdoms.
Unlike a hegemonic city-state system, the Inka ‘empire’ was organized as
a series of provinces ruled by the Inka upper class. Governorships were not
allowed to become hereditary. Provinces were governed from administrative
centres which were not loci of population and often were new foundations.
Local rulers, who in the central highlands were mostly descended from hered-
itary chiefs, administered largely rural populations. Their executive powers
were subject to the approval of the provincial governor. To reduce the power
of conquered groups, portions of large or potentially rebellious peoples were
sent as colonists to far-off regions of the Inka state and replaced by reliable set-
tlers from older parts of the kingdom (Patterson 1987). To construe as tributary
city-states even administrative units composed of as many as ten thousand fam-
ilies is unrealistic, since they lacked the key features of such polities, including
urban centres inhabited by craftsmen supplying a regional market.
While the Inka state was terminated by European conquest, the territorial
states in Egypt and northern China evolved into regional states that, as the
result of a process of convergence, shared many features with the urbanized
regional states that had developed out of a city-state system in Mesopotamia.
In Egypt this development began to occur in the late New Kingdom, when
the central government lost control over foreign trade and the production of

States: City and Territorial
119
luxury goods. Administrative centres were transformed into loci of indepen-
dent trade, manufacturing, and the exchange of manufactured goods with a
rural hinterland. As a result, the number of urban dwellers increased. Rulers
had to rely increasingly on the use of military force and develop the ability
to tax an economy that they no longer directly controlled to any signiﬁcant
degree. In China it took almost a millennium for a territorial state to evolve
into regional kingdoms in which monarchs ruled directly over family units
and land was privately owned. While farmers continued in their spare time to
manufacture most of the goods they required, large cities became centres of
upper-class life and specialized production (Shen 1994). In the fourth century
b.c., the various Chinese regional states were militarily united to form a single
imperial state. Whether urbanized regional kingdoms in various parts of the
world developed from city-states or territorial states, they had many features
in common and were signiﬁcantly different from both the city- and territorial
states that had preceded them.
In the chapters that follow, the distinction between city-states and territo-
rial states will provide an important framework for understanding functional
patterning as it relates to variation in forms of social organization, economic
behaviour, and culture in early civilizations. This distinction can help to explain
features of early civilizations that were neither common to all early civilizations
nor idiosyncratic.

7 Urbanism
U
rban centres were features of all early civilizations (Bairoch 1988:
1–70). Contrary to a once fashionable belief, there is no evidence of a
‘civilization without cities’ (J. Wilson 1960), and this includes early civilizations
in which, instead of cities, there were supposed to be ‘ceremonial centres’
inhabitedonlybyafewpriests,wherepeoplefromthesurroundingcountryside
assembled periodically for religious observances (J. Thompson 1954; Wheatley
1971). Nevertheless, the nature of their cities varied considerably.
Towns and cities were once deﬁned as communities of non-food-producers
with a minimum of 5,000 people or a population density of at least 386 people
per square kilometre (Burgess 1926: 118), but such deﬁnitions have been
abandoned. Some legally chartered ‘cities’ in medieval Europe had only a
few thousand inhabitants, while ‘farming villages’ in Eastern Europe and Italy
often had several times that number (Chisholm 1962: 60–61). In parts of China
and Indonesia rural population densities have long exceeded 386 people per
square kilometre (Cressey 1955: 15; Huntington 1956: 428). Finally, both in
early civilizations and in other preindustrial societies, considerable numbers
of farmers lived in urban centres. As recently as 1910, almost 10 percent of
the population of Cairo consisted of full-time cultivators (Abu-Lughod 1969:
164). The key deﬁning feature of an urban centre is that it performs specialized
functions in relation to a broader hinterland (Trigger 1972). The largest entities
of this sort in early civilizations were the capitals of city-states and the capitals
and provincial administrative centres of territorial states, which normally had
at least a few thousand inhabitants. Below these settlements were towns and
villages that performed a more restricted number of specialized functions for
smaller hinterlands. Yet cities, towns, and service villages are at best arbitrary
units of a continuum of size and function, not structurally or functionally dis-
tinct entities. Deﬁnitions based on arbitrary quantitative divisions appear to
bear little relation to concepts used in early civilizations and rarely contribute
120

Urbanism
121
to a better understanding of urban phenomena (Vining 1955: 169). I will refer
to relatively large, specialized settlements as ‘cities’, ‘towns’, ‘urban centres’,
or ‘administrative centres’.
Whatever else their function, cities were places where the upper classes of
early civilizations lived, along with most people who did not produce food.
They were the main locations of high-level political and administrative ac-
tivities, specialized craft production, marketing, long-distance trade, higher
education, artistic and cultural achievements, conspicuous display, court life,
and religious rituals. With rare exceptions, important temples, palaces, and
public buildings were located in urban centres. While these centres usually
depended on food produced in the surrounding countryside, they contained
all the institutions and produced everything that made the lives of the up-
per classes distinctive and worthwhile. Major cities impressed visitors by their
scale, richness, and architectural magniﬁcence and the grandeur of what went
on in them. These attributes stressed the insigniﬁcance of the ordinary person,
the power and legitimacy of the ruler, and the concentration of supernatural
power (Rapoport 1993). It is therefore not surprising that the development of
cities was strongly promoted by the upper classes, who used them to pursue
their personal and collective goals.
Attributing the origin of all the cities of early civilizations to their religious
functions (Wheatley 1971) is inconsistent with archaeological evidence, and
it is not particularly helpful to trichotomize all preindustrial urban centres
as regal-ritual, administrative, or mercantile (Fox 1977). The role of cities in
earlycivilizationswastoperformspecializedfunctionsinthecontextofalargely
agricultural and relatively undifferentiated hinterland (Mabogunje 1962: 3–4).
Concentrating a wide range of specialized functions in major centres made it
possible to achieve signiﬁcant economies of scale. If long-distance traders and
skilled metallurgists lived in the same community, it was easy for metallurgists
to obtain imported metal ingots and to sell or consign their surplus production
tomerchantsforexport.Metallurgistscouldalsohopetoﬁndincitiesthewidest
range of institutional and individual buyers for their products. Proximity was
convenient for the upper classes, since it facilitated access to all the goods
and services they required and enhanced their ability to monitor specialized
activities in ways that increased their power and well-being (Garner 1967).
The logistical and political considerations that encouraged the concentration
of specialized functions in urban centres were the exact opposite of those that,
under ideal circumstances, motivated subsistence farmers to live, dispersed in
small groups, as close as possible to the land they worked.
The largest community in each city-state was usually located near its centre.
Its central location minimized the cost of transportation and communication

122
Sociopolitical Organization
between it and the rest of the polity. Some city-states, especially if they were
small or highly nucleated, had only a single administrative centre. Larger city-
states and those with more dispersed settlement patterns had capital cities
encircled at a distance of perhaps ten kilometres by smaller secondary ad-
ministrative centres, each of which might in turn be surrounded by tertiary
centres. Territorial states had numerous centres in nested hierarchies, with the
larger ones being fewer and providing higher-level services for larger areas.
Higher-level centres also contained the largest buildings and were inhabited
by the most important people (Trigger 1972).
Major temples, palaces, and markets tended to be located in the centres
of cities. Population was usually denser in the core than towards the outer
limits, and the residences of prominent people tended to be concentrated
there. Servants and retainers lived close to the people for whom they worked,
which made the division of cities into different areas inhabited by rich and poor
less clear than it is in modern industrial cities. Messy and polluting activities
tended to be performed on the outskirts of cities if they were not banished to
the countryside.
All cities faced problems of provisioning and waste disposal that they
managed with varying degrees of rigour and success. In Egyptian and
Mesopotamian cities, water was drawn from rivers, canals, wells, and cisterns
and transported to homes that lacked their own wells either by hand or by
donkey (Van De Mieroop 1999: 158–61). The Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan,
located in the middle of a shallow saline lake, was supplied with fresh water by
aqueducts that ran along the causeways linking the city to the mainland. In the
Maya lowlands, where the porous limestone bedrock often left little surface
water available during the dry season, many Classic Maya communities were
forced to collect water and store it in underground cisterns (chultuns) and
large open reservoirs. Many reservoirs in the centres of cities were established
in abandoned quarries from which building material had been extracted. The
large buildings and plastered plazas that the Maya constructed in urban cen-
tres were designed to collect rainwater and channel it into these reservoirs
(Scarborough 1993).
Both the highland Mexicans and the Classic Maya recycled household or-
ganic waste onto garden plots near their houses, which they were able to
multicrop in perpetuity. The large gardens that Maya households cultivated
must have converted all their organic waste into fertilizer for their own use
(Fedick 1996a). The Aztec, having much smaller garden plots, collected sur-
plus household organic waste and conveyed it by canoe to agricultural areas
outside the city. The movement of goods was facilitated by a network of alter-
nating streets and canals that ran parallel to one another. Dwellings normally

Urbanism
123
opened onto a street while their gardens faced a canal. Each canal was ﬂanked
by low dykes that protected nearby homes against small rises in lake level
(Dur´an 1971: 231). The Maya appear to have collected inorganic waste near
their houses and transported it periodically to the inner cities, where it was
used for construction ﬁll (Moholy-Nagy 1997). Aztec ofﬁcials organized corv´ee
labour to keep city streets and public spaces clean, but in Egypt as late as the
New Kingdom garbage was dumped on vacant land between buildings (Kemp
1989: 300).
The dead were sometimes buried within communities. The Yoruba interred
family members inside house compounds and the Maya in house platforms.
In Mesopotamia major cemeteries sometimes were located in the central
precincts of cities, but the dead were also buried in vaults beneath their houses.
The Egyptians, Inka, and Shang Chinese normally interred their dead in ceme-
teries located outside their settlements.
Even in urban centres where attention was paid to hygiene, sanitary con-
ditions must have remained well below modern standards. This likely created
more serious health problems in larger cities than in smaller ones and more in
crowded urban centres than in communities where houses were more widely
separated. Many diseases, such as measles, rubella, smallpox, colds, and in-
ﬂuenza, require interactive populations of three hundred thousand to ﬁve
hundred thousand individuals to become endemic and therefore must have
ﬂourished in early civilizations as they had never done before (M. Cohen 1989:
49–50). Greater proximity to domestic animals enhanced the transmission of
serious infectious diseases in Old World civilizations by comparison with New
World ones (McNeill 1976: 45). Demographic data from selected Old World
urban centres and from Teotihuacan indicate a relatively short life expectancy
in both hemispheres (Storey 1985). While detailed demographic information
is not available, it is possible that in at least some of these early civilizations
large urban populations were unable to reproduce themselves – a situation
that prevailed in many urban centres until the advent of modern preventive
medicine (McNeill 1976: 55–57). Under these conditions, a continuing inﬂux
of rural people would have been essential.
urbanism in city-states
Each city-state normally had a single primary centre, which served as its capital.
The atypical city-state of Lagash in southern Mesopotamia had three large
centres: Lagash (El Hiba), Girsu (Telloh), and Nina (Zurghul), the ﬁrst two of
whichservedinturnasitscapitalduringtheEarlyDynasticperiod(Falkenstein
1974 [1954]: 6–7). Multiple urban centres of this sort presumably arose as the

124
Sociopolitical Organization
result of a federation of two or more neighbouring polities. The capitals of
city-states normally had from a few thousand to as many as ﬁfty thousand
inhabitants, although occasionally the capital of a hegemonic city-state might
have one hundred thousand or more residents.
In city-states a high proportion of the population tended to live in the main
urban centres. The extent of concentration varied from one early civilization
to another and according to the political and economic circumstances of indi-
vidual city-states. Because rural/urban boundaries tended to be fuzzy and the
boundaries of states are rarely known, it is difﬁcult to estimate what percent-
age of the population of any particular Maya state lived in urban centres. It
has been estimated that 15 to 35 percent of the population may have lived in
urban centres in most Maya city-states, although in some states this ﬁgure may
have been as high as 50 percent (Chase, Chase, and Haviland 1990). Sanders,
Parsons, and Santley (1979: 154, 162) have estimated that in most parts of the
Valley of Mexico 30 percent of the population lived in urban centres; however,
because of the large number of people living in Tenochtitlan and a few other
large centres, the overall ﬁgure was 50 percent.
Fifty percent or more of Yoruba are reported to have lived in capitals (ilu
alade, or ‘crowned settlements’), where an oba who wore a crown with a beaded
face-covering reigned, or in surrounding towns (ilu oloja, market towns) that
were sometimes ruled by a subordinate oba (who could not wear this sort
of crown). Most Yoruba extended families had their main residences in such
centres, although some members of each extended family spent all or part
of the time living in villages (ileto), hamlets (abule), or isolated homesteads
(ago, aba) producing food. The Yoruba clearly distinguished ‘town people’ (ara
ilu), who belonged to kin groups having rights of urban residence, from ‘farm
people’ (ara oko), who were regarded as culturally inferior (Lloyd 1974: 32).
Yet secondary towns, villages, and homesteads were all classiﬁed as ilu ereko
(settlements on the fringe of farmland) to distinguish them from the main
urban centres (Bascom 1969: 3–4; Krapf-Askari 1969: 25–28).
The highest concentrations of population in urban centres were achieved
in Early Dynastic southern Mesopotamia, where, depending on the region, 70
to 80 percent of the population lived in cities and towns, from which many
farmed the surrounding countryside (R. McC. Adams 1981: 90–94). At this
time there were few permanent settlements of any sort in this region apart
from city-state capitals. Although the rural population increased after the Early
Dynastic period, rural settlements were abandoned again as a result of Amorite
invasions around 2000 b.c. (Postgate 1992: 86).
The main reason so many people lived in urban centres was the greater pro-
tection these cities offered to houses and property where and when intercity

Urbanism
125
conﬂict was prevalent. Mesopotamian and Yoruba cities were normally walled
to protect them from attack. The mud-brick ramparts surrounding some
Mesopotamian cities appear to have been intended not just for practical de-
fense but to impress potential enemies with the strength and unity of the city
that had constructed them; in the Gilgamesh epic the walls of Uruk – 9.5 kilo-
metres in circumference, with bastions every 9 metres, and still 7 metres high
(Huot 1989: 227) – were celebrated in these terms (Jacobsen 1976: 196).
Despite endemic warfare among city-states, walled cities were much less
common in the Western Hemisphere (Sanders and Webster 1988). Tenochti-
tlan was approached by causeways with removable bridges, but most city-
state capitals in the Valley of Mexico had no physical barriers around their
perimeters. Guards appear to have been stationed on the frontiers of city-
states to monitor travel and watch for invaders, and rulers were reported to
have guarded their capitals day and night (Dur´an 1964: 61, 192). For the most
part, however, highland Mexicans built walls around their ritual centres, other
major buildings, and houses rather than around the city as a whole. Their
chief defence appears to have been to lure enemy forces into the city, where
they would be forced by the street pattern to break into smaller groups that
could be fought from rooftops and ramparts. The ﬁnal point of defence was
the major temple platform in the city centre. Setting ﬁre to the shrines atop
such platforms symbolized the defeat of a city by its attackers (Hassig 1988:
62–105).
At an early period in its history the Maya city of Tikal constructed earth
walls between swamps at its north and south ends, presumably as a form of
protection (Culbert, Levi, and Cruz 1990: 115). The approaches to some other
Maya cities were impeded by swamps and other difﬁcult terrain. While Maya
civic centres contained enclosed areas that could easily be defended, ordinary
house groups, which were arranged on low platforms constructed around three
or four sides of open courts, would have been relatively vulnerable to attack. A
log palisade was constructed around the central plaza of the city of Dos Pilos
during the ﬁnal years of its existence (Schele and Freidel 1990: 505).
Since individual farmers in the early civilizations were able to produce only
relatively small food surpluses, most people of necessity engaged in agricultural
production. Where urban centres contained more than 15 percent of a state’s
total population, they must have been home to some full-time farmers. As we
have seen, many Yoruba lived full-time in cities and worked land that their
families owned nearby. Early Dynastic Mesopotamian cities appear to have
housed the vast majority of full-time farmers; where 80 percent of the total
population lived in cities at least 75 percent of urban dwellers would have been
farmers.

126
Sociopolitical Organization
As for Tenochtitlan, some argue that its island core was occupied exclusively
by non-food producers, many of them craft specialists, fed by full-time agri-
culturalists from as far south as Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco (Calnek 1976;
Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 154–55, 177–78) and by tributary states
throughout the valley. Others maintain that many of its residents were full-
time farmers who grew crops on the fringes of the city centre (M. E. Smith
1996: 195–201). The large dykes that the Aztec constructed to regulate wa-
ter levels and reduce salinity in the area around Tenochtitlan would have had
as one of their goals to support such agriculture. Economic specialization on
the scale that would have been required for Tenochtitlan to have been a city
of non-food-producers is attested for no other early civilization in this study,
although it is known from some later preindustrial societies. Further, a pre-
dominance of craft specialists in Tenochtitlan is inconsistent with the extensive
craft production and exchange documented for other city-states in the valley. I
therefore tend to view Tenochtitlan as a city containing a considerable number
of full-time farmers.
The urban centres of city-states frequently contained extensive areas that
were not built over. I have already mentioned the kitchen gardens of Aztec
and Maya cities. Mesopotamian cities had orchards as well as gardens inside
the city walls, where fruit trees would have been safe from destruction by the
enemy. These plots appear to have been privately owned, and therefore not
everyone had access to their produce (Van De Mieroop 1999). Some Yoruba
cities had thick forests just inside their walls that aided in defence and could be
cleared to produce food in times of danger (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 24). Forests
were left standing within the grounds of royal palaces to supply the wild plants
that the obas needed to perform important rituals (Ojo 1966b: 22, 36).
The majority of full-time craft specialists tended to live and work in urban
centres, where they produced goods for the upper classes and for sale to each
other and to farmers living in the city and in the surrounding countryside.
Workers specializing in a particular craft sometimes lived adjacent to one
another in the same part of the city. Some urban farmers also worked on a
part-time basis as craft specialists. Craft workers and urban farmers together
constituted a large and easily mobilized pool of manpower for defending the
city and waging war against its enemies.
Both in the Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba, public markets located
in special open spaces near the centres of cities played a prominent role in
facilitating the exchange of goods. In Mesopotamia, shop-lined streets indicate
vigorous commercial activity involving large numbers of people, and retailing
there may have resembled the bazaars of modern Middle Eastern urban cen-
tres (Postgate 1992: 79). For the Maya, plazas may have provided market sites

Urbanism
127
when they were not being used for religious rituals, but the apparent self-
sufﬁciency of Maya urban families and upper-class control of access to exotic
goods may have reduced the need for large public markets.
The layouts of urban centres in different city-state civilizations reveal ﬂexible
combinations of planning and unregulated growth, as well as a mixture of
cross-culturally regular and culturally speciﬁc features. Mesopotamian cities
were built along rivers or large canals and from Early Dynastic times on were
surrounded with roughly oval walls of mud-brick. Sometimes branch canals ran
though the cities (Gibson 1977; Stone and Zimansky 1995). The main temples
were located near a city’s geographical centre, often within a rectangular or
oval enclosure wall. This temple quarter was called the uruku (sacred city)
(Jacobsen 1970: 379), and a broad, straight avenue sometimes connected it to
a principal city gate. Palaces were usually less centrally located than the main
temple complex. The rest of the built-up area of the city consisted of a network
of winding streets and alleys lined with one- or two-storey houses. Cities were
divided into wards (dagia; Akk. babtum) that were often separated from each
other by walls and had their own outer gates (Postgate 1992: 81–82). There
was little difference in overall wealth among these residential areas, which
seem to have been associated with ethnic or kinship groupings. Near the outer
wall of the city were harbour areas (kar; Akk. k¯arum), apparently walled off
from the rest of the city. These areas, which had their own administration,
accommodated foreign merchants and perhaps the local traders who dealt
with them (Fig. 7.1). Beyond the city walls were suburban areas containing
orchards, ﬁelds, and country houses belonging to people who lived in the
city (Stone 1990; 1997; Van De Mieroop 1999). During the periods of most
intense urbanization, Early Dynastic II and III, at least eight cities in southern
Mesopotamia occupied more than ﬁfty hectares each, and two more covered
more than four hundred hectares (Huot 1989: 158).
Yoruba cities and towns were surrounded by elaborate systems of earth
ramparts, often planted with thorn hedges, and ditches. In the centre of the
city was the walled aﬁn or royal palace, surrounded by one or more market
squares, the main shrines (both inside and outside the palace), and the house
compounds of the principal members of the governing council. A number of
streets, each about ﬁve metres wide, made their way from the centre of the
city to one of the city gates and on into the surrounding countryside. Each
of these streets tended to be associated with one of the wards (adugbo) into
which the city was divided. These wards, which varied in number depending
on the size of the city, were in turn composed of precincts (ogbon) inhabited
by patrilineal extended families. In normal states there was only one palace
in a city, but in smaller, less integrated communities several kings might reign

Ilesha road
Ife
Ibadan road
Ondo
 road
palace
Ifewara
road
18th and 19th
century walls
earlier walls
principal streets
0
1 km
General Scale
Euphrates
river
west
harbour
north harbour
city wall
river, canals, harbours
temple sector
excavated
habitation
areas
temple
Ur
north gate
temple sector
temple
Ur gate
city wall
watercourse
early dynastic areas of habitation
Uruk
a
b
c
7.1. Urban centres in Mesopotamia and among the Yoruba: (a) Uruk, the largest urban centre in early Mesopotamia; (b) Ur, the capital
of an important Mesopotamian city-state; (c) Yoruba city of Ife, showing walls of various periods and major streets. Sources: (a), (b) after
Strommenger & Hirmer 1964: 408, 410; (c) after Shaw 1978: 146, and Willett 1967: 16.

Urbanism
129
over their own portions of the town, each from his own palace. Each of the
lineages that took turns sharing the kingship of a whole community might have
its own palace. Individual Yoruba urban centres had from about ﬁve thousand
to perhaps seventy thousand inhabitants in precolonial times. Benin City had a
population of ﬁfty thousand. Then as now, the Yoruba were the most urbanized
indigenous people in sub-Saharan Africa (Bascom 1969: 29–30; Krapf-Askari
1969; Mabogunje 1962; Ojo 1966b).
The urban centres of the smaller city-states in the Valley of Mexico had at
theircentresmajortemples,palaces,andmarkets,aroundwhichwerearranged
wards inhabited by endogamous corporate groups called calpolli. Each calpolli
haditsowncentre,equippedwithtemples,meetingplaces,leaders’residences,
andschools(Hodge1984;M.E.Smith1996:187–96).Tenochtitlan,in1519the
largest city in the valley with some one hundred thousand inhabitants, had at
its centre a walled precinct containing the major temples and many other
religious buildings (Fig. 7.2). Adjoining this precinct was a palace complex and
a market area. From this central zone, four straight avenues stretched out in
the cardinal directions, dividing the city into four quarters. A generally similar
arrangement of public buildings and major streets had existed at Teotihuacan
over a thousand years earlier. Each of the quarters had its own central temple
and administrative complex, around which were arranged the many calpolli
that composed the population of the city. A rectilinear pattern of streets and
canals paralleled the main avenues, giving people access on foot and by water
to all parts of the city. The city of Tlatelolco constituted a de facto ﬁfth ward
to the north of Tenochtitlan. Its centre contained a large temple complex
and the main market that served the two cities (M. E. Smith 1996: 196–203;
van Zantwijk 1985). Other large cities appear to have have been more dispersed
and to have lacked Tenochtitlan’s gridlike layout. Texcoco, the second-largest
city, had a quadrilateral palace or ceremonial centre surrounded by a number
of detached neighbourhoods (Hodge 1997: 211).
Maya cities were much less compact. At their centres were complexes of
temples, palaces, paved plazas, and upper-class residences. Many of them had
complementary paired precincts: a group of ritual buildings, at least partly
devoted to the cults of dead kings, to the north and a royal palace complex
to the south, with a ball court between (Ashmore 1989: 274). Around the
centre of the city was a ring of moderately dense settlement which lacked
large monumental structures, and beyond that was a zone of still less dense
settlement. Throughout the urban zone, large multistructured residential com-
plexes were surrounded by smaller, less elaborate residential units. The larger
complexes appear to have belonged to powerful individuals or lineage leaders
who exercised authority over their neighbours. Since shrines or temples of

Lake Texcoco
Lake
Texcoco
Tlatelolco
Atzacualpa
Cuepopan
Moyotlan
Teopan
chinampa areas
ceremonial precinct
palaces
avenue or causeway
market
Tenochtitlan
0
1 km
0
1 km
urban centre
0
4 km
2
earthworks
swamps
area of  Tikal
Tenochtitlan- Tlatelolco
Tikal
Tikal
urban centre
Mendez
Causeway
North
Acropolis
Great Plaza
a
b
c

Urbanism
131
corresponding degrees of elaborateness were associated with all residential
complexes, a hierarchy of royal, upper-class, and commoner family cult cen-
tres extended throughout each city. In some urban centres, paved avenues
joined upper-class ritual and residential complexes directly with the central
parts of the city. Large Maya centres appear to have had from eight thousand
to sixty-ﬁve thousand inhabitants. The central area of Tikal covered sixteen
square kilometres and is estimated to have had a population of sixty-two thou-
sand people. Calakmul appears to have been equally large. Caracol may have
had thirty-ﬁve thousand to sixty thousand people living within three to four
kilometres of its centre, while Coba, far to the north, had ﬁfty-ﬁve thousand
inhabitants. Small secondary centres were often located about ten kilometres
from major urban centres (Andrews 1975; Ashmore 1981; Chase, Chase, and
Haviland 1990; Culbert et al. 1990; Culbert and Rice 1990; Folan, Kintz, and
Fletcher 1983; Folan et al. 1995; Pyburn 1997; Tate 1992; Webster 1997; Wilk
and Ashmore 1988).
In all four city-state civilizations, the central public buildings of urban cen-
tres symbolized the unity of the city and of the surrounding territory it con-
trolled. Mesopotamians and Yoruba used defensive walls to mark their cities’
boundaries. In Mesopotamia walls separated different groups living within a
city. Both in the Valley of Mexico and among the Maya, the marking of urban
boundaries seems to have been much less important; their quarters, districts,
and house complexes had at their centres ritual structures that expressed their
individual identity. While the Yoruba and Mespotamians utilized barriers to
demarcate cities and their subdivisions, Mesoamerican cultures used ranked
systems of well-deﬁned public buildings to identify such entities physically.
urbanism in territorial states
Territorial states developed hierarchies of administrative centres at the local,
district, provincial, and national levels, but the populations of those centres
tended to be of modest size. Even national capitals, with perhaps ﬁfty thousand
inhabitants, were no more populous than the capitals of substantial city-states,
although the populations that sustained them were many times larger. This was
because these centres were inhabited almost exclusively by the ruling class and
by administrators, craft specialists, and manual labourers who either worked
7.2. Urban centres in Mesoamerica: (a) Tenochtitlan-Tlatelolco in the early sixteenth century
a.d.; (b) central four square kilometres of Tikal, a large Maya city; (c) the boundaries of Tikal as
deﬁned by structure density and location of earthworks, shown in relation to adjacent swamps.
Sources: (a) after E. Calnek 1976: 293, and M. Smith 1996: 199; (b) after Blanton et al. 1981:
196; (c) after Culbert & Rice 1990: 118.

132
Sociopolitical Organization
for the state or served the residents. Because the government protected the
state as a whole against armed attack, farmers preferred for practical reasons
to live in dispersed homesteads and villages near their ﬁelds rather than in
urban centres. The houses of powerful ofﬁcials sometimes had ornamental
gardens, but these were mainly for enjoyment rather than to provide signiﬁcant
subsistence. Food was brought into the cities from the country estates of urban
dwellers or as taxes and rents from rural villages.
Large territorial states sometimes had multiple capitals, which might shift
location from one period to another. In Egypt the fortiﬁed palace and admin-
istrative centre founded, according to tradition, by Menes of the First Dynasty
grew into the city of Memphis, which remained the primary administrative
centre of Egypt throughout the Old and most of the Middle Kingdom. The
main royal residences and burial places were located in its general vicinity,
although the precise locations of both shifted from one reign to another. In
the New Kingdom Memphis remained an important centre of government
and court life but shared this role with Thebes, where the Egyptian kings
were buried and had their main cult centre. As relations with the Near East
became more crucial in the late New Kingdom, another royal residence was
established at Pi-Ramesses in the eastern Delta. The sprawling remains of
Akhenaton’s short-lived capital at Akhetaton, in Middle Egypt, indicate how
quickly a new capital could be constructed if a king wished to do so (Kemp
1989: 261–317). Equally signiﬁcant was the speed with which the kings who
united Egypt abandoned their original capital at This in Upper Egypt and the
ﬁrst ruler of the Twelfth Dynasty shifted his capital from Thebes to Memphis,
perhaps recognizing that, because of communication difﬁculties, it was almost
impossible to govern Egypt from a single capital located in the far south (Uphill
1988).
While the Inka regarded Cuzco as the cosmological centre of the world and
their family seat, kings who had to remain away from it for long periods wag-
ing war and inspecting provinces established ‘New Cuzcos’ where they could
perform essential state rituals. In these cities, as in major provincial capitals,
streets, hills, plazas, and major buildings bore the same names as their pro-
totypes in Cuzco, although they rarely closely resembled these prototypes in
appearance (Hyslop 1990: 140, 172–76, 304–6). There is evidence that in the
years preceding the Spanish conquest Inka rulers may have been deemphasiz-
ing Cuzco. Wayna Qhapaq, the last king to die before the Spanish conquest,
may have intended to establish his mortuary cult in the city of Tumipampa
(Tomebamba), in Ecuador, where he had resided for the last years of his reign,
and the later Inka rulers promoted creation myths that traced their divine
origin back to ancient ritual centres on Lake Titicaca (Urton 1990: 3).

Urbanism
133
While the frequent relocations of capitals historically recorded for the early
Shang Dynasty have raised questions about the accuracy of these sources,
they have generally been interpreted as motivated by military considerations
related to expanding the Shang kingdom or maintaining its unity. Yoffee (1993:
70) has suggested that the rulers of territorial states may have sought to disem-
bed political from social power by establishing new capitals where ‘a formal
separation from other elites allows for new policies to be implemented and
new dependents to be recruited for the new enterprises’. It is therefore pos-
sible that the frequent shifts of capital cities of early Shang times were efforts
to increase royal power.
In territorial states, kings spent much of their time travelling about their
domains. Egyptian kings moved regularly from one part of the country to
another inspecting provincial centres, collecting taxes, performing religious
ceremonies, and hunting. In addition to their large palaces in the main ad-
ministrative and ritual centres, they possessed a network of smaller residences
throughout Egypt where they could stay while moving about (Kemp 1989:
218–23). Some of these were important centres for producing cloth and other
goods for the court. The Inka kings travelled through their much larger king-
dom inspecting administrative centres, performing rituals, hunting, putting
down rebellions, and waging wars to extend or protect their frontiers (Kendall
1973: 67–68). They stayed in major provincial capitals and at rest stations along
the main roads, where elaborate buildings were erected and equipped for gov-
ernment use. David Keightley (1983b: 552) suggests that by travelling about
in their kingdom the Shang rulers renewed ‘religious and kin ties (ﬁctive or
not) that bound the state together’. Rulers in all three territorial states were
accompanied on these travels by armed escorts and large numbers of servants
and ofﬁcials.
Major urban centres took the form of dispersed settlements where rulers
and the upper classes lived in special enclaves around which administrative
and storage facilities, cult places, burial grounds, and settlements of lesser
functionaries, retainers, craft workers, and supporting farmers were arranged.
Elite enclaves, temples, and administrative centres were often enclosed by
formidable walls, which not only protected their inhabitants against robbery
and insurrection but also sheltered them from public view. Walled structures
were therefore symbols of power and exclusivity as well as secure areas. Urban
complexes in territorial states lacked outer defences, although entry to and exit
from the capital area were controlled by ofﬁcial patrols and checkpoints. The
dispersed nature of cities in territorial states was possible because there was
little danger of external attack. The Inka ‘fortress’ of Saqsawaman, which was
an imposing feature of the Cuzco landscape and a redoubt to which the upper

134
Sociopolitical Organization
classes and their supporters could retreat in time of rebellion or enemy attack,
served storage and ritual as well as military functions (Hyslop 1990: 51–55).
The original administrative centre that had been established at Memphis
came to symbolize the unity of Egypt. Its name, White Wall (Inb h
• d), signiﬁed
an Upper Egyptian (hence ‘white’) presence in Lower Egypt, near the point
where the two major administrative divisions of the country came together.
This enclosure persisted in the form of a major administrative palace where
the enthronement of Egyptian monarchs took place. For a king to circle this
palace’s outer walls symbolized taking possession of Egypt. Memphis’s palace
complex and the temple of Ptah to the south of it became the nucleus of a
settlement that endured throughout Egyptian history. Bureaucrats, craftsmen,
and others who worked for the state lived in the city, and high-ranking ofﬁcials
probably had ofﬁcial residences there as well (Fig. 7.3).
It appears, however, that the principal royal residence lay close to the pyra-
mid complex of the reigning monarch and therefore was frequently located
some distance north or south of Memphis. In the Old Kingdom, new royal
residences seem to have been established in almost every reign. During the
Middle Kingdom, the main royal residence appears to have remained at Itı
t3wy (The Rightful Possessor of the Two Lands) about thirty kilometres south
of Memphis. The palace of Djedkare-Isesi, a Fifth Dynasty ruler, is described
as a rectangular structure about 640 by 230 metres that was called the ‘Lotus
Blossom of Isesi’. Nearby service towns would have been inhabited by skilled
pyramid builders, palace servants, craftsmen, and later those who tended to the
cult of the dead king. The settlement closest to Khufu’s palace at Giza may have
covered two hundred hectares. Residential palaces that were vacated when the
court relocated may have been used for a time for administrative purposes,
such as collecting and distributing resources, before being abandoned (Lehner
1997: 230–32).
Many features of these arrangements appear to have been retained in better-
known New Kingdom capitals, such as Thebes and Akhetaton. On the east
bank at Thebes, temples, an ofﬁcial palace, and various government ofﬁces
were surrounded by the houses of ofﬁcials, bureaucrats, retainers, craftsmen,
and manual labourers. Only a few processional avenues imposed some de-
gree of central planning on this agglomeration. On the west bank, at the
edge of the ﬂoodplain, were a series of royal mortuary temples and the
tombs of ofﬁcials and kings. These were built and tended by workmen and
priests who lived in nearby villages. Between these establishments were ﬁelds
and a large number of farming villages, whose inhabitants probably worked
part time as labourers and priests in neighbouring government and temple
complexes. Kings appear to have located their main residential palaces on

Abu Sir lake
Weni lake
South Saqqara lakes
Nile River in Phar
aon
ic
ti
m
es
E
ar
ly
Dyn
astic
cou
rse
of Nile River
Early
      Dynastic
      Memphis ?
Early Dynastic
   burials of high officials
Gisr
el-Mudir
Sekhemkhet
Pyramid
Step
Pyramid
Mit Rahina
(Memphis)
Palace
compound ?
enclosure of
Ptah temple
Hu
at
an
a
y
River
Wakapata and
Cusipata squares
b
a
Tu
ll
u
m
ayo R.
road to
Chinchasuyu
road to
Antisuyu
road to
Collasuyu
road to
Cuntisuyu
Saqsawaman
(fortress)
scale
0
5 km
d
e
s
e
rt
pl
at
e
a
u
Hanan Cuzco
Hurin Cuzco
7.3. Urban centres in Egypt and the Inka kingdom: (a) the Egyptian Old Kingdom administra-
tive centre at Memphis and some nearby royal burial sites; (b) the royal residential and ritual
centre of the Inka capital at Cuzco – this area was surrounded by agricultural land and a ring of
settlements occupied by people of lower status. Sources: (a) after Baines & Malek 1980: 135;
(b) after Hyslop 1990: 30.
135

136
Sociopolitical Organization
the outskirts of the urban area. Akhetaton displayed a similar combination of
centrally located ofﬁcial palaces and temples and suburban residential palaces
(Lacovara 1997; O’Connor 1995; 1998).
The Inka rulers used the resources of their kingdom to reorganize and
transform the entire Cuzco Valley. At its centre was an urban zone of about
forty hectares occupied by palaces, state buildings, and temples. This area was
inhabited almost exclusively by members of royal lineages. Located on the site
of the original town of Cuzco, this zone had been completely redesigned and
rebuilt after a.d. 1438 by the Inka ruler Pachakutiq, who expelled all its non-
Inka residents. The built-up area stretched from the fortress of Saqsawaman
southeast between two small rivers, the Tullumayo and the Huatanay. Plans for
the eventual expansion of settlement south of the Huatanay went unrealized.
At the heart of this complex, marking the geographical and ritual centre of the
Inka kingdom, were two adjacent squares, Wakapata and Cusipata, that were
joined by wooden beams extending across the Huatanay River. Commoners
from nearby communities frequently assembled in these squares to participate
in major rituals and celebrations (J. Moore 1996). From these squares four
roads ran outward to the main divisions of the Inka state. The road heading
northeast divided Cuzco into upper (hanan) and lower (hurin) halves, which
corresponded to the moiety arrangement found in all highland communities.
The rest of the city was traversed by three or four narrow streets that ran par-
allel to the rivers and a larger number of short intersecting side streets. The re-
sulting roughly rectangular blocks, up to seventy-ﬁve metres long and forty-ﬁve
metres wide, were occupied by the palace compounds of the reigning king and
all the deceased ones. The dead kings’ mummiﬁed bodies continued to be at-
tended in their respective palaces as if they were alive. The palace compounds
were located according to moiety afﬁliation: those associated with the earliest
kings were located in Lower Cuzco and those of more recent kings in Upper
Cuzco. Two royal palaces, belonging to Wiraqucha Inka and Thupa Inka Yu-
panki,containedthetemplesofthecreatorgodWiraquchaandthethundergod
Illapa respectively (Kendall 1973: 115). Other compounds contained temples
or housed special religious personnel. Still other compounds may have been
used for administrative purposes. The main temple, the Qorikancha (House
of Gold), was located at the south end of this urban complex. It faced onto an-
other square where animals were sacriﬁced daily (Hyslop 1990: 36–47, 59–63;
Kendall 1973: 112–15).
Central Cuzco was surrounded by a belt of farmland beyond which was a
ring of planned settlements inhabited by ofﬁcials who did not belong to the
Inka royal family, provincial lords who were required to visit Cuzco periodi-
cally as proof of their loyalty, craft workers, permanent retainers who served

Urbanism
137
the Inka elite, and conscripted labourers summoned from remote areas to
work on government building projects in the Cuzco area. In this belt, as well
as at Saqsawaman and in the central area, were located major storehouses
for food, clothing, and other wealth belonging to the state. Representatives
of every ethnic group in the Inka kingdom were said to have lived in these
settlements, which were connected to central Cuzco by a radial set of trails
that supplemented the four main roads that ran beyond the valley. Still far-
ther from the centre, in the Cuzco and neighbouring Urubamba Valleys, were
farming communities, but there too were the private estates and rural palaces
of reigning and former kings and estates belonging to members of the nobility.
The Cuzco Valley was covered by a network of shrines, some of which played
a prominent role in state rituals. It has been estimated that ﬁfteen thousand to
twenty thousand people may have lived in central Cuzco, another ﬁfty thou-
sand in the surrounding ring of settlement, and a further ﬁfty thousand to one
hundred and ten thousand in other parts of the valley (Hyslop 1990: 64). Many
of the inhabitants of the central area did not reside there full-time, however,
and because numerous commoners lived and worked in different zones there
may have been duplication in recording the population of these three areas.
Thus the total ﬁgures estimated for the Cuzco Valley may be somewhat inﬂated
(Hyslop 1990: 48–58, 63–67; Kendall 1973: 116–17; Zuidema 1964; 1990).
The dispersed layouts of Shang major centres resemble the capitals of other
territorial states rather than those of city-states. At the Early Shang site of
Zhengzhou a massive rectangular wall of stamped earth about 22 metres thick,
1,870 metres long, and 1,690 metres wide has been interpreted as an elite
compound containing palaces and upper-class residences. Around this com-
pound have been found small, isolated settlements once inhabited by bronze,
bone, and pottery workers, an area of poorer houses, and various burial areas.
The bronze workers lived in stamped-earth houses built on platforms which
indicate a considerable level of afﬂuence. The compound appears to have been
surrounded by villages of craft workers and retainers who served the upper
classes living within its walls. Still farther away would have been agricultural
villages (An 1986; Bagley 1999: 165–68; K. Chang 1980: 263–88). The general
arrangement of Zhengzhou resembles that of Cuzco. Another walled com-
pound, about 2,150 metres square, has been identiﬁed just north of Anyang
and tentatively dated to the beginning of the Middle Shang period (Tang, Jin,
and Rapp 2000) (Fig. 7.4).
The late Shang royal centre at Anyang (Yinxi) has been described as a
network of separate settlements spread over an area measuring six by four
kilometres. Xiaotun, near the centre of the complex, contains a collection of
large halls and temples facing south and appears to have been a royal palace

Huanbei
Shang City
(Middle Shang)
B
C
B
C
B
C
H
u
a
n
R
i
v
e
r
Li
m
it
of Yin
xu
(L
ate Shang cap
it
a
l)
Xibeigang
(royal cemetery)
Xiaotun
(palace area)
enclosure
elite residences
commoner residences
mixed residences
elite burials
elite craft areas
C
B
K
C
W
B
C
C
C
palace
foundations
C
B
Chin-shu
i
R
iv
er
H
si
u
n
g-
er
h
Riv
e
r
enclosure
bronze workshops
pottery kilns
bone workshops
cemetery
C
B
W
K
0
5 km
a
b
dwellings
commoners'
dwellings
7.4. Urban centres in China: (a) Anyang, showing recently discovered Middle Shang adminis-
trative enclosure and major features of the Late Shang capital region to south; (b) Early Shang
administrative enclosure at Zhengzhou and some surrounding settlements. Sources: (a) after
Tang et al. 2000: 479; G. Barnes 1993: 128; (b) after K. Chang 1986a: 337.
138

Urbanism
139
complex. Around the major buildings were small houses probably inhabited
by royal servants. It is not clear whether this central complex was walled, al-
though the remains of an ancient ditch have been reported. There was another
elite residential area nearby, and to the north at Xibeigang a large cemetery
contained royal graves and evidence of ongoing mortuary rites. Interspersed
throughout the area were settlements housing a mixture of wealthy and poorer
individuals, sites inhabited exclusively by commoners, and various workshops
(G. Barnes 1993: 126–29; K. Chang 1980: 70–135; Li Chi 1977).
The capitals of territorial states tended to be less compact than those of
city-states, and their various components were often separated by areas of
farmland. At least in part these arrangements seem to have reﬂected the de-
sire of rulers to live in isolation from their subjects and perhaps even from most
ofﬁcials. While various central administrative and ritual structures were built
near the centres of such agglomerations, at least some royal residences were
located on the outskirts. By comparison with city-state capitals, the primary
cities of territorial states tended to lack clearly marked centres or boundaries.
While massive structures provided impressive displays of royal power, in terri-
torial states it was the king and his court, wherever they might be, rather than
any speciﬁc features of urban architecture that constituted the heart of the
state.
To draw a complete comparison between city-states and territorial states
with regard to urbanism, it is essential to consider the latter’s provincial ad-
ministrative centres as well as their capitals. In Egypt a network of admin-
istrative centres and government ofﬁces in smaller towns was necessary to
serve royal funerary cults, levy and collect taxes, and control the countryside.
Provincial centres would have required elite residences, ofﬁces, storehouses,
barracks for police, and workshops where, for example, boats could have been
built to transport surplus grain (David 1986; Wegner 2000). For the most part,
these centres were small ones. Moreover, during the Early Dynastic period
and the Old Kingdom, while the central government featured prominently in
the construction of walled enclosures and temples at key ritual centres such
as Abydos and Hierakonpolis, elsewhere most such construction appears to
have been carried out by local ofﬁcials. It was not until the Middle Kingdom
that the central government began to play a systematic role in building tem-
ples throughout Egypt (Kemp 1977; 1983: 96–104; 1989: 65–83; Seidlmayer
1996). During the Old Kingdom, the main construction projects of the Egyp-
tian state were focused on the Memphis area and in particular on royal tombs.
This centralized symbolic afﬁrmation of the unity of the Egyptian state would
have been optimally effective if, in the course of corv´ee labour, most Egyptian
men had seen and perhaps helped to build these monuments. Because they

140
Sociopolitical Organization
were also important regional cult centres, most of the provincial administrative
centres endured throughout Egyptian history.
Inka provincial centres in the highlands invariably contained Inka-style cut-
stone buildings constructed by local masons working to Inka speciﬁcations.
In the lowlands Inka embellishments were often added to buildings of lo-
cal styles. Administrative centres were established in every province, often
away from indigenous settlements, as residences for provincial governors and
places where food, clothing, and weapons could be supplied to government
ofﬁcials, soldiers, and farm labourers moving from one part of the kingdom
to another. These centres also contained barracks in which large numbers of
transient soldiers and labourers could eat and sleep. The full-time inhabitants
of these centres included state functionaries, women charged with brewing
beer, weaving cloth, and cooking for the state, and assistants attached to gov-
ernment ofﬁcials. Food and other materials were brought from throughout
each province to its administrative centre, where most of the bulk commodi-
ties were stored for government use. The workforces that built and maintained
such centres were recruited locally, usually as corv´ee labourers. In contrast to
the Egyptian kings, Inka rulers displayed their power not only in the capital
region but systematically throughout their kingdom (Hyslop 1990: 69–101;
Kendall 1973: 118–19; Morris and Thompson 1985).
Subsidiary centres of government in the Shang and Western Zhou kingdoms
appear to have been much smaller than capitals. Each centre consisted of a
walled enclosure containing the residence, ancestral temple, and other ofﬁcial
buildings of the local ruler, as well as housing for his household servants and
armed retainers. Both the words that later meant town (yi) and state (guo) ap-
pearinitiallytohavereferredtothesewalledresidences(HsuandLinduff1988:
268–69). Thus yi probably originally designated a walled administrative centre
rather than a more conventional town or city. The Chinese clearly viewed set-
tlements of this sort as proper locations for the exercise of aristocratic power.
There is no evidence that at this time secondary walled settlements were other
than the seats of dominant lineages and their retainers (G. Barnes 1993: 136;
K. Chang 1980: 158–83). This interpretation further calls into question the sug-
gestion that the Shang rulers were hegemons ruling over a series of city-states.
In more secure areas, walls may have mainly protected the privacy of the
local governing family, but in more exposed or unsettled territories they may
also have sheltered a garrison, possibly related by blood to the presiding ofﬁcial,
which cultivated land both inside and outside them. In times of enemy attack
or local rebellion, such centres would have provided places of refuge for those
in the region who supported the local ruler, together with their animals and
movable property. They may also have attracted craft workers seeking work

Urbanism
141
and protection. Thus these centres of regional government would have been
smaller and simpler versions of royal court centres.
sources of variation
Much of the variation in urbanism in the early civilizations is correlated with
the distinction between city- and territorial states. Some of this variation was
of a functional nature, such as the tendency for farmers to locate their homes
in urban centres in city-state systems, where local warfare was common, but to
live near their ﬁelds where a territorial state ensured their safety from attack.
At the same time, the dispersed nature of major urban centres in territorial
states suggests a pursuit of privacy on the part of the ruling class that, according
to Peter Wilson (1988), is everywhere an important technique for enhancing
the authority of rulers. In city-state capitals such privacy had to be ensured by
limiting access to upper-class residences rather than by geographically isolating
them. Whether or not different city-state systems constructed walls around
their capitals may have been a simple alternative in their defensive strategies
and the deployment of resources. It also gave rise to an Old World versus New
World and hence perhaps a historically derived dichotomy. This particular
differenceseemstohavebeenrelatedtoamoregeneraltendencytodistinguish
social units by emphasizing boundaries in some societies and centres in others.
In all early civilizations urban centres were viewed as exceptionally interesting
places in which to live. They were the physical embodiments of political power
and human achievement and the places in which humans came into closest
contact with the supernatural powers that made the universe function.

8 Class Systems and Social Mobility
I
n early civilizations and other complex preindustrial societies, inequality
was regarded as a normal condition and injustice as a personal misfortune
or even an individual’s just deserts rather than as a social evil (Weber 1976
[1896]: 258). Structures based on differential power were pervasive. Every
child was born into and socialized by a family that was internally hierarchized
in the image of the state. The subordination of children to their parents and, to
varying degrees, of wives to their husbands went unquestioned, as did corporal
punishment as a means of enforcing obedience and discipline (Trigger 1985b).
Young people were expected to obey older people, especially older men.
‘Father’, ‘king’, and ‘god’ were often synonyms and metaphors for power.
While most small farming communities were already hierarchized, they be-
came even more so with the development of more complex societies. The most
powerful and advantaged members of these communities strengthened their
positions by acting as intermediaries between their fellow villagers and the
state. The general pervasiveness of inequality ensured that its legitimacy went
unquestioned. If egalitarian social organization was known to people in early
civilizations, it was as a feature of small-scale and usually despised societies
beyond the pale.
In all early civilizations richer and more powerful people cultivated a dis-
tinctive lifestyle. They controlled the major public institutions and used this
control to protect and enhance their wealth and power. They also tended to
marry people of similar status and to restrict and control vertical social mobil-
ity. Nevertheless, there were signiﬁcant differences among early civilizations
in the extent to which distinctions between classes were formally demarcated.
Ian Morris (1997) contrasts Ernest Gellner’s (1983) model of ‘agro-literate
states’ (large preindustrial kingdoms) with the ideal class structure of a demo-
cratic Greek city-state (polis) of the Classical period. In agro-literate states,
horizontally segregated layers of the military, administrative, religious, and
142

