Food Production
281
metals were known reﬂects the relative scarcity of copper and tin throughout
the world. By contrast, the abundance of iron ores made iron an appropriate
material from which to manufacture farming implements once it was known
how to smelt them.
Egypt and Mesopotamia were the only early civilizations in our sample
that supplemented human agricultural labour with that of domestic animals.
Oxen- and donkey-drawn ploughs were present from an early period. Draft
animals are estimated to have resulted in a 50 percent reduction in the human
labour needed to grow grain, and this permitted small groups of men to work
large, monocropped ﬁelds (R. Hunt 1991: 148). Special skills were required to
construct and maintain ploughs, and draft animals had to be fed, harnessed,
and trained to pull them.
Animal-drawn ploughs were used not to cut deeply into the soil or to turn
over heavy turf but to loosen the surfaces of ﬁelds to help conserve subsur-
face moisture and cover seed. Ploughs were equipped with wooden blades,
which in Mesopotamia were sometimes sheathed with copper. Mesopotamian
ploughs were also equipped with a ‘drill’ or funnel which dropped seed into
the furrows as the plough moved along (Postgate 1992: 167). This form of
sowing was more economical of grain than the broadcast method employed in
Egypt. Because ploughs were expensive to manufacture and used to work large
ﬁelds, they either belonged to large estates or were owned communally. Small
independent farmers had to rent ploughs and teams of oxen or pay to have
their ﬁelds ploughed. Animal-drawn ploughs were not used until the late Zhou
period in China, although animal traction was employed routinely for military
purposes in Shang times. The absence of ploughs in New World civilizations
can be explained by the lack of domestic animals that could have been used
to pull them; the Peruvian llama was unsuitable as a draft animal, although
it was used to carry light packs. The Yoruba kept a few cattle, but ploughing
was not well adapted to their root-crop agriculture. Even the Egyptians and
Mesopotamians did not use their ploughs, as Iron Age Europeans were to do,
to cultivate rich and fertile but heavy and therefore hard-to-work soils. Instead,
they worked lighter soils that could otherwise have been cultivated using hand
implements.
There is therefore no basis for viewing the rise of early civilizations as being
closely linked to improved agricultural implements. The development of such
technology was related to historically contingent factors such as whether draft
animals were available and whether metallurgical techniques were capable of
mass-producing farm implements. Moreover, the Maya, using digging sticks,
were able to support a civilization that was at least as complex as that of the
iron-using Yoruba in a generally similar environment.

282
Economy
Efforts have also been made to correlate the development of civilization with
the segmentation of different forms of agricultural production – the separation
of gardening from grain production or of agriculture from animal husbandry. It
has been suggested that more complex segmentation of agricultural activities
would have produced a greater division of labour as individuals and groups
specialized in performing different tasks and that this in turn would have
promoted the development of expertise and higher levels of food production
(Fussell 1966). It has also been maintained that increasing agricultural special-
ization inﬂuenced gender relations by making agriculture a male occupation.
In reality, however, women in early civilizations appear to have performed
many agricultural tasks, such as herding animals and tending kitchen gardens
near their homes. Where major reliance on a few crops created short peak pe-
riods of agricultural labour, women and children also joined in activities such as
winnowing grain. Such labour ﬂuctuations reached extremes in societies that
worked ﬁelds with animal-drawn ploughs. The highland Andean civilization
was the only one in our sample that recognized and ideologically justiﬁed the
cooperation of men and women in producing food (Silverblatt 1987: 10–15).
In other early civilizations, the ideological celebration of men as food pro-
ducers served to reinforce patriarchy. Although the symbolic differentiation
of male and female tasks exceeded their real separation, a growing division of
labour in complex societies resulted in men’s increasingly specializing in food
production while women specialized in food processing and other household
tasks.
In the past it would have been argued that Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba gar-
dening represented the simplest form of agriculture associated with early civ-
ilizations. These economies would have been followed by that of the Shang
Chinese, who appear to have kept more domestic animals and sowed grain in
hand-ploughedﬁeldsaswellastendingkitchengardens.Nextwouldhavecome
the Inka economy, with its altitudinally varied plant complexes and specialized
herding sector. Egypt and ﬁnally Mesopotamia would have represented the
most elaborate forms of agriculture, with their complex associations of gar-
dening, ploughed ﬁelds, farm animals, and specialized herding. Yet, as we
have already noted, much of this variation was fortuitous. The lack of any
indigenous large domesticable animals in Mesoamerica and of suitable draft
animals in Peru precluded various forms of specialization. The presence of ad-
jacent pastoral peoples in China, Mesopotamia, and (to a much lesser extent)
Egypt created additional possibilities for articulating complementary forms of
food production. More important, however, there is no evidence that organi-
zational specialization of this sort corresponded with increased productivity.
The Yoruba kept a few large domestic animals, but their agricultural system,
while highly sophisticated and well adapted to their environment and to a low

Food Production
283
population density, was much less productive than that of the Aztec or the
Maya, who did not. Specialization in food production was important, but it
does not account for overall productivity. To understand productivity, intensi-
ﬁcation of production and labour must be considered.
Many evolutionary theories treat population pressure as the driving force
behind more intensive food production and the development of more hierar-
chical societies, including early civilizations (Boserup 1965; M. Cohen 1977;
P. Smith 1976). These theories assume that population pressure characterized
all early civilizations and that people submitted to taxation and political au-
thority only if they had nowhere else to go. This ties in with the argument that
early states and civilizations developed only in regions where fertile soils were
circumscribed by far less productive areas, with the result that, as populations
expanded, people could not easily evade political authority by moving else-
where (Carneiro 1970b). Using Michael Mann’s (1986: 38–40) terminology,
these populations became ‘caged’.
Agricultural land was naturally circumscribed in the Valley of Mexico, Peru,
Egypt, and Mesopotamia. In highland Mexico and Peru, arable land, located
mostly in valleys, was limited, and relocation from one valley to another would
have been socially and politically difﬁcult for farmers. Moving to the lowlands
would have required ecological knowledge that was not easily obtained. Es-
cape from Mesopotamia necessitated a major change in lifestyle (one that has
been undertaken in the Middle East by marginal and oppressed farmers who
become pastoralists [A. Cohen 1972: 7]). The areas immediately adjacent to
the Nile Valley in Egypt had little sustaining power in historical times. Pedro
Cieza de Le´on observed that in Peru the population was easy to control because
most of the region consisted of wasteland that offered no refuge to dissidents
(Salomon 1986: 20).
The Classic Maya, Yoruba, and Shang Chinese civilizations had no such
natural boundaries. The Maya could have expanded farther south into Central
America (McAnany 1995: 146), and the low overall population density of the
Yoruba gave people considerable room for movement and colonization within
their existing territories. Shang and Zhou expansion was ecologically restricted
by the cold and arid terrain to the north and west, but vast amounts of desirable
farmland lay to the south. People in these civilizations had large areas of less
densely inhabited arable land into which to escape from authority.
Another intensiﬁcation argument is that, as population densities increased
andsuitablelandwasdevelopedtosustainhigherlevelsofproductionbymeans
of drainage, terracing, and irrigation, such land became an investment that its
owners would not willingly abandon. They would submit to authority and
taxation if necessary to retain possession of their farms and supported rulers
who offered their holdings protection against claims by neighbours who lacked

284
Economy
such good soil or intruders from elsewhere (Linton 1933; 1939). Theories
of circumscription thus assume that coercion depended either on increasing
population density without any outlet for excess population or on the growing
appeal of staying in one place.
Estimates of population sizes and densities without modern census data de-
pend largely on archaeological settlement patterns and written records. Even
if archaeologists can date houses and farming hamlets to speciﬁc periods, it is
notoriously difﬁcult to determine how many buildings were occupied simul-
taneously, how many nuclear families inhabited each structure, and how large
the average nuclear family was. Written information is frequently even less re-
liable. Early European visitors to Mexico, Peru, and West Africa recorded their
own and what were purported to be indigenous estimates of the populations of
speciﬁc cities or regions, but they seem often to have exaggerated population
size to impress European readers. In Mexico and Peru, reliable census data
are available only after the Spanish conquest, when European diseases had de-
stroyed much of the aboriginal population. For the Yoruba and Benin, census
data are available only after European colonization had resulted in major eco-
nomic and political changes. There are reports by Greek and Roman writers
on the population of Egypt, but because of the intensiﬁcation of agricultural
production that occurred during the Ptolemaic period (Butzer 1976: 50) it is
difﬁcult to apply these ﬁgures to earlier times.
Despite these limitations, the intensiﬁcation of food production does ap-
pear to be closely correlated with increasing population density. The invest-
ment of more labour in agricultural production is indicated archaeologically
by hydraulic works, including various forms of irrigation, which were intended
to bring more land under cultivation and would have permitted more abun-
dant crops to be grown in most areas than rainfall agriculture alone. Drainage
schemes also brought more land under intensive cultivation. Agricultural ter-
races vary from simple works designed to limit soil erosion in areas of rainfall
agriculture to serried banks of carefully irrigated and drained artiﬁcial ﬁelds
such as those that lined the steep lower slopes of the Andes. Most of the labour
needed to construct and maintain irrigation works, terraces, and wetland ﬁelds
could have been performed at the village or district level. Other promotions
of intensive agriculture took the form of state-directed projects intended to
increase royal revenues.
agricultural regimes
Yoruba territory extends from the swampy coastal plain along the Gulf of
Guinea north through tropical forests to the southern edge of the savanna.

Food Production
285
The terrain, which mostly lies below ﬁve hundred metres, rises gradually to
the north, where a ﬂat plain is interrupted by massive outcrops of metamor-
phic rock rising as high as nine hundred metres. A number of small rivers
ﬂow south into the Gulf of Guinea. It is a region of red lateritic soils. In the
far south, around Lagos, the mean temperature is 27.2 degrees C in January
and twenty-ﬁve degrees C in July; around Ibadan these ﬁgures are lower only
by a degree or less. Dry, hot harmattan winds blow south from the Sahara
Desert between December and February, while moist winds blow north from
the Gulf of Guinea at other seasons. The coastal region receives signiﬁcant
rainfall year-round, but in the north rains sufﬁcient to grow crops last for only
six months, with peaks in June and again in September and October. The
dry season in the north lasts from December to February. Two hundred and
thirty centimetres of rain fall each year around Lagos but only 111 centime-
tres around Ibadan. Agriculture is therefore more seasonal in the north, and
farmers who live there are more likely also to engage in other forms of labour
(Bascom 1969: 4; Ojo 1966a: 24–26, 66).
Despite their iron agricultural tools, the Yoruba had the least intensive sub-
sistence pattern in our sample. They practised swidden agriculture, which in-
volved girdling large trees and cutting underbrush and small, second-growth
trees during the dry season and then, when the wood had dried out, subject-
ing the area to a controlled burn. Finally, the soil was broken up and hoed,
and tubers and seeds were planted between the stumps in April. Prior to
a.d. 1500, the main crops were yams, which were West African domesticates,
and sorghum and pearl millet from the Sahel, but, since their introduction
from the New World, maize has largely replaced sorghum and cassava is com-
mon. Beans, melons, oil palm, kola nut, and other fruits and vegetables were
also cultivated prior to European contact. African cotton was grown to make
cloth. Yams were planted in low mounds of loose soil and, after they were dug
up, dried to make ﬂour (Law 1977: 100). A wide variety of crops were grown
together in a manner imitating natural plant growth in tropical clearings, a
practice that minimized both erosion and the need for weeding. Successive
yam crops began to mature in July, November, and December. Groves of oil
palms were planted on community and lineage land (Bascom 1969: 18–20;
Bradbury 1957: 23; Forde 1934: 151–56).
Cities were surrounded for up to thirty kilometres by belts of farmland.
An extended family usually had holdings near the city (oko etile) and at vary-
ing distances farther away. This land was divided among the patrilineage’s
adult male members. Farmers commuted between their houses in the city
and nearby farms but lived in houses or cabins on these farms for weeks at
a time when agricultural work was at its peak. Other members of the same

286
Economy
extended family lived year-round in agricultural hamlets farther from the city
(oko egan) but sometimes moved into their patrilineage’s urban compound
when they grew older. In general, younger and less prestigious members of
urban lineages tended to live and work farther from the city (Krapf-Askari
1969: 39).
Three years of cropping were followed by seven to twenty years of fallowing,
during which time the soil’s fertility was renewed. The land was then recleared
of trees and crops were planted once again. Because population density was
low, there was usually enough land around agricultural hamlets for an extended
family to occupy the same farms and houses indeﬁnitely, cultivating adjacent
patches of land in rotation. Although land close to cities and occasionally small
plots of land inside cities may have been cultivated more intensively than
land farther away, the Yoruba made no use of inﬁelds (specially tended and
artiﬁcially fertilized land) near their residences. In the north, only some onions
and other garden vegetables were hand-watered during the dry season.
Farming was viewed as men’s work. Wealthier and more powerful extended
families had male slaves to help cultivate their ﬁelds and release male family
members for other tasks. Women might help to carry seed yams to a farm and
harvest some crops, and they transported surplus food to market and sold it.
They were not, however, asked to help clear ﬁelds or hoe crops (Bascom 1969:
20). Ideally their tasks were homemaking and marketing. Less afﬂuent farmers
were routinely helped by their unmarried sons or engaged in balanced labour
exchanges (aro) with neighbours. They also invited other relatives, friends, and
age-mates to attend bees (owe) when they needed extra labour to clear ﬁelds.
Such assistance was reciprocated while in progress with food and drink and in
the long run with return labour.
Yoruba families kept a small number of goats, sheep, dogs, chickens, and
a few diminutive cattle for sacriﬁces and eating, although only the wealthy
consumed meat regularly. Meat was mainly a ceremonial and celebratory food
and was sometimes preserved by drying (Law 1977: 99–100). Horses were
kept for military purposes. Farmers who had a specialized knowledge of wild
animals, plants, and medicines and belonged to hunters’ associations hunted
in the forest reserves during the dry season and guarded the borders of the
state against surprise attack. Males in Epe and other coastal communities
supplied smoked ﬁsh to traders coming from as far away as Oyo, Ife, and
Ado-Ekiti (50). Animals were not employed for ploughing. Their skins were
used to make leather, but no use was made of secondary animal products such
as milk and wool (Ojo 1966a: 30–50).
Gender relations with respect to agriculture appear to have been more ﬂex-
ible in Benin. Richard Bradbury (1957: 23–24) reports that, while the people

Food Production
287
of Benin regarded growing yams as a male occupation, women helped to plant,
weed, and harvest the crop. They also cultivated their own ﬁelds, where they
grew various other crops to feed their families and to sell. Young men who
helped to work their fathers’ yam ﬁelds also grew crops on adjacent land,
which they sold for proﬁt.
No reliable population statistics are available for the Yoruba during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The population at that period has been
estimated to have been between ﬁve and ten million. More recent ﬁgures
indicate that the Yoruba generally have a population density of 30 to 60 persons
per square kilometre. This may be higher than in previous centuries as a result
of the introduction of European medicine. The population varies, however,
from Ife, near the center of Yoruba territory, with 135 people per square
kilometre, and Ekitu, northeast of Ife, with 60 per square kilometre, to Ondo,
southeast of Ife, Oyo, and Benin, each with about 30 per square kilometre
(Bascom 1969: 2; Bradbury 1957: 4; Eades 1980: 82; Lloyd 1962: 53). These are
low population densities compared with those of other early civilizations. They
conﬁrm that for all lineages and individuals who were trying to accumulate
food surpluses in order to increase their political power, securing labour was a
much greater problem than acquiring land. This problem was widespread in
sub-Saharan Africa.
The successive Shang and Western Zhou kingdoms were centred on the
central plain of northern China, much of which is less than forty-ﬁve metres
above sea level. Enormous deposits of light, easily worked soil were carried
down the Yellow River from the loess plateau to the north and deposited
on this plain. River channels were often higher than the surrounding plain
and changed course over time, sometimes dramatically (Jing, Rapp, and Gao
1997). Numerous lakes and marshes existed in low-lying areas north and south
of the levee backslopes. The plain was originally covered with temperate forest,
including oak, pine, cypress, tamarisk, and mulberry, and was home to wild
animals such as cattle, bears, tigers, leopards, and panthers.
The present climate of northern China is strongly seasonal. The average
temperature is zero degrees C in January and twenty-eight degrees C in July.
Winds blow mainly from the north in winter and from the southeast in summer.
Rainfall is highest in midsummer but totals only seventy-six centimetres an-
nually and as little as ﬁfty centimetres in the lower Yellow River valley. There
is also considerable variation in rainfall from one year to another, with precip-
itation being uncertain in the spring and sometimes excessive in July. Strong
winds, heavy downpours or prolonged droughts, crop diseases, and insect pests
threaten the crops. Snow falls in winter, and crops can be grown only from
spring to autumn.

288
Economy
It has been suggested that northern China may have been a few degrees
warmer and the overall precipitation somewhat greater in Shang times than at
present, but the climate would still have been continental rather than tropical
or subtropical. The Shang oracle-bone records, which include divinations con-
cerning the weather, suggest only limited climatic change (Chˆeng 1960: 83–88;
Keightley 1999a; Wheatley 1971: 22). These texts indicate royal concern that
there be enough rain to grow food and fear that heavy summer rains may spoil
the crops (Keightley 1979–80: 29).
Wheat was the preferred cereal of the upper classes, and broomcorn millet
(Panicum miliaceum [shu]) was generally preferred to foxtail millet (Setaria
italica [chi]) (Hsu and Linduff 1989: 345–55). Barley, sorghum, hemp seed,
and numerous varieties of protein-rich beans (including soybeans) and peas
were grown as food crops. Clothing was produced from hemp, linen, and wool.
The upper classes already wore silk. A character that later means ‘rice’ (dao)
appears in the oracle-bone texts, but it is not known if wet rice was grown
in the Yellow River valley in Shang times. Producing it would have required
irrigation, for which there is no evidence (Bagley 1999: 178; Chˆeng 1960: 197;
Hsu and Linduff 1988: 365). Domestic animals included pigs, dogs, water
buffaloes, sheep, and oxen, as well as horses.
Fields initially had to be cleared of forests. Their fertility was maintained
by fallowing, burning weeds and brush as fertilizer, and manuring (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 354–55). Fields were surrounded by low earth walls inside
ditches which prevented the subsoil from becoming waterlogged as a result
of excessive summer rains or high water tables in low-lying areas (H. Sugiura,
cited in Isaac 1993: 452–53). Idealized descriptions of later times suggest that
individual ﬁelds were surrounded by shallow ditches, blocks of nine large
ﬁelds by deeper ones, and one hundred such blocks by still larger trenches
(Vandermeersch 1980: 221–22). Each cultivator was assigned approximately
6.6 hectares of good land for cultivation and more for fallow, allotments being
larger where the land was poorer.
The culturally approved view of country life had men working the land
while women cooked, looked after children, tended the family house, and
wove. Men worked in teams. In spring, grass was burned from the ﬁelds and
the root-impregnated soil was turned over with two-man hand ploughs. The
clods of earth were then broken up by pounding them with clubs or ordinary
hoes. Large grain ﬁelds appear to have been monocropped, and men worked
in large groups to harvest them (Granet 1958 [1930]: 140–46).
Farmers planted orchards and vegetable gardens near their houses, while
grain and hemp ﬁelds were located farther away. There appears to have been
considerable antipathy towards pastoral peoples who lived to the north and

Food Production
289
west and, when driven by hunger or attracted by the prospect of easy plun-
der, harassed settled regions. The Shang and Zhou people relished meat but
shunned milk and dairy products because of their associations with pastoralists
(K. Chang 1977: 29).
No population ﬁgures are available for Shang or Western Zhou China, and
there are as yet no comprehensive settlement pattern data. The earliest sur-
viving census, for a.d. 2, suggests a population of forty to sixty persons per
square kilometre on the central plain, but by then China had an agricultural
economy based on iron tools and private ownership of land (Barraclough 1984:
80). If Shang and early Zhou agriculture depended entirely on rainfall, popula-
tion density was probably relatively low. Yet patrilineages appear to have been
multiplying rapidly, and the apparent expansion of Shang and Zhou popula-
tions into adjacent regions suggests considerable natural population increase
(Pokora 1978: 193, 209).
The Lower Mesopotamian alluvial plain, which constituted the heartland
of southern Mesopotamian civilization, is located in a desert or semidesert
region. Between ten and twenty centimetres of rain fall each year during the
winter, mainly in November and December, and again in March and April. This
is sufﬁcient for winter grazing but not for agriculture in the regions beyond
and between the ﬂoodplains of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Southern
Mesopotamia was more or less cut off by extensive marshes to the east of the
Tigris from the Susiana plain and the forested valleys of the Zagros Mountains.
The average temperature of southern Mesopotamia is sixteen degrees C in
January and twenty-eight degrees C in July, with large diurnal variations and
low humidity (Postgate 1992: 6–20).
Settled life depended entirely on water from the rivers. The Tigris, which
received numerous tributaries from the east, was a turbulent river but too
deeply cut into the ﬂoodplain to be a useful zone of settlement in ancient times.
It was ﬁrst substantially harnessed for irrigation purposes in the Hellenistic
period (R. McC. Adams 1981: 244). However, its major tributary, the Diyala,
was an important area of settlement. The Euphrates River ﬂowed across the
desert farther west. Incised into the plain to the north, it formed levees in
southern Mesopotamia, where it was also divided into a series of braided
channels. It carried less ﬂood water than the Tigris and ﬂowed more slowly
and was therefore easier to control. Its various branches were, however, subject
to both gradual and abrupt shifts. The Euphrates carried a vast amount of silt,
most of which was deposited on the ﬂat delta north of the Hammar Swamp.
Channels were bordered by low, easily breached levees composed of coarse
deposits beyond which broad, gentle backslopes composed of ﬁne silts sloped
down to the desert. The levees and backslopes were covered with willow,

290
Economy
poplar, and tamarisk trees and licorice shrubs. It is uncertain whether, in the
third millennium b.c., the Persian Gulf reached almost as far north as Ur and
Lagash or whether lagoons, swamps, and marshes stretched south, as they
do today, to near the present shoreline (Pollock 1999: 34–35; Postgate 1992:
14–20). Both the Tigris and the Euphrates ﬂooded in the spring, reaching their
highest level in April.
Irrigation was essential for growing crops (Fig. 14.1). Water was drawn from
the Euphrates through canals that ran south along the levees and was then dis-
tributed by gravity ﬂow through smaller channels that ﬂowed down the back-
slopes. Controlling the ﬂow of water required diverters, head regulators, and
dykes. Water that was not absorbed by the soil accumulated in brackish ponds
and lakes on the edge of the desert. Around 2500 b.c., small, shifting distribu-
taries were replaced by more extensive and permanent canals (Maisels 1999:
86–87; Postgate 1992: 174). Considerable engineering skills were required to
build even these medium-sized systems, which were replaced by still larger ir-
rigation complexes in the ﬁrst millennium b.c. Water was distributed through
small feeder canals to ﬁelds (ikum) approximately sixty metres square and sur-
rounded on all four sides by low banks. As more agricultural land was required,
dykes were constructed to reclaim some of the marsh land along the lower mar-
gins of the backslopes. At least one canal built in Ur III times was forty-ﬁve
kilometres long (Postgate 1992: 182). An elaborate and carefully administered
system of allocation was required to provide every ﬁeld with four waterings
during the course of the growing season. Because of the terrain, large-scale
irrigation systems were generally more difﬁcult to construct in the northern
part of southern Mesopotamia than in the south (R. McC. Adams 1974b; 1981:
1–10; Liverani 1996; Oates 1996; Walters 1970).
The main crops were barley, wheat, legumes, and ﬂax, which was used to
produce both oil and cloth. Sesame was grown for oil after 2300 b.c. Wheat
and barley were winter crops, grown on the backslopes. Fields were pre-
pared in July and August. They were weeded and harrowed, using oxen-drawn
ploughs, and then ﬂooded. Ploughing loosened the surface of ﬁelds in order
to minimize evaporation. Crops were sown in August and September, wa-
tered and tended over the winter, and harvested in March and April. The
Mesopotamians also maintained year-round kitchen gardens, vineyards, and
orchards along the levees. In the orchards a three-tiered pattern of cultivation
was practised. Fig trees, apple trees, and pomegranates were planted in the
shade of high date palms, while vegetables such as onions, garlic, cucumbers,
and lettuces were grown beneath the shorter trees. Some of these gardens
and orchards were located inside the city walls. The Euphrates and the Tigris
were lowest in winter, when water was needed for agriculture, and highest in

wells
orchards / gardens
cereal fields
marginal fields
marsh
sweet water
salt water
river
orchards,
gardens
weir
reservoir
reservoir
desert
grazing
marginal
marsh
fields
(only irrigable
some years)
marsh reclamation
dyke
trees
orchards,
gardens
canal
canal
levee
village
grain
fields
grain
fields
trees
river
levee
levee
a
b
14.1. Mesopotamian irrigation system – hypothetical reconstruction in (a) cross-section and
(b) plan of one irrigation unit. Sources: (a), (b) after Postgate 1992: 175.
291

292
Economy
spring, when their ﬂoods threatened the ripening crops. Much effort had to
be expended in strengthening the levees to hold the ﬂood waters within their
banks (Maekawa 1984; Postgate 1992: 167–82).
Soils along the levees were higher, coarser, and well-drained, and therefore
salt from river water quickly made its way back into the river and the arable
land remained fertile. On the more ﬁne-grained, heavier soils of the back-
slopes, poorer drainage meant that irrigation water tended to remain near the
surface, and the accumulation of salts there eventually destroyed the fertility
of the soil. Fallowings every other year allowed deeply rooted weeds to dry
out the upper soil, after which accumulated salts were ﬂushed deeper with
heavy applications of fresh water. This meant that only half the available grain
ﬁelds could be cultivated at one time (Gibson 1974; Jacobsen 1982; Powell
1985). Despite the strenuous efforts made in ancient times to slow or prevent
salination, modern experiences suggest that in many areas ﬁelds would have
become uncultivatable after fewer than ﬁfty years (Fernea 1970). Although
debates continue concerning the historical importance of salination (Pollock
1999: 37–38; Yoffee 1995: 296), it has been suggested that, around 1500 b.c.,
the sedentary population of southern Mesopotamia declined rapidly as mas-
sive salination forced ever more people to move north. The short life-span
of backslope ﬁelds, together with high interest rates, may also explain the low
price of land in ancient Mesopotamia (Postgate 1992: 184). Opening new ﬁelds
required not only constructing new canals but also clearing trees, which were
a source of charcoal for cooking and industrial operations.
The Mesopotamians herded sheep and goats on a large scale and apparently
kept and ate large numbers of pigs. Cattle were bred in smaller numbers,
mainly for milking and ploughing, and were given names similar to those of
humans. Donkeys and oxen were used to draw ploughs, and donkeys and asses
pulled carts and carried burdens. Sheep, goats, and cattle spent the summer
and autumn eating the stubble and wild growth from the ﬁelds and fertilizing
them with their droppings as they did so. In the winter, cattle were fed grass
that farmers had accumulated or were pastured in the marshes. Sheep and
goats fed on the wild vegetation that grew in the adjacent deserts or in the
foothills of the Zagros. In the deserts the vegetation was limited, but ﬂocks
of sheep and goats could graze over large areas. These animals were herded
both by shepherds who lived in urban centres and agricultural villages and by
pastoral tribesmen independent of any city-state. The latter kept in contact
with agriculturalists, and many grazed their ﬂocks on the stubble of ﬁelds after
the desert pastures had dried up. Fishing, which was an important source of
protein, was carried out at least in part by full-time specialists (Postgate 1992:
158–66; Zeder 1991).

Food Production
293
Farm work, especially grain cultivation, which involved using animal-drawn
ploughs, was always represented as a male occupation. Commercial texts re-
veal, however, that large numbers of poorer women were employed to winnow
and carry grain, break up clods on ploughed ﬁelds, tow boats, and press oil (Van
De Mieroop 1999: 64). In Old Babylonian economic texts from Sippar, some
female slaves were described as trained ox drivers (R. Harris 1975: 256–57,
337). The use of ploughs and draft animals favoured the development of large
institutions and wealthy landowners as corporate extended families declined in
size and importance. Landless labourers moved from one city-state to another,
helping to harvest grain each spring as the crops ripened from south to north
(Maisels 1990: 183).
Robert McC. Adams (1981: 90) proposes that 107,000 people occupied
4,100 square kilometres of arable land in southern Mesopotamia in the Early
Dynastic I period, and Susan Pollock (1999: 65) suggests that there were
200,000 people in Early Dynastic III times. Adams’s ﬁgure represents a very
low density of only 26 persons per square kilometre. An estimate for the Ur
regionatthisperiodsuggestsapopulationdensityof66personspersquarekilo-
metre of arable land (H. T. Wright in R. McC. Adams 1981: 327). This is about
as high a population as could be sustained if 1.5 hectares of arable land were
needed per person. Adams (1981: 149, 251) estimates a population of at least
500,000 for Mesopotamia in the Ur III period. If the expansion of irrigation
had brought the extent of arable land close to the sustaining capacity of wa-
ter from the Euphrates (12,000 square kilometres, half in fallow), this would
indicate an overall population density of 42 persons per square kilometre.
Richard Hunt (1991: 145) has estimated a maximum sustaining capacity for
agricultural land in Mesopotamia of between 123 and 208 persons per square
kilometre, depending on crop yields. This suggests that a city of 100,000 could
have been fed using the agricultural land located within a radius of 12.4 to
16 kilometres, although the linear arrangement of arable land along river chan-
nels in Mesopotamia would rarely have permitted such an ideal arrangement.
More detailed research is needed on population size and population density,
both of which appear to have been low by comparison with most other early
civilizations. A low population density accords, however, with a subsistence
pattern that produced only one grain crop per year and had only a little more
than 50 percent of arable land under cultivation at any one time.
Ancient Egypt, which was called the Black Land (kmt), was the ﬂoodplain of
the Nile River north of Aswan. This plain varied in width from a few hundred
metres in the far south to 22.5 kilometres in Middle Egypt. The Delta to
the north, where the Nile broke into a fan-shaped series of distributaries,
extended 160 kilometres from south to north and was 240 kilometres wide at

294
Economy
the Mediterranean coast. Even if winter rainfall was somewhat higher in the
Old Kingdom than it is today, it would have been insufﬁcient to grow crops or
even to graze animals outside the Nile Valley, except near the coast. Currently
18 centimetres of rain fall annually at Alexandria but only 2.54 centimetres
at Cairo and one-tenth that amount at Aswan. Humidity also diminishes from
north to south. The Egyptian climate is biseasonal. The average temperature
from the north to the south of the country is seventeen to twenty-two degrees C
in January and twenty-seven to thirty-three degrees C in July. Between March
and June strong winds bring hot temperatures and dust storms from the Sahara
Desert. The rest of the year, cooler winds blow from the north. In ancient times
thenorthwindswereusedtopushsailingboatsupstreamagainstthenorthward
current of the Nile River.
Life in the Nile Valley depended on the annual Nile ﬂood, which arrived
at Aswan in mid-August and persisted there until early October. The higher
waters took a month or longer to reach the north of the country. The average
inundation covered two-thirds of the rich alluvial soil of the Nile Valley, which
amounted to about 17,000 square kilometres. Floods varied in volume, how-
ever, from year to year and over longer periods. Unusually high ﬂoods were as
harmful to agriculture as very low ones. In prehistoric times, the valley south
of Cairo was covered not with forests but with seasonally inundated grasslands.
There were permanent swamps only in restricted, low-lying places. Water was
also temporarily impounded on the ﬂoodplain behind fossil levees that had
been abandoned as a result of lateral shifts in the course of the river. The
Delta was a region of raised sand islands and grass-covered ﬂoodplains. Only
its northern third was covered mainly by swamps, brackish lagoons, and salt
marshes (Butzer 1976).
The ancient Egyptians planted only one cereal crop each year, in the autumn
after the Nile ﬂood had subsided. Barley and wheat were their main food crops.
Beans and chick-peas were also grown in large quantities, along with linen to
make cloth. These were all domestic plants that had come to Egypt from the
north and were ideally suited for growing during the relatively cool Egyptian
winters. The Egyptians also had gardens and orchards, which were located
close to their houses and were walled or fenced for protection from animals.
To lessen the chances of their being ﬂooded, houses were constructed on
high ground – on the tops of levees that ran along either side of the Nile and
its side channel, the Bahr Yusuf, and on abandoned levees that ran parallel
to the river. In gardens cabbages, asparagus, cucumbers, radishes, onions,
lettuce, and other vegetables were grown year-round on plots hand-watered
with buckets ﬁlled from wells, reservoirs, or the river (Eyre 1994). No labour-
saving devices were employed to help raise water, the shaduf (weighted water

Food Production
295
hoist) being unknown before the New Kingdom. Date palms, with their deep
roots, could reach the water table year-round from the tops of levees.
The Egyptians constructed lateral earth banks or dykes between levees or
other natural elevations on the ﬂoodplain and built up levees where necessary
to create agricultural basins (Fig. 14.2). These basins, enclosing between nine
and one hundred square kilometres, were smaller and easier to build in the far
south, where the ﬂoodplain was narrower. Canals conducted water from the
river into the basins as the Nile ﬂood reached its peak. The canals ensured that
even basins located on high ground could be ﬁlled almost every year and water
impounded in them long enough to moisten the soil sufﬁciently to produce a
crop. Basins were equipped with ‘siphon canals’ that drained the remaining
water into progressively lower basins until it returned to the Nile after the ﬂood
had subsided. Systems of interconnected basins extended along the Nile Valley
for twenty-ﬁve to thirty-ﬁve kilometres each, the length of an Upper Egyptian
province or administrative district. Building and maintaining basin systems did
not require direction at higher administrative levels. The central government
did, however, play an important role in maintaining the boundaries between
provinces and thus ensuring that adjacent basin systems did not encroach on
one another (Butzer 1976).
Eachbasinwasdividedintosquareplots.AsinMesopotamia,lightploughing
served not to turn over deep furrows but to loosen the surface of the soil and
cover seed, which was broadcast rather than planted with a seed drill. The
soil was sufﬁciently moistened by the Nile ﬂood that no further irrigation
was necessary for crops to grow and ripen. The crops were harvested in the
spring. This left a long summer period when only kitchen gardens and livestock
required tending. This cycle was not altered until sorghum was introduced in
the third century b.c. Sorghum was drought-resistant and even when planted
after the barley and wheat harvest would grow without irrigation.
The lower water table following the recession of the Nile after the annual
ﬂood drew salt deep into the ground, clearing the ﬁelds of it. Therefore salina-
tion was not a problem. It used to be claimed that the annual deposits of Nile
silt renewed the fertility of the soil, but Nile silt is not particularly rich in nutri-
ents. Egyptians fallowed their ﬁelds or alternated legumes with cereals to ﬁx
nitrogen. Most important, they pastured domestic animals on crop stubble and
fallow grasses so that animal droppings would fertilize the soil (R. Hunt 1987).
The numerous cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, fowl, and donkeys that they raised
were thus vital for crop production. In addition to providing meat, sheep and
goats produced wool, while cattle yielded milk and pulled ploughs. Donkeys
were used as pack animals. These animals had to be fed during the inunda-
tion. During the Old Kingdom, the upper classes also kept gazelles, oryx, ibex,

Natural levees
Artificial levees
Canals
Flow control point
Desert
Plateau
low
basin
medium
basin
high
basin
sypho
n ca
nal
Limestone
Bedrock
Desert
Plateau
Limestone
Bedrock
Desert
Plateau
Alluvium
Pl
eis
toc
ene
Grav
els
low Nile (winter)
Nile flood level
Nile
River
levee
old
levee
levee
old
levee
feeder canal
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
North
Nile River
a
b
14.2. Egyptian agricultural basin system: (a) cross-section of the Nile Valley in Upper Egypt; (b)
plan of a basin system on the west side of the Nile River. An Upper Egyptian province normally
contained two such systems, one on either side of the Nile. Sources: (a), (b) after Butzer 1976:
15, 42; L. Krzyzaniak, Early Farming Cultures on the Lower Nile (Warsaw, 1977), 35.
296

Food Production
297
addax, and hyaenas as semidomesticates and ate them. Cats were the only
indigenouswildspeciesofanimaltobedomesticatedinhistoricaltimes(Butzer
1976: 15, 91). Fishing and hunting contributed signiﬁcant protein to the diet.
Men from the same community worked together to plant and harvest crops.
They shared draft animals for ploughing. Most families probably kept sheep,
goats, fowl, and perhaps pigs. Cattle were owned by more prosperous farmers
and by estates. Large herds of cattle were tended by herdsmen, who led a
harsh, itinerant life. They fed on wild grasses near swamps, especially in the
Delta and Middle Egypt, and some were driven long distances in the course
of a year in search of pastures. As the human population expanded, the use of
the ﬂoodplain for pasturing cattle declined, although this was not a signiﬁcant
development during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. While farming was con-
sidered men’s work, women and children helped with the harvest, gleaning,
winnowing, and sieving grain and pulling up ﬂax. Women probably also tended
household animals and kitchen gardens (Feucht 1997: 318–19) but were not
recorded as having ploughed, reaped grain, ﬁshed, fowled, hunted, or herded
cattle.
Butzer (1976: 83) estimates that in the Old Kingdom, Egypt had a population
of 1.6 million, with an average population density of 93 persons per square
kilometre, and that in the Middle Kingdom its population was 2 million, with
an average density of 108 persons per square kilometre. Other estimates for
the Old Kingdom have ranged as low as 1 million and as high as 3 million
(Strouhal 1992: 134–35). If the population in 150 b.c. was about 4.9 million,
even allowing for the more intensive cultivation practised at that period, it
seems possible that there may have been 3 million Egyptians as early as the
Old Kingdom. This would have produced an overall population density of
165 persons per square kilometre of arable land. Population density varied,
however, by region. During the Old Kingdom, it was higher in the far south
and around Memphis and lowest in Middle Egypt and the Delta. Later the
population increased more rapidly in the Delta than in Upper Egypt, so that
by the New Kingdom most of the population lived in the north (Butzer 1976:
83, 101). T. K. Park (1992) has stressed variability in access to water as a major
factor promoting class stratiﬁcation in ancient Egypt. While this may have been
important in some densely populated regions, Park may have underestimated
the buffering effect of low population density.
The Central Andes, the heartland of the Inka state, is an extremely moun-
tainous area traversed by numerous unnavigable rivers ﬂowing west into the
Paciﬁc Ocean and east into the Amazon drainage. Arable land is scattered in
highland basins and steep-sided river valleys. Along the fog-shrouded Paciﬁc
coast, average temperatures vary from 15 degrees C in August (winter) to

298
Economy
22 degrees C in February (summer). At Cuzco the mean July temperature
is 10 degrees C and the mean January temperature 13.5 degrees C. In the
still higher Lake Titicaca basin, the mean varies from −2 degrees C in July
to 5 degrees C in November. Throughout the highlands, daily temperature
ﬂuctuations are more extreme than seasonal ones, on most days amounting
to from 11 to 17 degrees C. Rainfall generally decreases from north to south.
About 80 centimetres fall each year around Cuzco. The dry season in the high
Andes lasts from April to November, while rain falls from December to March.
The principal highland administrative centres of the Inka state were located
in the quechua (temperate region), between twenty-three hundred and thirty-
ﬁve hundred metres above sea level, a rolling landscape with a moderate
climate and rich volcanic soils. Above it, the suni, a rough, barren region, has
frequent frosts and thinner soils. Still higher, the puna (altiplano), between
four thousand and ﬁve thousand metres, consists of vast tablelands too cold
for trees to grow but covered with thick grasses that are foraged by cameloids.
Still higher, the janca region consists of rock and snow-covered peaks without
vegetation.
Below twenty-three hundred metres is the yunga (hot region). On the west-
ern side of the Andes, numerous river valleys lead down to the arid chala
(coastal plain), which except in El Ni˜no years receives less rainfall than the
Sahara Desert. Where this plain is crossed by rivers are narrow, once forested
valleys. In the valleys that descend steeply from the mountains, rain is fre-
quent, but there is little arable land. On the eastern slopes of the Andes, valleys
covered with deciduous and evergreen forests run down into the Amazonian
lowlands.
Aboriginal Andean farmers lived in a challenging environment. Through-
out the highlands, arable soil constituted only a small part of the total land
surface. Pockets of such soil were usually sharply delineated and separated
from each other by vast stretches of inhospitable terrain. Under these condi-
tions, possessing land and holding onto it were matters of vital importance.
Because of the steep topography, many ecological zones, none of which was
totally reliable for human subsistence, occurred in close proximity to one an-
other. Highlanders confronted extreme diurnal temperature ﬂuctuations, low
annual temperatures, irregular rainfall, and steep valley sides with insufﬁcient
soil cover (Burger 1995: 12–25). In the midst of this diversity, groups as small
as ayllus aspired to self-sufﬁciency in food production.
Farmers expanded arable land by terracing the hillsides, especially the steep
and semiarid lower sides of valleys, where maize and other temperate crops
grew best. Building terraces (pata) required constructing large numbers of
well-anchored stone retaining walls and ﬁlling them with gravel and topsoil

Food Production
299
brought up from the valley bottoms. Channels were often constructed both to
drain the terraces, so that saturation from excessive rainfall would not cause
them to collapse, and to irrigate them in times of drought. Irrigation systems
were also developed in the valley bottoms. The fertility of terraced ﬁelds was
maintained by applying fertilizers, including llama, human, and bird droppings
(Donkin 1979; Rowe 1944: 210). Land at higher altitudes did not require
irrigation or fertilizer but had to be fallowed for seven years after every four
years of cropping (Kendall 1973: 141).
To reduce the danger of crop failure as a result of frost and crop diseases and
to increase the variety of its diet, each family planted many different species
of plants and many varieties of each species. Andean highlanders are said to
have grown more than two hundred different varieties of potatoes (Kendall
1973: 140). They also planted crops with different maturation periods in order
to have a staggered harvest (Zimmerer 1993: 24–25). Fields were prepared
in August and maize was sown mostly in September so that crops would be
ready for harvesting beginning in January. Most potatoes were also planted in
September. While the largest potatoes were harvested in June, more rapidly
maturing varieties were ready to be dug up between January and March, and
there was another harvest in May (Kendall 1973: 149–50; Rowe 1944: 212).
For each family to be able to grow as many different crops as possible, the
ideal location for a farming settlement was about thirty-ﬁve hundred metres
above sea level. Below, terraced and irrigated land produced maize, beans,
squash, and other crops that had been domesticated in warmer regions. Maize
was especially valued as a luxury food and as the main ingredient for alcoholic
beverages (Murra 1960). The colder and wetter zone above produced locally
domesticated tubers such as potatoes, meshua, olluco and oca, grains such
as quinoa, and tarwi, a nutritious legume. Some communities also established
colonies at still lower altitudes to grow chillies, cacao, cotton, lima beans, and
other tropical crops, although these items were also carried into the highlands
for sale by itinerant herders. The desire of Andean groups to be economically
autonomous led them to support the Inka state in return for the state’s protect-
ing arrangements that enabled them to control dispersed eco-niches extending
from high-altitude grazing lands to the tropical forests (Kendall 1973: 140–41;
Masuda, Shimada, and Morris 1985; Rowe 1944: 210). Herders (punaruna)
appointed by each ayllu tended large ﬂocks of llamas and alpacas on the grass-
lands above four thousand metres. These animals provided meat and wool for
making clothes. Wild vicu˜nas were also ﬂeeced of their ﬁne wool in the course
of annual roundups. Ideally, each nuclear family possessed ten llamas. Fresh
meat was more regularly provided by guinea pigs, which roamed free inside
farmhouses (Rowe 1944: 219). Dogs and ducks were also kept and occasionally

300
Economy
eaten. To buffer crop failures, Andean farmers developed elaborate storage
systems, freeze-drying llama meat and tubers to produce ch’arki and chu˜no
and constructing rodent-free but well-ventilated granaries (qollqa).
When ﬁelds were cultivated, men turned over the grass-covered soil with
their foot ploughs and women smashed the clods of earth. At planting time,
men dug holes or loosened the soil while women placed the tubers or seeds
in the ground. Because the earth was regarded as the mother of crops, it was
thought appropriate that women rather than men should place her children
in her womb (Kendall 1973: 142; Silverblatt 1987: 29).
The Inka state controlled 980,000 square kilometres and has been estimated
to have had a population of between eight and fourteen million people (Earle
1987: 65; Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 771). Some have raised this ﬁgure as
high as thirty-seven million (Schaedel 1978: 293–94). If the Inka kingdom con-
sisted of about eighty provinces with an ideal forty thousand families in each,
it would have had a population of sixteen million. A conservative estimate
of twelve million suggests an overall population density of 12.2 persons per
square kilometre. This estimate means little, however, since the total area in-
cludes huge stretches of desert, barren mountains, and puna that were scarcely
inhabited. Today only 2 percent of Peru is estimated to consist of arable land.
Assuming generously that one-tenth of the surface area was habitable, this
produces a population density of 122 persons per square kilometre of arable
land. The fertile area may well, however, have been considerably smaller in the
Central Andean highlands and the population density correspondingly higher.
As a result of herding, the puna was also used to produce food, although it was
not inhabited in a sedentary fashion.
Thus the pressure of population on the relatively small amount of arable
land in the Central Andean highlands and the danger of crop failures led to
the elaboration of a complex and intensive system of agriculture. The Inka state
greatly beneﬁted highland farmers by abolishing local warfare, thus permitting
them to leave their hill-forts and resettle near the thirty-ﬁve-hundred-metre
line where they could grow the widest possible array of crops (Earle and
D’Altroy 1989; Hastorf 1990; von Hagen 1959: 118, 169). In addition, the Inka
state made it easier for highlanders to establish agricultural colonies in lowland
regions, which had come under Inka rule. Both of these developments helped
ayllus to realize more completely their aspiration to be self-sufﬁcient in food
production.
Apart from the Maya Mountains in Belize, the Classic Maya inhabited a
ﬂat to slightly rolling and porous limestone plateau. The region remains hot
throughout the year, averaging twenty-two degrees C in January and twenty-
eight degrees C in July. The northern area of Maya settlement, in the Yucatan

Food Production
301
Peninsula, currently receives 178 to 229 centimetres of rainfall annually, while
the southern lowlands receive up to 300 centimetres. These rains fall between
June and December, although the rainy season is shorter in the north than in
the south. The dry season starts in January and reaches its climax in April and
May (Hammond 2000: 197–204; Henderson 1981: 41–44).
The Yucatan Peninsula was originally covered with scrub forest, including
palm, palmetto, oak, and pine trees. Because surface water is rare, caves and
sinkholes were important locations for human settlement. The southern low-
lands have deeper soils and are naturally covered by a canopy of mahogany,
wild ﬁg, and ceiba trees over 50 metres high. Maya farmers avoided patches
of grassland with stunted trees because they indicated poor soils, but they
periodically burned these areas to open them up and attract deer and other
browsing animals which they hunted (Atran 1993; Fedick 1996a).
There is no more than sixty metres of topographic relief in the southern
lowlands, which has numerous swamps, a few permanent lakes, and many
natural, clay-lined seasonal waterholes. Rivers ﬂow down from the highlands
along the western edge of the region and from the Maya Mountains in the
southeast. In most areas the Maya constructed cisterns and elaborate systems
of catchments and reservoirs to collect and store rainwater for drinking and
gardening during the dry season. These systems frequently utilized plazas as
collecting areas and stone quarries as reservoirs (Lucero 1999; Scarborough
1993). The southern Maya lowlands are dominated by deep mollisols, which
are naturally more fertile than most other soils found in tropical forests (Fedick
1996b: 341; Fedick and Ford 1990: 28). In the north, fertile soil is shallower
and more discontinuous.
The Maya were long thought to have depended on swidden agriculture to
grow maize, beans, squash, and less important crops. The modern Maya grow
one to three crops each year in this manner. In December they cut the trees,
leaving the branches to dry over the winter. In April they burn the ﬁelds,
prepare the soil, and plant maize between the charred stumps of the bigger
trees. The corn is weeded once or twice, in June and July, and harvested in
September or October. In September they sow a second crop, usually beans,
between the cornstalks. This crop matures in December and January. Two
years of cultivation are followed by seven to ten years of fallow (Atran 1993;
Henderson 1981: 41–46).
Archaeologicaldatashow,however,thatClassicMayapopulationdensitywas
considerably higher than could have been supported by swidden agriculture
in its present form (Fedick 1996a; Flannery 1982; Harrison and Turner 1978;
Pohl 1985). It appears that, like the Yoruba, the Classic Maya grew various
root crops, such as manioc and sweet potatoes, together with corn, beans, and

302
Economy
squash. The root crops produced several times as much food per hectare as
did maize (Bronson 1966; Sanders 1973: 339–40), and this diversity helped to
maintain soil fertility even if it did not eliminate the need for fallowing. The
Maya preferred rich, well-drained soils when these were available. In clearing
the forest they preserved wild fruit-bearing trees, especially breadnut (ramon),
which is a highly productive food source, although the Maya consumed it
mainly as a famine food (Atran 1993: 683–86). The Classic Maya also made
extensive use of the wild plants that ﬂourished on their fallows and grew cocoa
and cotton.
In some hilly regions there is evidence of extensive dry-wall terracing on
sloping terrain. Such terraces would have helped to retain soil and moisture.
In other areas, the Maya piled up muck from the bottom of shallow swamps to
create raised ﬁelds separated from one another by narrow waterways (Dunning
1996). They also dug grids of ditches back from rivers to create similar ﬁelds.
These two sorts of ﬁelds absorbed groundwater and could be watered using
buckets. Their fertility was maintained by periodically piling on top of them
vegetation dredged from adjacent canals. Raised ﬁelds constructed in swamps
might produce three or more crops each year, while ﬁelds on a ﬂoodplain,
which would have been inundated between June and November, produced
two (Culbert, Levi, and Cruz 1990; Harrison 1990; Levi 1996: 97). In the
north, cacao and fruit trees, as well as two food crops per year, were planted in
large, natural sinkholes. Terraces and raised ﬁelds now appear to have been less
extensive than was once believed. Terraces are most widespread on the Vaca
Plateau around Caracol and raised ﬁelds in northern Belize and the Candelaria
area. In other regions either ﬂuctuations in water levels were too great or the
soil was too poor to permit intensive agriculture (Fedick 1996b).
An important source of food was the gardens attached to Maya houses.
Clusters of houses belonging to different extended families were widely sep-
arated, even in urban centres, to provide space for these gardens, which were
sometimes enclosed by stone walls (Graham 1999). Gardens were associated
with upper-class residences as well as with the homes of ordinary people. A
study at Sayil indicates that the largest gardens were attached to the most
elaborate residential complexes (Dunning 1996: 60). Gardens contained fruit
trees and probably were used to grow condiments as well as staples, espe-
cially root crops. These gardens appear to have been fertilized with kitchen
and human waste and probably were kept moist with water drawn from urban
reservoirs and household tanks. Kitchen gardens could thus produce three
or four crops each year over an indeﬁnite period. It appears likely that these
inﬁelds were a major source of food for families in both urban centres and the
countryside.

Food Production
303
Swidden agriculture was used to grow food during the wet season on ﬁelds
some distance away from urban centres or permanent rural settlements. Some
of those who cultivated swidden land constructed seasonally occupied houses
near these ﬁelds; however, these living quarters had no accompanying burials
or provisions for storing water for the dry season (Santley 1990: 333; Dunning
1996: 61). There is growing evidence of regional variability in Maya agriculture
and of variation in intensity from one region to another. The most serious
problems appear to have been securing water and controlling labour in a
region where arable land was not strongly circumscribed.
The Maya depended heavily on ﬁshing and hunting as sources of animal
protein. Their few domestic animals were dogs, turkeys, and ducks. They also
kept some semidomesticated peccaries.
The Classic Maya were once believed to have had low population density,
although this made it difﬁcult to understand how they had constructed so many
impressive urban centres. Recent studies of settlement patterns indicate that
large areas had an overall population density of about 180 persons per square
kilometre (Rice and Culbert 1990: 26). In some regions, such as R´ıo Bec,
the maximum population density may have reached 282 persons per square
kilometre, while in the Tikal and Calakmul regions it seems to have been as
low as 120 per square kilometre (B. Turner 1990: 321–23). Overall population
densities were low in areas where there were extensive seasonal swamps that
were unsuitable for agricultural development or too little water to support
intensive agriculture.
The Valley of Mexico is an elevated plain separated from other regions of
highland Mexico by rugged mountain ranges on its eastern, southern, and
western ﬂanks but by only a few broken hills from the Meseta Central to the
north. Until the eighteenth century, when drainage to the outside was artiﬁ-
cially established, the Valley of Mexico was a closed hydrological basin of seven
thousand square kilometres with a series of large but shallow and seasonally
ﬂuctuating lakes at its centre. These lakes were fed by rivers and streams de-
scending from the mountains and from artesian springs. Only two rivers ﬂowed
year-round. The central lakes, which were all interconnected when they were
at their fullest, stood at altitudes between 2,238 and 2,245 metres. The largest
of these bodies of water, Lake Texcoco, was also the lowest and most brackish
(Hassig 1985: 41–46).
The Valley of Mexico is located in what modern Mexicans classify as terra
fria, the cold rather than the temperate or tropical zone. Winters are dry and
cool, averaging eleven degrees C. Frosts occur regularly in most parts of the
valley between November and the end of January and exceptionally between
September and March. Summers are warm, with an average temperature of

304
Economy
twenty-one degrees C, and rain is abundant at that time. While scattered
showers occur from November until the end of April, 80 percent of the an-
nual rainfall takes place between June and October, with July and August
constituting a drier interval. Rainfall varies between 45 centimetres in the
north and 150 centimetres in the south (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979:
81–83).
Back from the lakes, a broad, gently sloping lower piedmont rises to twenty-
ﬁve hundred metres before giving way to a steeper upper piedmont. Soil is
generally fertile and easily worked, although it tends to be shallower in the
upper piedmont than it is lower down. Above twenty-seven hundred metres is
a rugged sierra, where agriculture is impossible. In the sixteenth century, the
upper rim of the valley was covered with forests of oak, cypress, and alder, with
pine at higher altitudes. The rulers of the various states in the valley were able
to regulate the use of these forests sufﬁciently to preserve them as a source
of timber and for curbing soil erosion (Hassig 1985: 207–8; Sanders, Parsons,
and Santley 1979: 84–89).
The Aztec and their neighbours grew corn and amaranth as their main
cereal crops, along with ch´ıa (Salvia), squashes, tomatoes, chillies, avocados,
and many other food plants. Hemp was grown to make cloth, but cotton
had to be imported from the hotter lowlands. Maguey was cultivated for its
sap, which was fermented, and its ﬁbres, which were used to manufacture
textiles.
While some swidden agriculture was practised in the higher and the more
northerly portions of the Valley of Mexico, it does not appear to have been of
great economic importance. Irrigation schemes were developed in the middle
and lower piedmont regions, using water from the mainly seasonal streams
ﬂowing down the sides of the valley. Because of the sloping terrain, high
water tables and salination were much less of a problem than they were in
Mesopotamia. Until around a.d. 1400, these schemes generally sought to irri-
gate areas of only ten to one hundred hectares, but after that time more exten-
sivesystemswithcomplexfeedercanalswereconstructed.Creatingthesemore
extensive systems required larger workforces and skilled hydraulic engineering
(Doolittle 1990). Vast numbers of short, irregular terraces were constructed to
control soil erosion (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 243–48). The number
of crops grown each year was limited by seasonal frosts, but in lower and more
southerly areas two crops could be grown annually.
In 1519, the main agricultural area was located in the southern part of the
central lakes (Fig. 14.3). There, in the ﬁfteenth century, a series of major
dykes had been constructed to impound fresh water and control water levels
in various parts of the lake system. The largest of these was the Dyke of

a
b
canal
chinampa
chinampa
c
Specialized land use
Irrigation systems
Chinampas
Forestry
0
10 km
5
Scale
chinampa
chinampa
obsidian
mining
maguey
production
maguey
production
Lake
Xaltocan
Lake
Texcoco
grain
production
salt
production
canal
Tenochtitlan
14.3. Agriculture in the Valley of Mexico: (a) map showing specialized forms of land use – the
rest of the valley was used for rainfall agriculture, which was more productive in the south than
in the north; (b) detail of Plano en Papel de Maguey, ca. 1523–25, showing a chinampa district;
(c) cross-section and plan of a chinampa ﬁeld. Sources: (a) after Sanders & Price 1968: 192; (b)
after A. P. Maudslay, The True History of the Conquest of New Spain, Vol. 3 (London, 1910);
(c) after M. D. Coe, The Chinampas of Mexico, Scientiﬁc American, July 1964.
305

306
Economy
Nezahualcoyotl, a multistate construction built around a.d. 1450. It created
a large zone of fresh water around the Aztec capital. Within this zone and
in Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco to the south, twelve thousand hectares of
chinampas were constructed. Like the Mayas’ raised ﬁelds, these were long,
narrow ﬁelds constructed of layers of mud, dredged by hand from the shallow
lake bottoms, and waste vegetation. They were raised high enough above the
lake level that roots did not become water-logged, and their edges were re-
inforced by planting trees around them. The ﬁelds were fertilized with fresh
mud and ﬂoating vegetation, as well as with human excrement brought by
canoe from urban centres. The lakes provided year-round moisture for grow-
ing crops, as well as protection against frosts. This permitted three or four
crops to be grown each year, with fallow periods amounting to no more than
a few months every three or four years while the ﬁelds were being repaired
and fertilized. By germinating plants on ﬂoating rafts it was possible to shorten
the growing season for each crop. The exceptional fertility of the soil en-
sured a very high yield. Produce was transported to cities located around the
southern edge of the lakes by canoe (Calnek 1972; 1973; Hassig 1985: 46–53;
Parsons 1976; Sanders 1976: 131–36; Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979:
273–81).
Commoners had substantial garden plots (calmil) adjacent to their houses.
These gardens, while not as big as Maya ones, were intensively cultivated,
weeded, and fertilized with domestic refuse. Men are recorded as cultivating
ﬁelds; it is not known to what extent women were responsible for working or
helping to work garden plots (R. McC. Adams 1960: 287; Berdan 1982: 12–13;
M. E. Smith 1996: 77–78, 189, 195).
Dogs, turkeys, rabbits, and ducks were the only domestic animals kept in the
Valley of Mexico, and all these species were eaten. There was heavy reliance
on beans and other vegetable sources of protein. The lakes were a signiﬁcant
source of meat protein in the form of ﬁsh, migrating waterfowl, and other
aquatic life.
Systematic archaeological surveys of the Valley of Mexico indicate a to-
tal population in the Late Aztec period of more than one million people.
This meant an overall population density of two hundred persons per square
kilometre in the Late Aztec period and of ﬁve hundred persons per square
kilometre in relation to arable land (Sanders, Parsons, and Santley 1979: 162,
219, 378–80), the highest population density in our sample. Despite a chal-
lenging climate and the lack of large domestic animals, a population of this
density was fed through a combination of irrigation and chinampa agriculture.
While there had been severe famines in the ﬁfteenth century, the subsequent
development of hydraulic works appears to have buffered climatic variations

Food Production
307
and allowed a general increase in food production that was able to support a
rapidly growing population.
intensity of food production
Early civilizations developed in many different geographical settings, some of
which did not naturally or easily support a dense population. Ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia both depended on irrigation agriculture in a desert zone,
but their hydraulic systems were radically different because each region had
its own, environmentally determined requirements for effective water man-
agement. While the Egyptians relied on controlling annual ﬂoodwaters, the
Mesopotamians, because their natural watercourses were elevated, depended
ongravity-ﬂowirrigation,whichmadeagriculturemuchmorelabour-intensive.
Different species of domestic plants and animals were available to various early
civilizations, and their speciﬁc potentials and requirements resulted in radically
different patterns of agriculture and diverse combinations of agriculture and
animal husbandry. Some early civilizations, especially those of Mesoamerica,
depended for subsistence primarily on domestic plants. Others incorporated
caring for animals into routine farm life, while yet others developed herding
as a specialized branch of farming or exchanged produce with independent
herding peoples living along their frontiers. These variations were largely de-
termined by the various sorts of plants and animals that had been domesticated
prior to the rise of civilization, the patterns of caring for them inherited from an
earlier period, and the different ecological settings in which these civilizations
had developed. Success stemmed from the care with which agricultural sys-
tems were adjusted to the needs of different sizes and densities of populations.
The result was nearly idiosyncratic variation. The primary shared requirement
of subsistence patterns in early civilizations was that they be able to feed rela-
tively dense, sedentary farming populations and produce a surplus that could
support an effective government administration and an upper class. A wide
range of subsistence patterns could meet these requirements in many different
types of environments.
The early civilizations of our sample may be rank-ordered in terms of
the intensity of food production (as measured by population density), from
least to most, as follows: Yoruba, Shang China, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Inka,
Classic Maya, and Valley of Mexico. (I acknowledge the speculative nature
of the population estimates on which this ranking is based, especially those
for China and Mesopotamia, but they are the best that available data and
current methods permit.) The higher population densities in the early civiliza-
tions of the Western Hemisphere seem to correlate with a relative absence of

308
Economy
communicable diseases compared with the Old World and the higher produc-
tivity of local cultigens such as maize and potatoes. Therefore these estimates
are probably accurate enough, at least relative to one another, to permit some
theoretical propositions to be examined.
The intensity of food production did not correspond with the number of
food sources exploited. The peoples living in the Valley of Mexico and the
Maya had very weakly developed animal husbandry yet sustained the high-
est population densities of our sample. This may have been possible at least
partly because humans were not competing with domestic animals for plant
food. The Yoruba, however, also raised few large animals, but their largely
vegetable-based subsistence economy was the least intensive. The highland
Peruvians grazed llamas and alpacas in areas that were unsuitable for crops,
but their population density appears to have been less than that of the Maya
and Aztec, who kept no large domestic animals, and greater than that of the
Egyptians and Mesopotamians, who combined the herding of animals in areas
not used for agriculture with grazing domestic animals on the stubble of their
ﬁelds.
The least (Yoruba) and the most (Valley of Mexico) densely populated early
civilizations were both city-state systems, with other city-state systems and
territorial states falling between them in random order. This arrangement casts
doubt on the widely held belief that the development of large, densely settled
urban centres by itself promoted more intensive agriculture (Netting 1969).
Greater intensiﬁcation as a result of urban growth seems to have occurred with
the development of chinampas to feed Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, but kitchen
gardens were associated with country as well as city life among the Maya
and in the Valley of Mexico, while no intensive agriculture is documented for
the Yoruba. Despite its extremely high degree of urbanization, especially in
Early Dynastic times, southern Mesopotamia had neither a particularly high
population density nor a particularly intensive form of agriculture.
Metal tools were employed in agriculture only by the Yoruba and in
Mesopotamia; that both were city-state systems accords with the suggestion
that city-states favoured the production and dissemination of more complex
tools. Yet among the Maya and in the Valley of Mexico wooden digging sticks
supported a more productive subsistence economy than Yoruba iron imple-
ments. Moreover, despite the labour savings that resulted from using ploughs
and draft animals, the early civilizations that employed animal traction for grain
production (Mesopotamia, Egypt) supported less dense populations than some
that did not. That agricultural tools generally remained simple in all early civi-
lizations does not, of course, mean that the introduction of more efﬁcient tools
might not alter the ways in which particular peoples worked the soil. The

Food Production
309
Maya and Aztec probably would have performed agricultural tasks differently
if they had possessed iron hoes and machetes as the Yoruba did. Yet, while re-
ducing labour, having iron tools did not independently enhance productivity.
The least intensive system was that of the Yoruba, who lived in a region of
tropical forests and savannas, but the Maya, who lived in a similar environ-
ment (albeit one with unusually rich soils), used a combination of raised ﬁelds,
irrigation, kitchen gardens, and swidden to support a much denser population
than was achieved by hydraulic agriculture in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The
inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico and of highland Peru, both using a combi-
nation of rainfall and irrigation agriculture, were near and at the top in terms of
productivity despite the severe climatic and topographical limitations of their
environments.
The civilizations that occupied the most clearly circumscribed productive ar-
eas were Mesopotamia, Egypt, highland Peru, and the Valley of Mexico, and all
of them had medium to high population densities. The Yoruba, Shang Chinese,
and Maya, each occupying only part of a more extensive fertile agricultural re-
gion, had low to high population densities. The Yoruba were surrounded either
by powerful states or by small-scale societies denser than their own; so it is not
surprising that in times of crisis Yoruba groups tended to relocate within their
own territory rather than trying to expand it. Thinly settled adjacent territory
did not, however, attract Maya settlement, while the Shang and Zhou popu-
lations maintained a relatively low population density by militarily expanding
into adjacent regions.
Elizabeth Stone (1997) has proposed that, where population densities do
not preclude relocation and agricultural land lacks substantial labour invest-
ment or is quickly exhausted, the control of labour is more critical than the
control of land. The ability of families or small communities to relocate be-
yond the range of a leader’s power may, she suggests, explain the prevalence of
heterarchical rather than centralized governments among the Yoruba, where
traditions of politically disgruntled factions moving to other states or founding
new ones abound, and in Mesopotamia. Within the Valley of Mexico, however,
because of the development of chinampas and forms of irrigation that were less
susceptible to salination than those of Mesopotamia, developed land acquired
high, long-term value, and its owners became increasingly subject to political
control. The Maya’s heavy reliance on kitchen gardens may have made their
owners more susceptible to coercion. While the special vulnerability to salina-
tion of ﬁelds in southern Mesopotamia may to some extent have inhibited the
local development of more centralized forms of government, it appears that in
all other city-state systems land ownership became more important and people
were more easily coerced by governments as population densities increased.

310
Economy
By encouraging the development of more intensive food production, denser
populations increased the vulnerability to political coercion of all those who
possessed land with potential for development. The primary basis of central-
ized power was the ability of rulers to punish uncooperative landholders by
conﬁscating their land. The principal differences between more centralized
and heterarchical city-states thus appear to relate to the presence in hierar-
chical states of higher overall population densities and the ability to cultivate
plots of land intensively and on a long-term basis.
Territorial states offered alternative solutions to the control of land and
labour. Because of its scarcity and high maintenance costs, fertile land became
a contested resource everywhere in the Andean highlands. The Inka state, by
suppressing intergroup conﬂict, was able to guarantee its highland subjects
not only secure tenure of fertile ﬁelds but also conditions under which the
maximum expansion of arable land was possible. Egyptian farmers were still
moving from the south into less densely settled areas of central and northern
Egypt throughout the Old and Middle Kingdoms. The emergence of a single
state guaranteed landowners’ control over farm labour while eliminating the
possibility that defeated political opponents and their followers would ﬁnd
refuge elsewhere, and these may have been among the most important con-
siderations encouraging the development of a territorial state that embraced
the whole of Egypt (R. Allen 1997). Thus, where control of either land or
labour was a problem, territorial states offered alternative solutions to those
offered by the development of city-states. While the development of more
centralized or heterarchical city-states may have an ecological explanation, it
appears necessary to account for the development of either city- or territorial
states politically.
The most obvious correlation is between intensity of food production, with
its attendant higher labour inputs, and population density (Boserup 1965), but
it is not clear whether intensity of food production was the result or the cause
of higher density or the two stimulated each other’s development. It was long
assumed that population increase was an independent variable leading, espe-
cially in ecologically circumscribed regions, to more intensive food production
and the development of early civilizations. Today experts are less certain. The
Ibo, who live next to the Yoruba, had double the Yoruba’s population density
but never developed states or cities. Thus population density does not explain
the development of Yoruba civilization (Bascom 1955: 452).
It is now clear that, even prior to the development of modern methods of
birth control, birth rates were subject to some limitation through infanticide
and abortion and the alteration of patterns of procreative behaviour. In all ﬁve
early civilizations for which data are available, the prolonged nursing of infants

Food Production
311
is reported: two to four years among the Yoruba (Bascom 1969: 57), two to
four years in the Valley of Mexico (Clendinnen 1991: 155; L´opez Austin 1998,
1: 449), three years in Egypt (Robins 1993: 89) and Mesopotamia (R. Harris
1975: 330, 357–58), and for as long as a woman could produce milk while
avoiding sexual intercourse in Peru (Kendall 1973: 75). The Yoruba believed
that children would die if nursed for less than two years, and to ensure the
production of milk Yoruba women avoided sexual intercourse as well. While in
some societies, including ancient Egypt, upper-class women hired wet-nurses
to feed their babies, most mothers in early civilizations seem to have breast-fed
their own children for long periods and practised birth-spacing.
Lengthy nursing of infants is a pattern that anthropologists usually associate
with mobile hunter-gatherer societies and regard as contrary to the desire
of farmers to produce large numbers of children as farm labourers and to
support them in their old age. Prolonged nursing alone increases the interval
between births, although sedentary women regain body weight and hence
the ability to become pregnant faster than hunter-gatherer women (Howell
1979; Lee 1972). The lengthy nursing of infants in early civilizations suggests
that population increase in these societies may not have been as rapid or
families as large as is generally believed. It also indicates that rapid population
expansion cannot be attributed to speciﬁc economic interests that supposedly
were universally shared by the farmers who made up the vast majority of
people in all early civilizations. Behaviour that limited family size appears to
have been as characteristic of early civilizations as it was of hunter-gatherers.
Postgate (1992: 295) suggests that the numerous measures the Mesopotamian
gods were supposed to have taken to slow human population growth reﬂected
a Mesopotamian belief that increased population posed a potential threat to
the stability of their society.
Since population increase is not an independent variable, various differ-
ent reasons may explain why it and more intensive forms of food production
occurred in speciﬁc settings. Ecological changes may occasionally have ne-
cessitated new forms of food production which required more labour input,
and this in turn may have encouraged farmers to have more children. The
development of larger markets for farm produce could also have resulted
in population increase. Perhaps the most important incentives for popula-
tion increase, however, were political competition and warfare. Where such
competition occurred, greater numbers meant more security. Under these cir-
cumstances, families, communities, and whole societies may have been anx-
ious to outnumber their competitors even if feeding more people required
investing greater effort in producing food. For farmers the beneﬁts of larger
families had to outweigh the extra labour needed to feed and care for children.

312
Economy
There is evidence that controls on reproduction can be relaxed quickly and
for short periods when the costs of population increase are low or ordinary
people judge it to be desirable (Warrick 1990). For kings and members of
the upper classes in early civilizations, larger numbers of farmers usually
meant increased productivity and hence more grain surpluses, corv´ee labour,
and soldiers. Almost invariably, they valued having more people under their
control.
Thus, as long as larger numbers of people could be fed without reducing
available surpluses, the ruling classes had a vested interest in seeking to in-
crease their support base by encouraging higher levels of reproduction. Such
strategies might have been frustrated by rising mortality rates or, if there was
inadequate circumscription, by emigration. There is no indication that rulers
understood how to inﬂuence, except by exhortation, rates of reproduction
among their subjects. An alternative option, expansion into neighbouring re-
gions, might have kept the overall population density relatively low but in-
creased the wealth of rulers by giving them control over more people and
natural resources. This appears to have been the course followed in Shang and
Zhou China. Such an option would not have encouraged the development of
new and more intensive forms of food production.
Egyptian kings sought to increase the population by settling prisoners of war
from Nubia, Libya, the Sinai Peninsula, and Canaan in less populated areas
of Egypt. They also welcomed peoples from these lands as refugees in times
of famine and actively recruited them as mercenaries. The Egyptian govern-
ment wanted foreigners as additional sources of labour and of military power.
Throughout ancient Egyptian history there was always room in Egypt for vol-
untary or involuntary newcomers (Eyre 1999: 35). Wealthy Yoruba sought to
increase their labour forces by acquiring many prisoners of war, whom they put
to work as slaves on their farms. Semitic-speaking pastoralists also appear to
have been welcome to settle in southern Mesopotamia, while the immigrants
who moved as individuals and groups into the Valley of Mexico, attaching
themselves to existing states and sometimes founding new ones, were often
viewed as a means of increasing the wealth and power of local rulers.
When population density exceeded the limit sustainable by the existing
system, food production became more intensive. This frequently required in-
vesting more labour. Population growth locked a people into a new system of
food production even if more energy was required for each unit of food that
was produced. This process occurred most quickly where geographical circum-
scription made it hard for people to move elsewhere and where investment
in agricultural land made its occupiers especially vulnerable to government
demands (Boserup 1965; P. Smith 1976).

Food Production
313
When required, intensiﬁcation of food production seems to have occurred
relatively easily. In most cases, the knowledge possessed by local farmers was
deployed to devise more efﬁcient systems. This was so even where the state had
to intervene in order for major objectives to be achieved. The vast expansion
of chinampas in the Valley of Mexico, which was grounded in long-standing
experience of wetland agriculture in Mesoamerica, occurred quickly, even
though it involved undertaking hydraulic projects on a hitherto unprecedented
scale. Mesopotamian irrigation schemes grew more elaborate over time as the
population and state demands for surpluses increased, but each innovation was
based on previous experience. Sometimes, however, expertise was borrowed
from elsewhere. When the Egyptian rulers of the Middle Kingdom wished
to increase their personal revenues by expanding agriculture in the Fayum,
they appear to have employed settlers from the Middle East. The agricultural
expansion of the Fayum required gravity-ﬂow irrigation systems that were
well known in Mesopotamia and the rest of the Middle East but were totally
different from the basin irrigation practised in Egypt. It is probably no accident
that many people of Semitic descent (3m) lived and worked in that area in the
Middle Kingdom (Butzer 1976: 41–47; David 1986: 41, 190–93; Grimal 1992:
166).
labour and surplus production
The agricultural systems of early civilizations were particular heritages from a
regional past modiﬁed to meet the requirements of expanded populations and
demands for surplus production by the government and the upper classes.
Therefore the way in which each civilization organized food production ex-
hibited many idiosyncratic features. At least two crucial features of food pro-
duction were shared by all early civilizations: the production of surpluses that
were in large part appropriated and utilized by the upper classes and the de-
pendence of agriculture on human labour, only supplemented in some cases
to a limited degree by animal traction. Where technology was limited and
production depended mainly on human labour, the agricultural surpluses that
any one farmer could produce were small. Increasing the number of persons
supported by each unit of cultivated soil usually required increased labour in-
put for each calorie of food produced, and therefore an increase in population
density did not necessarily result in per capita increases in food surpluses. It
appears that, regardless of the agricultural regime followed, between 70 and
90 percent of the labour input in early civilizations was, of necessity, devoted
to food production. This means that all early civilizations had to remain pre-
dominantly agricultural. It also means that the surplus resources available to

314
Economy
the upper classes were never large in relation to total production and had to
be used carefully. Because of this, strategies for increasing revenue had to be
mainly political (R. McC. Adams 1960): increasing the number of farmers con-
trolled, creating situations in which ruling groups shared available resources
more disproportionately among themselves according to rank, or persuading
farmers to surrender marginally greater amounts of surplus production without
increasing the cost of the mechanisms needed to ensure social control.

15 Land Ownership
I
n early civilizations surplus crops and, to a lesser extent, livestock were
the most abundant sources of wealth, and controlling these resources was
the key to political power. The study of the production and control of food
surpluses in early civilizations is complicated by vague and conﬂicting schol-
arly deﬁnitions of key concepts, in particular those relating to land ownership.
Some analysts term ‘private’ any land that was not owned by the monarch or
the state, whether it was possessed collectively or individually and whether or
not it could be sold. Stricter deﬁnitions restrict ‘private’ to land owned by indi-
viduals that could be sold to any buyer. To reduce these ambiguities, I propose
to differentiate three broad categories of land ownership in early civilizations:
(1) collective ownership by kinship groups or communities, (2) ownership by
institutions such as temples or the state, including landholding by individuals
or groups as beneﬁces from such institutions, and (3) private ownership. Be-
cause of lack of relevant information, the Classic Maya are excluded from this
discussion.
One of the most persistent myths about early civilizations, which can be
traced back to Montesquieu, is that of ‘eminent domain’ (Isaac 1993: 432).
This is the notion that in early civilizations rulers owned all the land in their
kingdoms and prohibited alternative forms of ownership, making everyone
the tenant or slave of the ruler. The evidence that has been interpreted as
supporting this claim appears to be metaphorical and political in nature. A
Yoruba ruler was often said to own his kingdom, but in reality ownership of all
but the palace and the royal farms was vested in communities and patrilineages
(Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 58). In the Valley of Mexico, high ofﬁcials
asserted that the land utilized by calpollis belonged to the king and the nobility,
who only permitted commoners to use it in return for their services to the
state (Offner 1983: 125). This claim appears to reﬂect the ideology of the
ruling classes rather than what members of calpollis believed. In practical
315

316
Economy
terms, the concept of eminent domain seems to have been no more than
an assertion of sovereignty equivalent to that made by all modern states. Its
primary signiﬁcance was that individuals or groups could not sell or give land
to foreigners in ways that extinguished or diminished the ruler’s authority to
treat that land as part of his kingdom. Among the Yoruba, land could not be
sold, given, or bequeathed to foreigners without the king’s permission. The
new owner had to agree to pay taxes and recognize the ruler’s continuing
sovereignty over the land. A Yoruba king did not, however, have the right to
appropriate or decide what should be done with land that belonged to speciﬁc
communities or kinship groups.
collective ownership
While many anthropologists are inclined to regard collective ownership of land
as evolutionarily ‘primitive’, its main feature is that it is relatively resistant to
economic exploitation by people who do not produce food, whether acting
together or individually. Producers who are constituted as corporate landown-
ing groups have more freedom to deﬁne their relations with the state and the
upper classes than producers acting individually, especially those who lack the
most important means for supporting themselves: land.
Collectively owned land was common in some early civilizations. In the
Valley of Mexico, the most extensive category of land was calpollalli, which
belonged jointly to members of calpollis. Calpollis were, ﬁrst and foremost,
landholding groups. Part of the calpolli land consisted of common ﬁelds that
were cultivated by internal corv´ee labour. The produce from these ﬁelds sup-
ported the calpolli leaders and their families, sustained the calpolli temple and
other communal activities, and was used to pay taxes. The rest of the land
was divided among all the families that belonged to the calpolli, whether their
adult male members were full-time farmers or had another profession. Full-
time artisans, traders, and administrators were allowed to rent their holdings to
landless workers and thus continued to derive at least part of their subsistence
from them. Calpolli land could not, however, be rented to members of the
same or another calpolli, since such an arrangement would have contravened
the legal equality and exclusivity of rights to land that deﬁned calpolli member-
ship (Berdan 1982: 89). In many parts of highland Mexico, calpolli lands were
regularly reassigned to reﬂect changes in family size and ensure that each fam-
ily continued to have a share that was proportional to its needs. In the southern
part of the Valley of Mexico such periodic redistributions did not occur, which
suggests that over time considerable inequalities in land ownership may have
developed. This development may have been offset to some degree by the

Land Ownership
317
expansion of arable land that resulted from the construction of chinampas.
Since calpolli land could not be sold, if a family died out or moved away
its holdings reverted to the collectivity and were available for redistribution
(Berdan 1982: 55–57; Offner 1983: 124–26).
The highland Peruvian ayllu was also an endogamous landowning group.
Each nuclear family received a share of the various kinds of ayllu land that
were required to produce all the basic foodstuffs it required. Every family had
to cultivate parcels of land at different altitudes. A local ayllu leader oversaw
the annual reallotment of land as part of the process of crop rotation and
fallowing. This reallotment ensured that, despite its changing membership,
each family continued to have an equitable share. Ayllu members assisted one
another in cultivating their land and also cultivated land assigned to members
of the ayllu who were sick, crippled, orphaned, or called away for long periods
of corv´ee labour. Land that was set aside to support ayllu leaders and religious
cults was also cultivated collectively by ayllu members. Those who worked
such land were entitled to allotments of food equivalent to their subsistence
needs during the time expended to perform this task.
Yoruba farm land belonged collectively to extended families. However, the
ownership of any land unclaimed by extended families or abandoned if an
extended family died out or moved away reverted to the community. A king
could dispossess an extended family of its land only by banishing that family
from his kingdom. Land could not be sold or alienated in any other fashion at
either the individual or the family level. Royal lineages held their land on the
same terms as others.
Some Yoruba farm land, called ajoyeba (title land) was worked collectively
by members of patrilineal extended families to support their lineage’s head and
corporate activities (K. Barber 1991: 162). The rest was assigned among the
individual, often polygynous, families that made up the extended family. The
amount of land cultivated by families varied according to their size, wealth,
and status. Large families had to cultivate more land than small ones in order
to support themselves. The most important factor that enabled wealthier or
more powerful men to cultivate proportionately more land was the number of
dependents, debtors, and slaves they could assign to agricultural tasks. Prestige
depended on being able to support many armed retainers who had to be
fed. Major ofﬁcials usually had large tracts of lineage land under cultivation
close to the urban centres where they lived (Peel 1983: 57). Women also
invested wealth they acquired from trading in buying slaves, whom they used
to cultivate land belonging to their patrilineage (W. Clarke 1972: 86). Thus
collective ownership of land did not preclude the use of land for economic
and political competition among individual Yoruba. In most Yoruba states

318
Economy
population density was sufﬁciently low that individuals could bring as much
land as they wished under cultivation. Where there was pressure on land, extra
farm land was assigned to the title-holders of patrilineal extended families so
that they could maintain their political power and the prestige of their group.
Lineage heads also rented unused extended land to strangers on a permanent
or short-term basis as a source of income (Lloyd 1962: 83, 89).
Rightstofarmholdingswereinheritedbythesonsanddaughtersofdeceased
male members of an extended family. Land could not, however, be alienated
from the patrilineage by further inheritance through female members. The
slaves that individual men and women acquired during their lifetimes became
the personal property of their heirs, male and female, and this made it possible
fortheseheirstobringlandundercultivationregardlessofitslineageafﬁliation.
The only farm land that a king could transfer to his children was the part of his
lineage’s holdings that he had cultivated prior to becoming king (Lloyd 1962:
18–37).
In Mesopotamia during the late fourth and early third millennia, patrilineal
extended families appear to have collectively owned extensive tracts of farm
land. By the time the oldest readable texts provide detailed information about
economic transactions, all or part of such holdings could be sold to non-kin,
subject to the agreement of all the male members of an extended family. In the
third millennium b.c., a rapid increase in institutional land appears to have
greatly reduced the amount of collectively owned land. Poor harvests and
other economic and ecological crises may have forced less afﬂuent extended
families to pledge their communal lands, as well as the personal freedom of
family members, in return for loans (Diakonoff 1974: 15; Maisels 1990: 151–52;
1993: 172–75; Van De Mieroop 1999: 203–6).
While statewide royal cancellations of debts (amargi), which are recorded as
early as the reign of Entemena of Lagash (ca. 2400 b.c.) and were sometimes
proclaimed to celebrate royal accessions or the thirtieth year of a king’s reign,
helped to counteract the growing economic and social inequality that resulted
from indebtedness, it is uncertain whether early acts of this sort did more than
free persons enslaved for debt. It is not until the Old Babylonian period that
debt cancellation is clearly recorded as returning land sold under duress to its
original owners, and even then there were many exclusions (Hudson 1996: 46–
49; Postgate 1992: 194–98). This left a long period during which collectively
owned land may have passed into the permanent possession of creditors while
its former owners became tenant farmers or landless labourers, perhaps often
after having been temporarily enslaved. The alienation of land possibly began
through the ﬁction of adopting a potential buyer into a family (Yoffee 1988).
He could then purchase a piece of land on the same terms as a single family

Land Ownership
319
member might have bought the rights of multiple heirs to a plot that had
become too fragmented for further subdivision.
As a result of these processes, collectively owned land was transformed into
institutionally and privately owned estates. Land ownership became concen-
trated in the hands of an ever-smaller number of institutions and individuals.
In the course of this transformation, leaders of some extended families may
have become the heads of major institutions or wealthy estate owners (Ellis
1976).
It is agreed that in China land was not bought and sold before the Spring
and Autumn period (722–481 b.c.) (Ke 1989: 52). In Shang and Western Zhou
times blocks of land were occupied and worked by extended families, but it
is unclear whether these families collectively owned the land they cultivated
or whether it belonged to the king or some regional or local ofﬁcial (Wheatley
1971: 66). Government decrees which moved extended families from one part
of the kingdom to another and assigned them to serve new lords suggest that
at least some extended families may have had hereditary access to land but
did not own it. Extended families also tended to split after they grew too
large to be supported by the land that was available to them. At this juncture,
junior branches, with the approval of high-ranking ofﬁcials, went off to occupy
land elsewhere. Regional rulers sent to occupy new territory assigned the land
around their headquarters to their ofﬁcials, household retainers, and soldiers
(Vandermeersch 1980: 43, 131–33). This suggests that land ownership may
have mattered less to descent groups than access to agricultural land through
lineage-mediated political relations, which could be interpreted as evidence
that in Shang and Western Zhou China all land was in some sense regarded
as institutional. Massive relocations of ayllus by Inka rulers did not, however,
undermine the status of ayllus as collective landholding units. It is therefore
possible that some or all rural extended families regarded the land they worked
astheircollectivepossession.Seniorlineages,whichremainedinoneplacefora
long time, may have come to venerate a speciﬁc locale because their ancestors
were buried there. It is also not impossible that, in a fashion analogous to
what happened in parts of the Valley of Mexico, Chinese ofﬁcials regarded all
the land within their domains as their institutional holdings, while commoner
patrilineages simultaneously viewed the land they farmed as their collective
possession.
For Egypt it is difﬁcult to study matters that existed beyond the purview of
the state. It is unknown to what extent, in the late Predynastic and Early Dy-
nastic periods, villagers collectively owned the land they worked and whether
thesearrangementsremainedintactintolatertimesinareasthatwererelatively
unaffected by the government’s creation of agricultural estates (h
• wt). These

320
Economy
unaffected areas would have included the far southern parts of Egypt that
were already heavily populated in Early Dynastic times. It is unclear whether
the creation of estates extinguished the rights of existing farming communi-
ties to own land or these communities were incorporated into estates with
their ancient land rights intact although they were henceforth required to pay
rents to the estate owners. The latter arrangement seems possible if the term
nıwt, which denoted some small rent-paying unit, also referred to a farming
community. The continuation through the Old Kingdom of the titles h
• q3 nıwt
(overseer of a village) and h
• q3 h
• wt (overseer of an estate) suggests the en-
during importance of farming villages as ﬁscal entities (Eyre 1987a: 34; 1999).
One archaeologically well-studied small settlement in Middle Egypt, Naga
ed-Deir, displayed remarkable social continuity through the Old Kingdom,
although it became both less egalitarian and poorer as the economic demands
of the state increased during the Third and Fourth Dynasties. Its wealthiest
family clearly had close relations with the provincial administration. During
the Early Dynastic period its leader had been able to obtain some items of
gold jewellery manufactured at the royal court (Reisner 1932: 185–92). It is
unknown to what extent these possessions were rewards for loyal service to the
government or were purchased using wealth derived from private holdings or
from the disproportionate amounts of land and labour that would have been
available to the head of an established landowning community.
In most early civilizations collectively owned land could not be bought or
sold; it was the common and inalienable possession of a kinship group or an
endogamous community. Evidence of increasing sales of collective land in
Mesopotamia during the Early Dynastic period suggests that in this early civi-
lization collective ownership was in sharp decline. Some collective landowning
groups, such as those found among the Yoruba, in rural areas of the Valley
of Mexico, and in highland Peru, were managed by traditional community
leaders supported by public opinion. Sometimes these leaders were the oldest
male members of a group; others belonged to speciﬁc descent lines. Larger
landowning groups tended to be more hierarchical. They were managed by
councils on which various extended families were represented by hereditary
ofﬁcers. The leaders of such groups were often co-opted by the upper classes.
Differences in the size of collective landowning groups inﬂuenced attitudes
towards land and surplus production. Small-scale units generally strove for
group self-sufﬁciency, while their members enjoyed relative economic equality
and were committed to supporting one another. In larger units, the land and
labour of the group tended to be treated more as a resource belonging to
the group’s leaders. Inequality was justiﬁed as necessary for representatives or
leaders to be able to perform essential acts of hospitality and worship on behalf

Land Ownership
321
of their followers. Maintaining membership in a collective landholding group
remained essential for having inalienable access to land. In cases where the
distribution of land within such groups grew less equitable, richer members
could use prisoners of war or debtors to enlarge their personal productive
labour force, or portions of collectively owned land might be sold to outsiders to
cover individual members’ debts. These situations created circumstances that
eventually might permit all collective land to be transformed into institutional
or private land. An alternative threat to collective land, when its co-proprietors
were not powerful, was expropriation by politically dominant leaders.
institutional ownership
Institutionally owned land in the early civilizations was not public property
(res publica) as deﬁned by Roman law. Rather than being established for the
enjoyment or beneﬁt of the community as a whole it was set aside to provide
revenue for the state, religious cults, ofﬁce-holders, and socially privileged
individuals. Conceptually it was closely related to those portions of collectively
owned land that were cultivated by the whole group to support its leaders and
ﬁnance group activities. Yet those who jointly owned collective land agreed
about what would be done with the common surpluses they produced, while
those who beneﬁted from the surplus production of institutional land had
rights to that surplus independent of the wishes of its cultivators.
Institutional land was not individually owned and therefore could not be
bought or sold. Individual use of a plot of institutional land may or may not
have been hereditary, but inheritance of beneﬁts from it was accompanied by
the transmission of related duties or roles from one generation to the next.
Institutional land assigned to individuals in return for service is often referred
to as prebendary land. In medieval Europe, such land was set aside to pro-
duce rents to support administrative personnel. To avoid the overly speciﬁc
connotations of this medieval terminology, I will call such land ‘ofﬁce land’.
AmongtheYoruba,theonlyinstitutionallandwasthetitlefarmsbelongingto
the king. This land consisted of farms cultivated by palace servants, royal slaves,
and sometimes corv´ee labourers. Like other agricultural land, title farms were
usually located outside cities; however, at Ode Onde such a farm lay within the
sixteen-hectare enclosure of the palace (Lloyd 1962: 72, 112). The produce of
royal farms was used to feed the king, his family, and his large palace staff, to
offer hospitality to citizens and to strangers, and to subsidize royal rituals. This
land was passed down not from father to son but from king to successor.
In the Valley of Mexico, kings held tlatocatlalli, ﬁelds and estates that could
be inherited by their children. Such land was exchanged among rulers of

322
Economy
different city-states when their children married. Major lords and probably
most if not all members of the hereditary nobility held pillalli (nobles’ land).
These two sorts of land provided rulers and hereditary nobles with a source of
income that made them to varying degrees independent of the taxes paid by
commoners. Modern scholars often refer to holdings of these sorts as ‘patri-
monial land’. Such land was set aside for the use of kings and nobles within the
city-state to which they belonged. As a result of conquest and royal intermar-
riage, however, variable amounts of such land were held by kings and nobles
in other city-states (Offner 1983: 129–38).
Jerome Offner (1981; 1983), who maintains that there was a thriving market
in land, asserts that this patrimonial land was private. Pedro Carrasco (1981)
and John Gledhill (1984) assert, in contrast, that the alienation of such land
was highly restricted and therefore it was institutional. It seems to be generally
agreed that such land could not be transferred to individuals who were not
members of the nobility. As a result of divided inheritance, land of this sort
would quickly have become fragmented, although blocks of it could also have
been consolidated by means of strategic marriages among the nobility. Even
so, efforts to maintain or assemble manageable units of land would have ne-
cessitated that nobles exchange holdings, and such exchanges may have given
the false appearance of buying and selling. Because there is no evidence that
patrimonial land could actually be sold, it seems likely to have been institu-
tional rather than private. Patrimonial land existed to support the upper classes
and in their view remunerated them for the political and military leadership
they provided. Yet a numerically expanding hereditary nobility meant that the
amount of land and income available to individual members of this class would
have declined in each generation.
Therewas,inadditiontocalpolli,nobles’,androyalland,landthatwasowned
and operated by the state. It was given various names according to the speciﬁc
usethatwasmadeofit,butallofitwascontrolledandadministeredinmuchthe
same fashion. Palace land (tecpantlalli) was used to pay for the operation of the
royal palace and therefore to feed and otherwise support the king’s numerous
retainers, attendants, and servants. Ofﬁce land (tlatocamalli) supplemented
the incomes of hereditary nobles and provided salaries for eagle nobles, who
did not possess patrimonial land of their own. Other state lands provided
income that kings could direct to temples (teopantlalli), use to subsidize the
operation of the army (milchimalli), and bestow as royal gifts upon calpollis and
commoners. Normally all these types of land were located within the borders of
a city-state. Yet hegemonic city-states appropriated ﬁelds in tributary states lo-
cated near enough that it was economically feasible to transport bulk produce.
The Aztec acquired their ﬁrst state land in another jurisdiction following their

Land Ownership
323
defeat of the hegemonic state of Azcatpotzalco (Hassig 1988: 145–46). Tribu-
tary states were responsible for delivering food at speciﬁed intervals. Such land
wascalledyaotlalli(landcapturedinwar)(Le´on-Portilla1984:23;Offner1983:
126–39; Soustelle 1961: 80–81). States also acquired land by sponsoring major
reclamation projects. While the chinampa land around Tenochtitlan appears
to have belonged to individual calpolli, the chinampa ﬁelds in the Chalco-
Xochimilco region probably belonged to the Aztec and Texcocan states.
Ofﬁcelandconstitutedamajorsourceofrevenueforthenobility,allofwhose
active male members were involved in some sort of state service. Individual
ofﬁce-holders in hegemonic city-states were often allocated speciﬁc ﬁelds in
tributary states. Such grants stiffened the determination of these ofﬁcials to
ensure that their city-state remained militarily dominant. Most of this land,
both at home and abroad, was worked under the supervision of government
ﬁscal ofﬁcers (calpixque) (Soustelle 1961: 41, 49). In the case of high ofﬁcials,
storable surpluses were probably conveyed directly to the residence of the
individual to whom the produce of the land had been assigned. In other in-
stances it was transported to the royal palace, where accountants apportioned
it among lesser ofﬁcials who had rights to a share of it. Beneﬁciaries of state
lands received much more food than they and their families could eat. They
invested the surplus in long-distance trade or used it to buy whatever they
wished at city markets. State land could not be inherited and was reassigned at
the king’s pleasure. While patrimonial land appears not to have been private,
state land deﬁnitely was not.
Both patrimonial and state lands were worked by mayeque (tenant far-
mers), recruited from landless families, rather than macehualtin (collective-
landowningcommoners).Inconqueredcity-statessomemacehualtinmayhave
beentransformedintomayequewhenforeignconquerorsreassignedtheirland
to produce tribute. The portions of the harvest that tenants had to surrender
to their landlords were much higher than the surpluses that the collective-
landowning commoners had to produce for communal use and to support state
projects. While, among the Aztec and their closest allies, calpollis retained
possession of their communal lands and may even have extended them, it
appears that in many adjacent parts of the Triple Alliance tributary network an
increasing amount of land was being used to subsidize the Aztec and Texcocan
states and their ofﬁcials.
Nobles may have tried, where possible, to convert their ofﬁce land into
patrimonial land in order to beneﬁt their families. This appears to have been
done on a massive scale after the Spanish conquest in an effort to prevent state
lands from being sequestered by the Spanish government. Such manoeuvres
may have considerably coloured an understanding of the nature of landholding

324
Economy
at an earlier period (Gledhill 1984: 139). Deception would have been easiest
with ofﬁce land that, as a result of sons’ inheriting their fathers’ ofﬁces, had
remained in the same families for several generations. Prior to 1519, such a
tendency would have been resisted by strong kings, who derived much of their
power over the nobility from their control of ofﬁce land. However, kings must
have endowed eagle nobles who married into the hereditary nobility with land
to ensure that their children might enjoy the same privileges as did those of
other minor hereditary nobles. The patrimonial land assigned to such nobles
probably came from state land.
After the incorporation of a region into their kingdom, Inka ofﬁcials insisted
that each local ayllu work plots of land set aside to support the state and
variousstateandlocalreligiouscultsthattheInkakingspatronized.Whileﬁelds
designated for state and religious purposes were cultivated independently of
one another, both were managed by government ofﬁcials. In order to reduce
the resulting hardship for the local population, at least some of these ﬁelds were
created by new terracing and hydraulic works rather than sequestered from
existing ayllu landholdings. State, temple, and ayllu lands were not established
in equal proportions. Because the food surpluses that it was technologically
possible for each farmer to produce were modest, state and temple ﬁelds
represented only a small portion of the total land that an ayllu cultivated
(S. Moore 1958: 24–38; Murra 1980: 31–34).
While farmers preferred to grow many different crops on their land, it was
the policy of the Inka government to produce only a small number of crops
on state and temple ﬁelds. Its preference for corn rather than potatoes and
other root crops may in part explain its emphasis on constructing agricultural
terraces in annexed territories. Maize, which the Inka symbolically associated
with the sun because of the yellow colour of its kernels, was used to produce
highly prized food and beer that was distributed to work parties and local
people on festive occasions (Murra 1960; Zimmerer 1993: 24). Farmers were
obliged to cultivate state and temple lands before they worked their own plots,
but they were provided with seed from government and temple storehouses
and were fed and provided with tools while they did so. In return, the entire
harvest produced on state and temple ﬁelds belonged to these institutions.
Ayllu members were also drafted to tend the llama and alpaca herds that
belonged to the state and to temples (Rowe 1944: 265–67).
The Inka kings further increased the revenues of the state and of the highest
ranks of the Inka nobility by creating large estates which they assigned in per-
petuity to themselves and their descent groups, to other prominent members
of the nobility, and to the army. Unlike ayllu land, these estates were exempt
from taxes. Wayna Qhapaq established the largest army estate at Cochabamba,

Land Ownership
325
a rich, low-lying maize-growing valley in Bolivia. The original population of
the region was resettled elsewhere and replaced by fourteen thousand labour-
ers. Most of these were corv´ee workers who came in rotation to Cochabamba
to work for a single growing season, but a smaller number of workers were
settled there permanently to supervise the storage of maize and its transporta-
tion to Cuzco. Another, smaller army estate in the low-lying valley of Abancay
employed one hundred to two hundred families (Wachtel 1982).
The large royal estates, such as those of kings Thupa Inka Yupanki and
Wayna Qhapaq in the Yucay Valley, near Cuzco, consisted of elaborate villas
which served as country retreats for the Inka rulers and elaborate agricul-
tural terraces. After the king died, his mummiﬁed body continued to visit his
estates, and their agricultural produce helped to feed his descendants, who
were responsible for maintaining his mortuary cult. Smaller estates assigned
to members of the royal family such as kings’ brothers, uncles, mothers, sis-
ters, wives, and concubines and to other high Inka ofﬁcials were inherited by
these people’s descendants. They could not, however, be sold, transferred, or
divided, and therefore the well-being of the group ultimately depended either
on their numbers’ not increasing unduly or on their ﬁnding additional sources
of revenue. Estates were also assigned to major temples (Murra 1980: 34–42).
The ayllus whose traditional lands were converted into estates were allotted
collective land elsewhere. They moved to their new holdings and were replaced
by permanently assigned labourers (yanakuna). The use of such labourers on
personal estates permitted a larger portion of the crops to be retained for
upper-class or government use than could be extracted from ayllus by means
of a labour tax. There is evidence that estates and government farms were
increasing rapidly in number and importance in the ﬁnal years of Inka rule
(Wachtel 1982). They supported an expanding army and an upper class that
needed more resources to ﬁnance its growing numbers and various projects.
While many royal and ofﬁcial estates were located in the vicinity of Cuzco,
Wayna Qhapaq founded royal estates near Tumipampa, in Ecuador. Royal
estates were also established in the lowlands to grow cacao and tropical fruit.
The Inka rulers granted small allotments of tax-free land to members of
the lesser nobility and commoners to reward them for valour, bridge building,
permanent garrison duty, and various other services to the state. Like the
larger estates, these lands were inherited by all of an individual’s descendants
and could not be sold, divided, or alienated (Kendall 1973: 145). Hence they
cannot be categorized as private holdings.
The Shang kings are recorded as owning large plots of agricultural land near
Anyang. These ﬁelds or estates were given names such as da tian (large ﬁeld) or
zhung tian (centre ﬁeld) and were worked either by corv´ee labour provided by

326
Economy
commoners or by landless workers who permanently served the king (zhong).
At least some of these workers were supplied with tools by their overseers.
Presumably all the food produced on such land belonged to the king. It seems
probable that princes and other high-ranking nobles possessed land of this
sort. As with Inka upper-class estates, possessing such ﬁelds must have greatly
increased the amount of food at the disposal of their owners (Keightley 1969:
109–11).
Later tradition afﬁrms that each block of arable land that was worked by a
lineage contained a central ﬁeld that the members of that lineage cultivated
for the king or lord who controlled the region or for some other designated
beneﬁciary. It was called the gong tian (lord’s ﬁeld) (Vandermeersch 1980:
217). While it is uncertain whether a nine-ﬁeld system ever actually existed
(Creel 1937: 313), the proportion of eight to one falls within the range of
agricultural land that might have been assigned to taxpaying cultivators and
upper-class beneﬁciaries in an early civilization.
The state was divided into jurisdictions which various lords or ofﬁcials con-
trolled and from the tax ﬁelds of which they were entitled to collect revenues
in the form of crops. Each lord could assign the revenues from one or more of
the tax ﬁelds he controlled to a subordinate ofﬁcial, courtier, soldier, artisan, or
retainer. In this way, the upper classes and their dependents obtained a major
portion of the resources that they required to support themselves and their
families and to carry out the functions for which they were responsible. It is
unclear if all the produce of tax ﬁelds belonged to ofﬁcials or their appointees
or some of it went to the head of the lineage that worked it. Alternatively, the
lineage head may have been supported by a share of the food produced on the
attached ﬁelds (Vandermeersch 1980: 210–17, 227). Exchanges of lords’ ﬁelds
are recorded for the Western Zhou period. Such exchanges may have been
essential in a kingdom in which ofﬁcials occasionally were transferred from
one region to another. These ﬁelds could not, however, be sold by those who
beneﬁted from them, since they belonged either institutionally to some level of
government or collectively to the lineage that worked them (Hsu and Linduff
1988: 275–79). Because Shang divination appears to have been ascribed an im-
portant supernatural role in making crops grow, royal exhortations that ofﬁcials
make sure that farmers diligently cultivated the soil need not be interpreted
as administrative orders as opposed to ritual pronouncements intended to en-
courage the growth of crops. Such admonitions may, however, have referred to
the cultivation of ﬁelds that produced crops speciﬁcally reserved for the king
and government ofﬁcials.
Institutional land played an important role in the economy of southern
Mesopotamia during the third millennium b.c. Most temples, as distinguished

Land Ownership
327
from small shrines, were endowed with land that was regarded as constitut-
ing the estate of the presiding deity. In Lagash there were more than twenty
temples of this sort. The main temple and the largest estate were usually asso-
ciated with the patron deity of the city. It has been estimated that 30 percent
of the working population of the state of Lagash was employed by or rented
land from these temples (Tyumenov 1969: 122–24). The temples in Lagash
are estimated to have owned two hundred to three hundred square kilome-
tres of agricultural land, or about one-tenth of the arable land belonging to the
city-state (Diakonoff 1969b: 174). Royal estates were divided into the personal
land of the king and land belonging to the palace (´egal, ‘great house’) (Maisels
1990: 171). As among the Aztec and the Inka, this was a division between
institutional land that supported the ruler and his family and lands used to pay
for administering the state (Gelb 1979: 5).
Temple and royal estates were organized in a similar manner. Both insti-
tutions appear to have been able to acquire land by purchase and seizure
for indebtedness, while temples also received land through donations. While
both institutions may have been able to sell as well as buy and receive land,
the dominant trend was towards accumulating more land, thereby fostering
the growth of what constituted a divinely or royally owned trust. Both temples
and palaces became major centres for the production and storage of agri-
cultural produce. By the time the earliest readable documents appear, about
2500 b.c., much land that formerly had been owned collectively by patrilineal
kin groups appears to have fallen under the control of kings, temples, and
wealthy estate owners (Diakonoff 1969b: 177; Maisels 1993: 172–76; Yoffee
1988).
Temple estates derived income or services from their land in at least three
different ways. The nigenna land, which was used to maintain the temple, was
cultivated by labourers who received rations (ˇseba) of barley, wool, and oil.
These workers were either slaves or free but landless labourers. If the latter
were full-time employees of the temple, they and their families were generally
supported by a combination of food rations and small plots of temple land that
they cultivated in their spare time. In the Ur III period, these sorts of labour
were increasingly supplemented and replaced by individuals’ working solely
for wages (Postgate 1992: 237). Casual, often itinerant, agricultural workers
were hired for the annual peak labour periods (Maisels 1990: 194). All the food
produced on this land belonged to the temple. It must have provided the bulk
of the agricultural produce that the temple used to feed and pay workers, buy
raw materials and manufactured goods, and support its ritual activities.
Gankur land was assigned in varying quantities to year-round manual labour-
ers, minor ofﬁcials, and major temple administrators as a source of income.

328
Economy
The labourers and their families were expected to grow their own food, but
ofﬁcials were assigned sufﬁcient land to support farmers as well as the ofﬁcials
and their families. The highest-ranking ofﬁcials derived enough income from
the land assigned to them to maintain a comfortable lifestyle and engage in
commerce. Wealthy individuals often hired stewards (iˇsˇsakku) to manage their
ofﬁce land as well as any land that they owned outright. Sometimes a single
steward worked for several ofﬁcials (R. Harris 1975: 166). This land could be
neither sold nor inherited by the people who beneﬁted from it, although it
might pass from fathers to sons together with speciﬁc temple administrative
positions. By Ur III times, temple ofﬁces had become saleable commodities
(Postgate 1992: 314). While landholdings were transmitted with the ofﬁces,
the land remained the property of a temple.
Ganaru land was let by the temple on a rental or sharecropping basis both
to farmers who lacked their own land and to commercial entrepreneurs, who
in turn sublet it to farmers. Rentals, which were usually for a period of two or
three years, gave a farmer the right to cultivate a plot of land in return for a
ﬁxed annual payment, normally in grain (Steinkeller 1981). With sharecrop-
ping, the landowner contributed to the costs of production and shared the risk
of a bad harvest but received a larger share of the crop. In good years renters
proﬁted more from their work than did sharecroppers; in bad years sharecrop-
pers suffered fewer losses. Sharecroppers were therefore generally landless
farmers who could afford to risk less than could tenant farmers. Holders of of-
ﬁce land derived revenue by renting it, sharecropping, or working it using paid
labourers. All temple allotments were subject to yearly rotation or redistribu-
tion. Fields which were worked or sharecropped by the temple were supplied
with seed, draft animals, ploughmen, and equipment from central facilities.
Workers on temple estates were subject to the state corv´ees that constructed
and cleaned major irrigation systems, built and repaired city walls, and per-
formed military service (R. McC. Adams 1966: 107–8; Diakonoff 1969b: 176;
Ellis 1976; Falkenstein 1974 [1954]; Foster 1982; Frankfort 1956: 65; Maisels
1990: 151; Postgate 1992: 126; Van De Mieroop 1999: 146–58).
Royal estates were run on similar principles except that the tenants were
mainly ofﬁcials, artisans, and professional or semiprofessional soldiers in
the service of the king. Ordinary landholders either cultivated their small
allotments or had them worked by other members of their families, while high-
ranking ofﬁcials rented or sharecropped their larger allotments. By the time of
Hammurabi many royal soldiers could ‘sell’ their right to allotments, but this
transfer required that the ‘buyer’ legally agree to perform the same services
for the king as the previous allotment holder (Diakonoff 1969b: 197; Yoffee
1977).

Land Ownership
329
It has been observed that both temple and royal estates tended to specialize
in growing grain, while private citizens preferred to invest in orchards and
kitchen gardens (Stein 1998). Grain was easily stored and relatively durable
and therefore a suitable commodity for the commercial transactions of large
institutions. Moreover, because of their large size and abundant resources,
temple and royal estates were better equipped than small-scale cultivators to
manage large irrigation systems, own the equipment and animals required to
plough ﬁelds, and cope with the complicated crop rotations and anti-salination
procedures that were necessary to grow grain crops on the backslopes of river
channels (Postgate 1992: 188–90).
There is much controversy about the order in which various Mesopotamian
institutions developed. Temples are identiﬁed long before palaces in the ar-
chaeological record, and by the middle of the fourth millennium b.c. some
appear to have evolved signiﬁcant bureaucracies that were concerned with
crops, domestic animals, crafts, allotting ﬁelds, procuring raw materials, issu-
ing rations to workers, and constructing large buildings and irrigation works
(Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993). Yet it is not clear to what extent tem-
ples already possessed large estates at that time. Palaces do not appear until
the Early Dynastic period and from the beginning seem to have possessed land
the main purpose of which was to provide kings with the revenues required
to maintain and equip the armies that were needed to defend city-states. The
palace also had to support a large administrative staff that increasingly came
to constitute the central government of the city-state. Kings sought to increase
their revenues by buying or appropriating (often by compulsory purchase)
more land (R. McC. Adams 1966: 142–48; Postgate 1992: 184).
Kings also sought to control temples and their revenues. King Shulgi, of the
Ur III dynasty, placed major temples at Lagash and perhaps elsewhere under
the control of palace ofﬁcials, and Hammurabi assigned state accountants to
temples (Postgate 1992: 300). Under public pressure, however, Urukagina, a
ruler of Lagash in the 24th century b.c., seemingly restored to various gods
the ownership of temple estates that had been sequestered by his predeces-
sors and abolished royal taxes on these estates (Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90).
Some Assyriologists see royal estates, during the course of the third millen-
nium, as competing with and gradually replacing temples as the most powerful
economic and political force in society (Postgate 1972). Others argue that tem-
ple estates expanded as a reaction to increasing royal power and the erosion
of collectively owned landholdings (B. Foster 1981; Huot 1989: 153; Nissen
1988: 147–48). This view is a development of Max Weber’s (1976 [1896]: 188)
suggestion that ordinary people turned to priests for protection against the
despotic power of kings.

330
Economy
It is now argued that spiralling debts may have caused individuals and groups
to donate their land and themselves to temples in return for protection against
creditors and royal administrators. High taxes and the economic hardship that
small groups faced as a result of poor harvests may have encouraged the gradual
disintegration of collective landholdings. Loans made at high rates of interest
often had to be paid off by selling, with the approval of all the male co-owners,
portions of collective land that in earlier times might or might not have been
alienable.Asaresultofthesesales,thepoorestandpoliticallyweakestmembers
of landowning groups would have found themselves unable to subsist on what
remained of their extended family’s collective landholding, and some may have
decided to donate themselves and what remained of their land rights to temple
estates. Other landless individuals may have sought the protection of temple
estates. Arua, the term for free-will gifts to temples, included chattels, ex
voto objects, prisoners of war (donated by kings), and ordinary people, many
of them widows, orphans, and other impoverished individuals (Maisels 1990:
154–55; Postgate 1992: 135). While temple estates do not appear to have been
indulgent institutions, they did provide economic security for marginalized
members of society. Thus palaces and temple estates both may have expanded
as rival institutions as collective ownership of land declined in importance. This
development would have sustained the heterarchical nature of Mesopotamian,
and especially Sumerian, society despite the growing centralization that was
resulting from the increasing power of kings.
Egyptian kings had begun to establish royal estates (h
• wt) long before the Old
Kingdom,andthroughouttheperiodtheycontinuedtocreatelargenumbersof
these institutions. Estates varied in size from one to over ﬁfty hectares. While
the revenues derived from estates were assigned to speciﬁc individuals and
institutions, they remained the property of the government unless their own-
ership was speciﬁcally relinquished. Many estates were intended to support
the monarch and close members of his family. Others (h
• wt k3) ﬁnanced the
funerary cults of kings, female members of the royal family, and high-ranking
ofﬁcials. The revenues from still other estates were assigned to temples or pro-
vided ofﬁcials’ salaries (Eyre 1987a: 22–23). While ofﬁcials received income
from royal estates as payment for the work they did for the government, the
successful transfer of speciﬁc ofﬁcial positions and associated lands from father
to son over several generations blurred the distinction between ofﬁce land and
land that may have belonged privately to ofﬁcials.
Each large estate and perhaps clusters of small ones had a manager (h
• q3
h
• wt), whose substantial residence served as the estate’s administrative centre
and storehouse. At least during the late Old Kingdom, a centralized bureau-
cracy with its headquarters in Memphis collected grain and other foodstuffs

Land Ownership
331
from estates throughout Egypt and distributed them to the various royally en-
dowed funerary cults in the Memphis area (Eyre 1987a: 23, 34; Roth 1991b).
This eliminated the need for individual cults to provision themselves from their
widely scattered landholdings. It also gave the central government consider-
able control over these estates and their produce. By appointing government
ofﬁcials to well-paid but part-time positions supervising the various royal fu-
nerary cults, it was also possible to return to the royal administration some of
the revenues that had been dedicated to these cults, thus making them less
of a threat to the central government’s control of the economy than Egyptol-
ogists used to believe. Funerary cults also provided income for the artisans
who worked part-time for them as priests. While it has been argued that in
the Early Dynastic period the central government provisioned ofﬁcials from
the palace, as the bureaucracy expanded increasing numbers of ofﬁcials were
provided with estates instead of a salary (Eyre 1987a: 23). In at least some
cases the holders would have managed these estates, thereby reducing the
administrative load of the government bureaucracy.
The central government was particularly active in establishing estates in less
densely populated regions, especially in the Delta and Middle Egypt (Kemp
1983: 91). Many estates in the western Delta were devoted to wine production
and raising cattle. These estates were settled by farmers from more densely
populated regions of Egypt and with foreign families who had been captured
in war and were gradually transformed from slaves into free farmers. It is not
clear to what extent Egyptian farmers were permitted to move freely from
one region to another or could be forced to do so. Many individuals may
have been happy to relocate from densely populated regions where land was
becomingscarcetoregionsthatweredevelopingrapidly.Inpartsofthecountry
experiencing economic growth, competition for labour may have resulted in
more favourable working conditions. The distribution throughout Egypt of
estates assigned to support speciﬁc government institutions, major religious
cults, and royal funerary cults must also have given ofﬁcials who derived their
living from working for these institutions a vested interest in keeping Egypt
united.
private ownership
Private land is owned by a single person or by two or more freely associated
partners and can be bought and sold as these individuals wish. It is frequently
subject to taxation by the government and following an owner’s demise may
be inherited, like other personal possessions, according to socially prescribed
rules. Owners can also dispose of such property during their lifetimes and often

332
Economy
can bequeath it to whom they wish. Both unilinear evolutionists and substan-
tivist economists believe that private property is a recent innovation (Polanyi,
Arensberg, and Pearson 1957), but since the right of individuals to possess
goods is recognized in much simpler societies the existence of private land in
early civilizations should not be ruled out. There is, however, no evidence that
such land existed in most early civilizations. It has been claimed that in the
Valley of Mexico land granted to individuals could be sold by them (Offner
1981; 1983), but there is no proof that this was so even with the patrimonial
land that was inherited in noble families. In Peru hereditary estates and those
who worked them could not be sold or exchanged. Among the Yoruba there is
no evidence that land was privately owned, although successful warriors and
traders who invested in large numbers of slaves could bring large amounts of
collectively owned land under cultivation for their personal beneﬁt. Because
of the Yorubas’ relatively low population density, wealth was derived from pri-
vate ownership of the human means of production rather than land. In China,
rights to the produce of ﬁelds that were collectively worked were assigned to
various ofﬁcials and their retainers, but these ﬁelds were owned either col-
lectively by extended farm families or institutionally by the government. That
leaves Mesopotamia and Egypt as early civilizations in which some land might
have been privately owned.
It is believed that in Mesopotamia prior to the third millennium b.c. most
land was owned collectively. In the course of the third millennium, as commu-
nal land rights were pledged for debts, increasing amounts of land fell under
the control of temples or palaces, but some of it appears to have become the
property of individual creditors. The sale of perhaps 263 hectares of land in
four lots, recorded on the Obelisk of Maniˇstuˇsu, which dates about 2500 b.c.,
has been interpreted as evidence that at ﬁrst collectively owned land could be
sold only to a king, but this is far from certain (Maisels 1990: 151–57; Postgate
1992: 41, 94–99). At the beginning of this transformation, leaders of landown-
ing patrilineages were probably in a privileged position to transform collective
holdings into private estates. The senior branches of these lineages may have
accumulated wealth and power at the expense of junior branches, and eldest
sons may have bought out the inheritance rights of younger siblings either
while their fathers were alive or after their deaths. Initially the transfer of land
to non-family members probably required ﬁctional adoptions and the consent
of the extended families of the sellers (Postgate 1992: 182–84). Such legal
ﬁctions grew less necessary as the pawning, buying, and selling of the use of
land and then of land itself continued. Eventually land came to be treated like
other forms of private property. It is also possible that high-ranking ofﬁcials
who made their positions hereditary managed to convert their large personal

Land Ownership
333
grants of temple or palace land into permanent and eventually disposable
holdings (Crawford 1991: 46).
Small privately owned farms that resulted from the breakup of collectively
owned land were extremely vulnerable to ecological or economic crises and to
sickness in a family; hence they were easily lost as a consequence of indebted-
ness. This probably facilitated the development of large private estates, tracts
of which the owners either rented to tenant farmers or sharecropped with
them. In Akkadian times, such an estate might employ several hundred agri-
cultural workers and their families (R. McC. Adams 1966: 107). Although the
extent of privately owned land at any one period is uncertain and it developed
slowly, unsteadily, and in diverse ways out of collective forms of land owner-
ship, it increased over time and probably included most of the best orchards
and gardens.
To possess arable land was the primary goal of all Mesopotamians (Postgate
1992: 183). Collective or private ownership of land made an individual a citizen
(dumugi) and an integral member of a Mesopotamian city-state in a way that
was not open to those who were either landless or worked another’s land.
Declining collective ownership of land would have made individuals anxious to
acquire land in their own name as a way of retaining their status as landowners.
The goal of prosperous Mesopotamian individuals, such as traders, appears to
have been to invest in enough farm land and urban property that they and their
families could live on the revenues derived from renting and sharecropping
(Maisels 1990: 228; Oppenheim 1969: 11). To be supported in this manner
was to imitate the life of the gods.
Yet, as the amount of institutional and privately owned land increased,
the number of people who possessed land constantly declined, and the eco-
nomic and social gap widened between those who owned land and those who
merely worked it. Palace and temple estates emerged as the richest institu-
tional landowners, but considerable amounts of land were either collectively
or privately owned at any period. Wealthy ofﬁcials probably invested much of
their surplus income in land. At the same time, the direct transfer of some
land from collective to private ownership limited the power of temple hierar-
chies and kings and thus helped to maintain the broad, heterarchical nature
of political power in southern Mesopotamia.
It is less certain that private land existed in Old Kingdom Egypt. Christopher
Eyre (1987a: 33) maintains that there is no evidence that a clear distinction
was drawn between privately owned land and ofﬁce land, which implies that
there was no concept of privately owned land. Barry Kemp (1983: 81) asserts
that private ownership of land is well documented for the Old Kingdom. Texts
of this period refer speciﬁcally to ﬁelds or estates that were inherited from

334
Economy
a parent (Malek and Forman 1986: 80–81). At least some of this land could
be alienated from its possessors’ heirs in a variety of ways, including using
it to endow personal funerary cults. Much of this land appears, however, to
have been bestowed on individuals by the king, and it is frequently difﬁcult or
impossible to distinguish between an outright gift and a bestowal that would
eventually have reverted to the king. It is especially difﬁcult to distinguish
privately owned land from ofﬁce land that was held by successive generations
of a family that performed the same or equivalent services for temples or the
state. Possessors of such land had powerful reasons for trying to make their
rights to it appear to be those of permanent ownership. Especially under weak
central administrations, efforts to do this would have created much ambiguity
about the legal status of many parcels of land. Even records of sale, which
became more common in later periods, do not resolve whether freeholds or
use rights were being transferred from one individual to another (Robins 1993:
136). It is also impossible, for lack of evidence, to know whether private land
was being created through the sale to individuals of collectively owned land.
Nevertheless, it does seem as if something closely resembling private land was
already being transferred by sale in the Old Kingdom (Malek and Forman
1986: 82).
Revenues from these different categories of land circulated in highly com-
plex ways. For example, the mortuary cult of a high ofﬁcial might have received
food supplies from royal estates or from a plot of land specially set aside for
this cult by the king. It might also have received endowments from a private
funerary estate established by the deceased or through the endowed purchase
of reversions, or reuse, of food offerings from nearby royal funerary cults,
temples, or more lavishly endowed tombs. This income would have supported
low-ranking ofﬁcials who, among their other duties, would have made regular
food offerings at the dead person’s tomb (Kemp 1983: 85–107).
land ownership and political and
economic variation
Land owned collectively either by patrilineal descent groups or by endogamous
communities played a major role in food production among the Yoruba, in the
Valley of Mexico, and in highland Peru. In Mesopotamia there is circumstantial
evidence that collective ownership had been important at an early period,
but by the time the ﬁrst detailed records appear land was being sold by the
collective agreement of extended families to the king and possibly to other
individuals, as well as being donated to temples. In Egypt collective village

Land Ownership
335
ownership of land, which antedated the development of royal estates, may
have continued into later times. In Shang and Western Zhou China agricultural
land may have belonged either collectively to the patrilineages that worked it
or institutionally to ofﬁcials who were able to assign the surplus production of
such land to themselves and their supporters and retainers. In the Valley of
Mexico and Peru, land was owned collectively by endogamous groups, among
the Yoruba, the Mesopotamians, and perhaps the Shang and Western Zhou
Chinese by patrilineal extended families, and in ancient Egypt by communities.
InstitutionallyownedagriculturallandwasimportantintheValleyofMexico,
highland Peru, Mesopotamia, and Egypt. Among the Yoruba it appears to have
been limited to ﬁelds belonging to the ofﬁce of kingship. In Mesopotamia it
was divided between the palace and various temples, and the rivalry between
them helped to preserve the heterarchy of this society. In the Valley of Mexico
institutional land was shared by the king and the hereditary nobles, but the
king’s control of palace lands enabled him to subsidize the entire nobility and
thus promoted political centralization. Inka royal estates, state farms, and gifts
of land produced income for the king, his close relatives, high ofﬁcials, royal
descent groups, and the army. In Egypt the government developed unused or
underused land as estates that could be assigned to support various institutions,
government ofﬁcials, andother privilegedindividuals.In Chinaat least theking
possessed ofﬁce land that was worked by corv´ee and by landless labourers
who were bound to royal service. Local and regional ofﬁcials expanded their
incomemainlybyincreasingthenumberofcultivatorswhosecommunallabour
produced food surpluses that were at their disposal.
Thus in many early civilizations the upper classes derived revenues from
lands set aside to provision rulers, temples, leading families, and ofﬁcials. A
considerably higher percentage of the food produced on this land went to its
beneﬁciaries than was collected in taxes on equivalent amounts of collectively
or privately owned land. The Inka was not the only early civilization to use
corv´ee labour to produce food for the state and its designated beneﬁciaries
on institutionally owned land. Such labour was also employed in the Valley of
Mexico and probably in China, and these states, together with ancient Egypt
and Mesopotamia, also attempted to increase the share of the crops that went
to state institutions and the upper classes by creating special forms of labourers
who were required to work some institutional land on a full-time basis. The
Inka differed from other early civilizations only in the extent to which taxes
were collected in the form of labour.
There is no evidence of private ownership of land among the Yoruba, Inka,
Shang Chinese, and the peoples of the Valley of Mexico. Individual Yoruba
who commanded extra human labour were able to develop large farms on

336
Economy
patrilineally owned land that provided them with the resources required to
promote their political careers. In Mesopotamia, privately owned land ap-
pears to have grown increasingly common as the collective ownership of land
declined. Old Kingdom Egypt displayed a complex mixture of collectively, in-
stitutionally, and (probably) privately owned land, its most striking difference
from Mesopotamia being that most institutional land was ultimately controlled
by the king or by the state. Royal control of institutional land appears to be a
general characteristic of territorial states.
A ﬁnal question is whether there was a developmental sequence from col-
lective to institutional to private ownership of land. There is some evidence
that might be interpreted as supporting this claim. In Mesopotamia it appears
that collective land gradually was transformed into institutional and privately
owned land, and in Egypt a similar development may have occurred. In China,
over a much longer period than we are considering, collective and most in-
stitutional land was transformed into privately owned land, although rights
to private property were never guaranteed in China to the same extent that
they were in countries that adopted Roman law (Ke 1989; Shen 1994). In the
Valley of Mexico institutional land existed alongside collectively owned land
and tended to expand as hegemonic states exploited their weaker neighbours.
The Inka kingdom appears to have been energetically creating institutional
land in a region dominated by collectively owned land in order to increase
the amount of food available for government projects and the wealth at the
disposal of the upper classes. In contrast, the Yoruba had experienced only
very limited development of institutional land.
Increasing proportions of institutional and privately owned land might be
used to arrange these civilizations in a hypothetical evolutionary hierarchy.
The replacement of collectively owned land by increasing proportions of in-
stitutional and privately owned land is correlated with compelling farmers
and farm labourers to produce and surrender increasing amounts of surplus
food. While the state and the upper classes were able to appropriate crop sur-
pluses for their own use from farmers who cultivated land that they owned
collectively, the amount was limited compared with what could be extracted
from landless farmers who cultivated institutional and private land as bound
labourers, sharecroppers, or tenant farmers.
Yet care must be exercised in advocating such an interpretation. The long-
term survival of collective and institutional ownership of land in all early civ-
ilizations and the relatively limited development of private ownership in all
but one early civilization suggest that all three forms of land ownership were
compatible with early civilizations as a general type of society. All of them sup-
plied the food surpluses that were necessary to support the upper classes and

Land Ownership
337
those specialized workers who supplied the upper classes’ particular wants.
It is also clear that speciﬁc combinations of land ownership corresponded
functionally with more general political and economic variations among early
civilizations. In Mesopotamia heterarchical power encouraged the develop-
ment of rival landowning institutions; in Egypt, the Valley of Mexico, and Peru
the development of institutional land ownership was one device among many
for reinforcing royal authority. In territorial states, the king or government
claimed paramount control over institutional land. Finally, among the Yoruba,
where arable land was relatively abundant, wealthy and powerful individuals
used slaves and debtors to work large portions of communal land and kept all
the surplus production for themselves. This arrangement increased the crop
surpluses being accumulated by members of the upper classes as institutional
or private ownership of land did elsewhere. In dealing with land ownership,
we are considering an aspect of social organization in which historical partic-
ularities played a signiﬁcant role alongside a limited range of strategies that
were deployed by the upper classes to encourage the production of larger crop
surpluses and ensure their appropriation of them. These strategies must have
been devised independently as each early civilization developed.

16 Trade and Craft Specialization
E
volutionary archaeologists used to believe that increasing social com-
plexity and intellectual progress resulted primarily from the devel-
opment of more complex technology, in particular increasing dependence
on metallurgy. This view rested on the assumption that in early civilizations
metal was used primarily to manufacture cutting tools. Yet it has long been
recognized that the development of metallurgy was not as crucial to the
evolution of various early civilizations as this view suggested (Childe 1951:
26–27).
The Yoruba were the only civilization in our sample that forged iron on
a large scale. It is generally believed that, because of its greater technical
complexity, iron forging began much later than the working of gold, silver, and
copper. It has also been assumed that knowledge of how to work iron spread
to Africa from the Middle East during the ﬁrst millennium b.c. Nevertheless,
radiocarbon dates which indicate that iron-working was well established as
early as 700 b.c. in Uganda and West Africa and may have been practised
there in the preceding millennium raise the possibility of the independent
invention of iron-working in sub-Saharan Africa. The use of iron appears to
have reached southern Nigeria early in the Christian era (Connah 1987: 113,
141; Holl 2000: 14–15; Shaw 1978: 69–99). Raw materials needed to make
iron, in the form of laterites and iron-rich shale soils, were abundant in Yoruba
territory, although they were more common in the north than in the south (Ojo
1966a: 96–98; Peel 1983: 22–23). Beginning in the sixteenth century a.d., iron
as well as brass ingots were purchased from European traders operating along
the Gulf of Guinea. Because of the abundance of locally produced iron, Yoruba
wereabletomanufactureheavyagriculturalimplements,tools,ornaments,and
ritual objects from this metal. According to archaeological evidence from Ife,
they also beat or cast ornaments and ritual objects from gold and copper or
copper alloys (mainly brass) beginning around a.d. 1000. Casting was done
338

