Class Systems and Social Mobility
143
sometimes commercial upper classes were rigidly separated from laterally
insulated communities of agricultural producers (Gellner 1983: 9–11; 1998).
In democratic Greek city-states, male citizens were distinguished from female
citizens, foreigners, and slaves. Morris argues that after 500 b.c., despite con-
siderable real differences in wealth, the ideal of the equality of male citizens led
to the disappearance in Greek urban settings of rich graves, elaborate funerary
monuments, fancy houses, and elaborate clothes and jewellery (1997: 102–3).
No early civilization displayed that sort of ideologically driven symbolic
equality. Kings, not a mass of sovereign citizens, stood at the head of soci-
ety, and there were marked differences in way of life between the wealthy,
powerful, and leisured minority that controlled society and the much poorer,
hard-working, and ideally obedient mass of the population. Nevertheless,
Gellner’s and Morris’s models indicate the need to consider how class was
perceived and represented in early civilizations and to what extent differences
in class and status were symbolically accentuated or disguised by lifestyles.
In early civilizations there was a need not only to protect the reality of
power and authority from challenge and ridicule by the lower classes but
also to ensure that the symbols of status were not encroached on by those
of lower rank. Protecting the privileges and symbols of authority was one of
the responsibilities of the monarch. In some early civilizations, sumptuary
laws dictated what kinds of clothes, jewellery, and insignia could be worn
by different classes. Among the Aztec particular colours and patterns of cloth
were restricted to speciﬁc classes and ranks within classes. Every enemy soldier
capturedbyanAztecwarriorentitledthatwarriortowearadistinctivecostume,
ornaments, and hairstyle and to perform special honoriﬁc roles in public rituals.
The state could punish and even kill people for infractions of these sumptuary
laws (Clendinnen 1991: 120; Hassig 1988: 39–40; Soustelle 1961: 132–39).
The Inka government carefully regulated the kind and amount of goods that
members of different classes could own. Inka ofﬁcials distributed fancy clothes,
women, male servants, metal ware, land, and minor public ofﬁces as rewards
for service to the state. These gifts were carefully graduated to take account
of the recipient’s social rank. Rulers obliged individuals to wear their hair and
dress in a manner that was distinctive of their ethnic group. This not only
distinguished the ruling class from subject peoples but, when various ethnic
groups were resettled in different parts of the kingdom, also distinguished such
settlers from indigenous people. The Inka rulers were seeking not to create
ethnic homogeneity but to preserve ethnic diversity so that they could play
one subject group off against another. By carefully distinguishing hairstyles,
dress, and ornaments they emphasized differences in class, ethnicity, and the
favour of government ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 33, 178; Rowe 1944: 262).

144
Sociopolitical Organization
At the investiture ceremonies of regional ofﬁcials, Western Zhou kings pre-
sented them with clothing decorated with symbols of ofﬁce, special banners,
elaborately crafted chariots and weapons, and jade ornaments. Gradations in
these valuable presents reinforced an established hierarchy of privileges and
prestige (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 177–78).
The Benin rulers claimed ownership of all the red coral beads in their
kingdom. These beads were highly coveted royal honours. Kings assigned
collars made of them to ofﬁcials for their lifetimes, to be returned when the
recipients died. The collars were also periodically recalled to the palace, where
a slave was ritually sacriﬁced and his blood poured over them to renew their
power. Special clothes bearing distinctive patterns were woven in the royal
palace at Benin to be worn by the king and his major ofﬁcials. The power of
the king was displayed and reinforced by his ability to control luxury goods,
both by regulating their manufacture and by determining who might own or
use them (Bradbury 1957: 26, 46, 58). The aim of these regulations was to
keep such goods scarce and therefore useful as status markers.
Noneoftheearlycivilizationsweareconsideringhadorders–classesdeﬁned
primarily by the type of work that each group did. Whereas in medieval Europe
knights or professional warriors, priests, and manual workers constituted an
overriding hierarchical framework, as the brahmin (priest), ksatriya (warrior,
ruler), vaisya (trader, businessman), and sudra (farmer) orders (varna) still do
in India, in all seven early civilizations both the priesthood and the army cut
across class lines. The top levels of religious hierarchies were invariably occu-
pied by members of the royal family and the upper classes. Middle levels were
staffed by people drawn from the administrative class, while the physical labour
required to maintain temples was usually performed by low-ranking priests
drawn from craft workers and farmers. While major positions in religious hier-
archies were generally ﬁlled by full-time personnel and less prestigious ones on
a part-time basis, in Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt even high-ranking priests
were government ofﬁcials who took turns managing shrines and temples or
performing religious duties. Military leaders were likewise drawn from the up-
per classes, while ordinary soldiers and militia conscripts were recruited from
the lower classes. Full-time soldiers tended to be members of an intermediate
specialist class.
perception of class
In practice early civilizations appear to have had numerous social groupings –
most of them highly localized, others geographically dispersed – each of which
was aware of its social position in relation to other groups. Such units included

Class Systems and Social Mobility
145
families, localized occupational collectivities, and people who played speciﬁc
types of leadership roles. While, inevitably, elaborate formal or informal gra-
dations of status existed among these groups, there was also a tendency to
generalize these gradations to form a small number of hierarchical divisions.
Usuallythisinvolveddistinguishinganupperclass,freecommoners,andslaves.
Since slaves, if any, tended to be few, the bulk of the population was divided
into two groups: upper class and commoners. Divisions of this sort provided
a general framework for understanding the much more complicated relations
of authority and deference that characterized interaction among individuals
and collectivities. A dual distinction also reinforced the pretensions of the nu-
merically inferior upper class by pairing it in a simple hierarchy with the vastly
more numerous lower class.
While all early civilizations shared a general view of class hierarchy, the
criteria and clarity with which these broad classes were distinguished varied.
The Inka recognized an upper class that was entirely hereditary and divided
into three main ranks on the basis of members’ origins. The ancient Egyptians
distinguished the p‘t (hereditary nobility) from the rh˘ yt (defeated/subjected
ones) or nds (small people) (Baines 1995b: 133; Malek and Forman 1986: 34).
The hereditary nobles were, however, supplemented and increasingly eclipsed
by a non-hereditary upper class composed of ofﬁcials who held positions in the
higher echelons of the civil service hierarchy. Throughout the Valley of Mexico,
a hereditary upper class (pipiltin) traced their descent from the ruler of the
ancient city of Tollan, who was believed to be a descendant or manifestation of
the god Quetzalcoatl. Membership in that class could be acquired only through
one or both parents. Among the Classic Maya hereditary ahaw (nobles) may
have been differentiated from commoners (Freidel 1992: 130). In China a
hereditary nobility was distinguished from ordinary men (ren) and dependent
workers (zhong), and according to L´eon Vandermeersch (1980: 18) the upper
class was divided into two levels: zi (close relatives of the king) and chen
(retainers). Other major upper-class titles suggest intervening grades of nobles.
In each of these civilizations the upper classes, or at least their highest levels,
which traced their descent from former rulers, claimed a special supernatural
origin. While in Peru the second major rank of the nobility was composed
of ennobled commoners and in Egypt individuals of non-royal ancestry were
raised to the rank of the hereditary nobility, in the Valley of Mexico an ennobled
commoner could ensure that his descendants became hereditary nobles only
by marrying a female member of that group.
The early Mesopotamians do not appear to have had a hereditary nobility,
but their free population was divided into two groups with unequal political
power and unequal rights before the law. The higher-ranking of the two thus

146
Sociopolitical Organization
constituted a formally recognized upper class (Diakonoff 1987; Maisels 1990:
273–74). J. D. Y. Peel (1983: 46) has proposed that the closest thing to a domi-
nant class in Yoruba society was the entire body of male household heads.
Yet, in addition to the royal clans, some Yoruba patrilineages were larger and
more prosperous than others, and the most prominent male members of these
lineages shared substantial power with the king. While these men and their
families may not have constituted a formally recognized upper class, they
formed a de facto one.
In territorial states there was a tendency for the distinction between the
upper and commoner classes to be more overt, complex, and symbolically
marked than in city-states. The upper classes were also more likely to be
explicitly divided into multiple grades or ranks. This was done by means of
ranked subclasses in Inka Peru, by tracing deep and unequal genealogical
relations among descent groups in Shang China, and by using additional cri-
teria such as civil service rankings in Egypt. Because territorial states extended
over large areas, even members of the upper class could not all be expected
to know one another personally. Fixed ranks and special insignia facilitated
the recognition of authority that was essential for effective interaction among
members of the ruling group.
In city-states, where prominent people tended to know each other person-
ally, there was less need for a formal demarcation of status. There was also
a tendency for power to be shared among the leaders of various groups and
institutions, for the power of individuals and groups to be challenged, and for
there to be more ﬂuidity in which groups made various types of decisions.
Under these circumstances, it must have been strategically advantageous to
mute the expression of some types of social inequality in order to fend off
challenges and reduce political tensions. At the same time, public attention
had to be drawn to leading citizens to ensure that proper forms of deference
were maintained. These contradictory objectives were not handled in the same
way in all city-states. The peoples living in the Valley of Mexico and perhaps
the Classic Maya had hereditary upper classes. Both the Mesopotamians and
the Yoruba recognized general class divisions, but these divisions were not
hereditary or socially emphasized to the same degree.
There are important similarities in class structure in all the civilizations
in our sample, as well as similarities in the detailed criteria by which groups
were ranked. Whether or not these criteria were terminologically marked, they
appear to represent cross-culturally similar views concerning the appropriate
correlates of prestige and status. Even an early civilization organized on the
basis of orders such as that of Gangetic India would have conformed to this
arrangement.

Class Systems and Social Mobility
147
upper classes
While symbolically the king stood above and represented all of society, he was
also the leader of the upper classes. One of his most important functions was
to unite that group and protect and promote its social and political interests.
The upper classes in all early civilizations were small, amounting to no more
than a few percent of the total population, but they controlled much of the
surplus wealth of their societies and played key roles in decisions about policy
and administration. They used their power to protect their economic and
social privileges and reinforce their social position. Where the upper class was
hereditary, it was normally composed of the king and other members of the
royal family, collateral descendants of formerly independent rulers and leading
provincial families, and administrators and soldiers who had been ennobled as
a reward for their services to the state. Where the upper class was not formally
hereditary, it was made up of the leaders of prominent lineages or ethnic
groups, the administrators of major civic institutions, and wealthy landowners.
Even in these societies kingship tended to be hereditary, and other ofﬁces
were often controlled by the same families for long periods.
The luxurious lifestyle of the upper classes was supported by family or pri-
vate ownership of land, by state salaries, which sometimes involved revocable
assignments of land instead of actual payments, and by the opportunity to
become the beneﬁciaries of bribes, fees, military booty, and economic con-
trol. Some members of the upper classes enjoyed these privileges simply as
a result of belonging to upper-class families. They did little work, but their
status put inherited land and other forms of wealth at their disposal. Other
members played an active role in administering the state. The highest state
ofﬁcials belonged to the upper classes, and together with the king they made
all the most important decisions. Members of this group also commanded the
army and managed the major religious institutions. Less prestigious members
of the nobility were minor ofﬁcials, engineers, and sometimes high-ranking
artists.
The Inka upper class was composed at the highest level by the reigning
monarch, his immediate family, and the descendants of all previous Inka rulers.
The latter were organized as panaqas (royal descent groups) each of which
traced its origin to a particular king. Depending on how they were genealogi-
cally related to their founder, members of each panaqa (and perhaps also their
dependents) were divided into three ranked groups called qullana, payan, and
kayaw (Bauer 1998: 35–39). The members of a panaqa were collectively en-
dowed with the dead king’s palaces, personal wealth, and private land. Their
chief task was to manage these properties and to feed, clothe, and care for the

148
Sociopolitical Organization
mummiﬁed bodies of the dead king and his chief wife. These two individuals
were venerated as the founder deities of their panaqa, in the same manner as
minor nature deities were regarded as the founding ancestors of commoner
landowning groups (ayllu). Unlike ayllus, however, panaqas were not required
to be endogamous.
It is often assumed that each new Inka king had to acquire his own wealth,
everything that his predecessor had accumulated belonging to that king’s de-
scent group. This, it is argued, explains why each king strove to expand the
borders of the kingdom (Conrad and Demarest 1984). If, however, it is true that
the panaqa Qhapaq Ayllu always belonged to the reigning monarch, consid-
erable wealth would have passed from each monarch to his successor, leaving
only his palaces, personal lands, and private possessions to his other descen-
dants (I. Farrington 1992: 369–70). It also appears that the panaqas of at least
thirteen successive kings may have been assigned to only ten named divisions
of the Cuzco terrain. This suggests that descendants of later kings had to share
resources in the Cuzco area with descendants of much earlier rulers if their
panaqas were assigned the same estates.
Panaqas were important political entities in the Inka state. The oracular
pronouncements of each dead king, which his panaqa controlled, were an
important source of political power for its leaders. Panaqas participated in
policy-making and meddled in royal successions. Their leaders competed for
high state ofﬁces, which were granted as a result of winning the king’s favour,
and sought to enhance their power by marrying their close female relatives to
the king. The most recently formed panaqas appear to have been the richest.
This may have been because the older ones had never possessed much land
or wealth or because their wealth had had to be divided among a growing
number of descendants of the original king. It is also possible that many of
their resources had been reallocated to the panaqas of more recent rulers.
All the members of this highest level of the Inka upper class claimed descent
from the principal Inka deity, the sun god, Inti. Men drawn from this level
occupied the highest ofﬁces in the Inka state (Gose 1996a; Patterson 1991).
The second rank of Inka nobility consisted of Inka-by-privilege (ayllucusco),
who were organized into ten descent groups (ayllus). According to Inka tra-
ditions, they had originally lived in the Cuzco region, and their ancestors had
supported the early Inka kings. In return, the Inka rulers had ennobled them
when they found it necessary to recruit more administrators for their expand-
ing bureaucracy. Unlike the true Inka nobility, these groups were derived, like
ordinary humans, from minor supernatural forces, not from the sun god. The
Inka and the Inka-by-privilege shared posts in the administration of the king-
dom, although the latter generally occupied less important positions. Finally,

Class Systems and Social Mobility
149
conquered hereditary rulers and their descendants, down to the level of rulers
of one hundred families, were often allowed to retain their land and privileges
as members of the provincial nobility (Kendall 1973: 56, 101; Rowe 1944:
260–61). While their power was carefully circumscribed by Inka provincial
overseers, their control over their own people was frequently enhanced rather
than diminished by the political support they received from the Inka state.
In Egypt, the hereditary nobility were in theory descended from beings
who had lived when the creator gods still ruled directly over the terrestrial
realm (Morenz 1973: 47). They included descendants of kings and possibly
also of cooperative local rulers whose territories had been absorbed into the
Egyptian state at the time of its uniﬁcation. Ofﬁcials of commoner origin and
their descendants were raised to this rank as a reward for especially meritorious
service. Less prestigious honorary titles, such as h
• 3ty  (notable), smr wty
(unique friend of the king), smr (friend of the king), and h˘ tmt bıty (royal
sealer), were assigned to favoured ofﬁcials for their lifetimes (Allen 2000: 32).
The hereditary title ‘pt’ was meaningful so long as an individual commanded
sufﬁcient wealth to live in an appropriate fashion. Such wealth was derived
from administrative ofﬁces, land bestowed on individuals as gifts by the ruler,
inherited estates, and land that was purchased using wealth accumulated from
government stipends.
In contrast to members of Inka panaqas, the Egyptian hereditary nobility
did not constitute a formally organized group or series of groups that enjoyed
collective economic privileges or political advantages. Instead, individual title-
holders had to look after their own interests. The most important and ﬁnely
graduatedEgyptianmalestatushierarchyconsistedoftherankedpositionsthat
individuals might occupy in the state administrative system. These positions
were an important source of power and wealth. The formal role that individual
nobles played in relation to this hierarchy and in administering Egypt varied
from one period to another. During the Fourth Dynasty, many of the highest
state ofﬁces were occupied by sons and other close male relatives of the king.
Later in the Old Kingdom such individuals were for a time excluded from
these ofﬁces. Without private wealth or patronage and economic support from
the king, nobles were in danger of lacking sufﬁcient wealth to remain active
members of the upper class. Both the non-corporate nature of the hereditary
nobility and the role of the civil service ranking system in deﬁning status
reﬂected the importance of winning royal or ofﬁcial favour for preferment and
career advancement (Baer 1960; Strudwick 1985).
Strong emphasis was placed at all levels of Shang society on the ranking
of descent lines within clans and on birth order among siblings of the same
sex. Power and authority passed from a man to his eldest son or from older to

150
Sociopolitical Organization
younger brothers within a speciﬁc descent line. Supreme power was vested in
the senior line of the Zi clan. Males who were closely related to reigning or pre-
vious kings held important court ofﬁces or administered territories. Regional
ofﬁces tended to remain hereditary in the senior male line of their occupants.
As the state expanded, new territories were established where younger sons of
ofﬁcials might be installed. Thus ofﬁcials of higher genealogical status tended
to hold land closer to the centre of the state and participated in the function-
ing of the court while others lived farther away. As lineages expanded, it was
increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd positions for younger sons that would allow them
to maintain an upper-class lifestyle (Vandermeersch 1980: 81–122).
Territories were also assigned to leaders of clans that supported the Zi, while
some conquered rulers were allowed to govern all or part of their former
territories as Shang vassals. These ofﬁcials were permitted to marry female
members of the royal clan, and some of the most important of them married
women of the royal lineage. The Shang upper class thus became a network
of ofﬁcials related directly or indirectly to the king. Ofﬁcials who governed
administrative territories bore the titles hou (archer lord?), bo (patriarch?),
and tian or dian (ﬁeld lord). While these positions normally were hereditary,
successors, at least at the higher levels, had to be conﬁrmed by the king, who
could also promote or remove individuals from their ofﬁces (Chao 1972: 99–
111). Ofﬁcials who headed junior branches of a clan remained ritually and
socially subordinate to the leaders of the senior branches from which they had
split off, even when they lived far apart.
The Aztec nobility (pipiltin) traced their descent ultimately from the god
Quetzalcoatl through the male or the female line or preferably both. In the
centuries preceding the Spanish conquest, throughout the Valley of Mexico,
the pipiltin had replaced or absorbed local elites that could not claim divine
descent. According to tradition, all the Aztec had originally been commoners
who had migrated into the Valley of Mexico from the north. Acamapichtli,
the ﬁrst Aztec king, had been invited to Tenochtitlan from the neighbouring
city-state of Culhuacan, whose nobles claimed descent from the ruler of an-
cient Tollan. It was maintained that some of Quetzalcoatl’s descendants had
moved south to Culhuacan following the destruction of Tollan in the twelfth
century a.d.
The hereditary nobles of the Valley of Mexico were divided into two groups:
the tetecuhtin (lords), who were the king’s main advisers and military ofﬁcers,
and the pilli, descendants of tetecuhtin who had not inherited their fathers’
positions but served as government ofﬁcials of lesser rank. Tetecuhtin headed
teccalli (family groups) to which related, lower-ranked pipiltin belonged
(Berdan 1982: 52–54). Pipiltin wore cotton clothes, sandals, feather work,

Class Systems and Social Mobility
151
and jade ornaments, lived in two-storey stone houses, ate the ﬂesh of human
sacriﬁces, drank chocolate and fermented beverages (in moderation) in public,
kept concubines, entered the royal palace at will, could eat in the palace dining
hall, and performed special dances at public rituals. They did not pay taxes
(Clendinnen 1991: 120).
Because calpolli leaders were encouraged to marry the daughters of kings,
powerful commoner families were drawn into the nobility and their primary
loyalties transferred from their kinship and residence groups to the emerging
upper class. As a consequence, class divisions cut across calpollis. Individual
warriors who performed brave acts, especially those who captured at least four
enemy soldiers in battle, were raised to the status of quauhpilli (eagle noble).
Their position was not hereditary, but by marrying younger daughters of noble
parents or daughters of nobles by their secondary, commoner wives they could
ensure that their children inherited pilli status from their mothers.
The pipiltin appear to have been ranked in descending status according to
whether they were members of the royal descent group, members of other
prominent ofﬁce-holding families, descended from pipiltin through both par-
ents or only one, or had personally achieved that status. A noble’s rank was
further deﬁned by the state ofﬁces to which he was appointed and by the ﬁnely
graduated military honours that he won in recognition of his performance in
battle. The main terminological distinctions were drawn between nobles who
held high ofﬁce, ordinary nobles, and eagle nobles. While the pipiltin were
found throughout the Valley of Mexico, the difference between noble and
commoner lifestyles was probably less marked in small city-states than in large
and powerful centres such as Tenochtitlan and Texcoco.
Among the Maya, rulers and their families also appear to have belonged to
a hereditary lordly class. It is generally assumed that large patrilineal extended
families or clans played an important role in Maya social organization. These
families are believed to have been stratiﬁed both internally and in relation to
one another. Powerful ones may have increased in size and wealth by incor-
porating non-kin as low-status members or clients (Carmack 1973; 1981). It
is unclear, however, whether the title-holders of major patrilineages formed
a high-level governing group within each Maya city-state, as occurred among
the Yoruba, or the most powerful local ofﬁcials were consanguineal members
of the royal family, as in China. If noble status was restricted to the senior lines
of major patrilineal groupings, the situation was very different from that found
in the Valley of Mexico. Some Mayanists question the importance of large
patrilineal groupings in Classic Maya society or suggest that their importance
varied from one Maya region and one class level to another (Chase and Chase
1992b: 307–10; Haviland 1992; Wilk 1988).

152
Sociopolitical Organization
In each of the ﬁve early civilizations considered so far, there appears to
have been a hereditary upper class, although in Egypt the importance of that
group was eclipsed to a considerable degree by a ranking system based on
honorary titles bestowed on individuals and personally achieved positions in
the government administrative hierarchy. Insofar as these upper-class positions
were hereditary, it seems appropriate to refer to the non-royal segment of
the upper classes in these societies as a nobility or aristocracy. In two early
civilizations, however, Mesopotamia and that of the Yoruba, there was an upper
class but no hereditary nobility.
It is believed that in the initial stages of Mesopotamian civilization the lead-
ers of major landowning extended families, who were sometimes also leaders
of villages, wards, and ethnic groups, participated in the councils that governed
early city-states, possibly in conjunction with a king. By the Early Dynastic pe-
riod, kings, administrators of major temples, and important private landowners
shared power. Rich private landowners occupied seats on city councils, and
they and major temple ofﬁcials advised the king and helped him to govern
the state. Land that had once been owned collectively by patrilineal extended
families fell increasingly under the control of palaces, temples, and wealthy
families or individuals. As collectively owned land was transformed into insti-
tutionally and privately owned land, increasing numbers of ordinary people
were forced to become clients of palaces, temples, and landowners in order
to survive. This development accentuated the differences between a small
privileged group and a much larger dependent stratum in Mesopotamian so-
ciety. In the Old Babylonian period these two strata were designated awilum
and muˇskenum. The awilum embraced the families of major ofﬁce-holders
and landowners and leaders of groups that possessed land communally. The
muˇskenum were landless families under perpetual patriarchal authority or at
best working conditional landholdings (Diakonoff 1987: 2; Maisels 1990: 262–
74). Earlier the Sumerians appear to have drawn an analogous distinction be-
tween dumugi (property owners, citizens) and guruˇs (dependents). While both
groups believed themselves to be descended from the same human ancestors
and social mobility occurred, in the Early Babylonian period the two groups
were marked by an explicit legal distinction between property owners, who
were treated relatively leniently by the law, and poorer people, who were not.
ThereisnoevidenceofformalrankingwithintheMesopotamianupperclass.
Power was both shared and contested by kings, temple administrators, and
private and collective landowners. Only in a few hegemonic city-states and for
limited periods was royal authority preeminent. Yet economic developments
had produced deep economic and political inequality in Mesopotamian society.
While various privileged elements, both individual and institutional, resisted

Class Systems and Social Mobility
153
centralization and struggled to control various spheres of activity, these same
privileged groups cooperated in defending their privileges in opposition to
lower-class discontent.
TheYorubahadadefactoupperclasscomposedofmembersoftheroyalclan
in each city-state, ward chiefs, leaders of important ritual societies, and rich and
high-ranking members of the patrilineages that held seats on the state council.
The generic term applied to such men was olal´a (honoured) (Lloyd 1974: 49).
Prominent members of the leading patrilineages engaged in ﬁerce competition
for their ofﬁces and titles. These patrilineages were invariably more populous,
prosperous, and powerful than others. Their principal members owned many
slaves who grew large amounts of food, and this permitted them to attract
numerous clients, including soldiers who could capture more slaves for them
in warfare and intimidate their rivals. A position on the state council enabled
a man to share in the revenues of the kingdom and secure trading and other
privileges that greatly enhanced his prosperity and that of his patrilineage.
Over time titles might shift from one patrilineage to another, and the king
could create new titles and ofﬁces. Nevertheless, the ability of ofﬁce-holders
to exploit their privileged positions to create wealth for their families tended to
keep the upper class relatively stable. In Benin the kings had severely curbed
the power of these leading families and developed an elaborate system of titles
that rewarded individuals for their particular services to the monarch. Despite
their loss of power, the leading non-royal lineages of Benin continued to enjoy
afﬂuence and social and ritual precedence (Bradbury 1957: 35–36; R. Smith
1969: 110–16).
The upper classes in early civilizations had many features in common. They
controlled a disproportionate amount of the wealth of their societies, avoided
physical labour, enjoyed an opulent lifestyle, and indulged in conspicuous con-
sumption. They occupied the top administrative, military, and religious posts
and constituted the highest levels of decision making and administration, either
sharing power with the monarch or being the people most able to inﬂuence
him. These upper classes were not always hereditary, and where they were not
they might be deﬁned either formally or informally. In territorial states upper-
class status tended to be both hereditary and formally deﬁned. The presence
of hereditary nobilities in some but not all early civilizations refutes Charles-
Louis Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu’s (1689–1755) assumption that early
despotic societies lacked them (Isaac 1993: 432). Yet to preserve upper-class
status, individuals and families needed to maintain their wealth and access
to high ofﬁces. The ability to do that became impaired as families slipped
genealogically farther from major sources of power and ﬁxed wealth became
sub-divided over successive generations. An important way for members of

154
Sociopolitical Organization
the upper class to counter a loss of wealth and power was marriage into royal
or other leading families.
commoners
Commoners made up the vast bulk of the population in early civilizations,
often constituting 90 percent or more. They rarely owned land individually
and, if they did, only in small amounts. They depended for subsistence on the
sale of goods they produced, worked for the state or other patrons, or formed
collective landholding groups. Their political power was also severely limited.
The lowest-ranking and by far the most numerous of them were engaged in
agriculture. At the top of the commoner class were full-time specialists, more
numerous than the upper classes but also amounting to no more than a few
percent of the population. They are often claimed to have formed a ‘middle
class’, but they did not derive their income from ownership of commercial
and industrial enterprises within the context of a capitalist economy. Nor did
they correspond to the professional bourgeoisie, the ﬁrst form of the middle
class to establish a place for itself in Western society. Specialists lacked sig-
niﬁcant political power and independent sources of wealth. Some may have
owned small properties, but others either subsisted by selling their produce
or received rations or grants of land in exchange for their services.
Many members of this group depended on the state or on members of the
upper class for their positions and salaries. These might be called ‘dependent
specialists’. The principal exceptions were craftsmen and traders who made a
living by selling goods to anyone who wished to buy them. Hence the term
‘full-time specialists’ seems preferable as a generic designation of this class.
Specialists were divided into a number of different types of occupations of
varying prestige. These occupations tended to be hereditary, and most were
taught by father to son or learned through apprenticeship. In general, the less
highly regarded the type of occupation, the more people practised it.
The most prestigious group of specialists was the lesser ofﬁcials, who are of-
ten labelled ‘administrators’, ‘bureaucrats’, or ‘scribes’ (Egyptian sˇs, Sumerian
dubˇsar, Aztec tlacuilohqueh, Inka hampikamayoq). Their principal duties
were to see that the orders of upper-class ofﬁcials were carried out, make
the routine decisions required to do this (such as ascertaining how much tax
individual farmers should pay), and keep track of the wealth and property of
large institutions, rulers, and other members of the upper class. They were
trained to read and write or to use whatever recording devices were employed
by a particular civilization. In general, their work and style of life were more
similar to those of the less prestigious members of the upper class than to those

Class Systems and Social Mobility
155
of any other group. It has been suggested, on the basis of very fragmentary
surviving evidence, that among the Maya knowledge of writing may have been
conﬁned to certain members of the nobility (Fash 1991: 120). If so, those elite
administrators must have been assisted by lesser ofﬁcials who were not literate.
It is possible, however, that some Maya ofﬁcials of commoner rank were also
literate. Those who designed fancy ceramic vessels and stone sculpture, both
of which bore inscriptions, may have been the equivalents of master architects
and engineers, rather than of craft workers, in other early civilizations. The
Maya term ah ts’ ib appears to have designated a writer and draftsman but not
a painter or sculptor (Tate 1992: 20, 40–49).
The next rank of commoners consisted of full-time soldiers and police who
were not members of the upper classes. In general, they and their families
were well fed, housed, and rewarded for their services to the state. Their
main tasks included guarding upper-class people and property, maintaining
forts, and manning garrisons. In wartime they would be put in charge of other
commoners who had been conscripted for military duty. Professional soldiers
did not work with their hands, but their general deportment did not as closely
resemble that of the upper classes as did the behaviour of lesser ofﬁcials.
The third and lowest rank of specialists was full-time craft workers. They
laboured with their hands and therefore resembled farmers more than they did
soldiers or bureaucrats. Long-distance traders were part of this grouping. Craft
workers were valued for their skills. Some were self-employed, others worked
primarily for upper-class patrons, and still others were permanently attached
to institutions such as palaces and temples. The state and the upper classes
were the major consumers of the work produced by the most skillful artisans.
The servants of the upper classes formed an occupationally and socially
diverse group. They were secretaries, guards, hairdressers, and other personal
attendants, cooks and other types of skilled household staff, and unskilled
workers who ground grain, hauled water, and disposed of waste. All these tasks
were also performed by slaves, but skilled free staff would have been viewed as
dependent specialists, equivalent to craft workers, while free manual labourers
would have been equated with landless farm labourers.
The bulk of commoners, probably amounting to 80 percent or more of the
total population, were farmers. Some farmers had legal rights to land, either as
owners or renters; others were tied to land owned by others, while still others
were landless labourers. Less secure rights to land generally correlated with
lower social status.
Yoruba land was held collectively by patrilineal extended families, although
such land reverted to the community if an extended family died out or moved
away. In Inka society farmers belonged to ayllus, which were endogamous

156
Sociopolitical Organization
kinship and corporate landholding groups. In the Valley of Mexico, the mace-
hualtin (tax payers) belonged to similar landholding calpollis. While ayllus
and calpollis collectively owned their land, individual families could not per-
manently leave these groups without forfeiting their right to a share of it. In
Mesopotamia collective ownership of land by patrilineal descent groups may
have been widespread at an early period and private ownership of small plots
of land may have resulted from the gradual breakup of such groups. Yet, as
a result of growing debts, small farmers tended to lose their land. When this
occurred, landless farmers had either to rent or sharecrop land owned by
others or to work as hired labourers (guruˇs, erin). Some of these became de-
pendents of temple estates while others did whatever jobs were available.
Gangs of Mesopotamian labourers made their way north each spring helping
to harvest the crops as they ripened (R. McC. Adams 1981: 145). The only
other civilization for which free landless labourers are recorded is the Valley
of Mexico, but these latter appear to have been immigrants from the north
who were trying to insert themselves into local societies. Most appear to have
found employment as burden carriers.
Some farmers were bound to land that was owned or otherwise controlled
by the state or by members of the upper classes. These farmers did not pay
taxes, but most of the surplus food they produced went directly to those who
controlled the land; hence they were considerably less well off than landown-
ing farmers. In the Valley of Mexico, the mayeque, who may have made up
30 percent of the Aztec population (van Zantwijk 1985: 271), were farmers
who did not own land of their own or pay taxes, as the macehualtin did, but
worked land owned by the crown. The produce of some of this land was in-
tended for the upkeep of the palace, while other plots were assigned to the
king, other members of the royal family, and nobles, including ofﬁcials and
honoured warriors. The mayeque fought as soldiers during military campaigns
but do not appear to have been free to leave the estates on which they worked.
They also would have been landless had they done so (Berdan 1982: 59–60;
Hassig 1988: 30; Offner 1983: 133).
At least some Egyptian villagers appear to have possessed their own land,
but it is uncertain whether this land was communally or family-owned. The
Egyptian central government established large numbers of estates to support
the royal court, royal funerary cults, and various ofﬁcials. Most of these estates
were located in less densely settled parts of Middle Egypt and the Delta. An
estate consisted of farmers supervised by an ofﬁcial living in a large house that
was also an administrative and storage facility. It is unclear whether farmers
were legally attached to such estates or free men who had been attracted to
them by promises of lower taxes (Kemp 1983: 85–92).

Class Systems and Social Mobility
157
In China farmers belonged to corporate lineages whose members inhabited
a settlement and worked adjacent plots of land. It is unclear, however, whether
most agricultural land belonged to lineages or was assigned to government
ofﬁcials.
slaves
The conceptualization and practice of slavery differed signiﬁcantly among early
civilizations (J. Watson 1980b). It is often suggested that a continuum of lower-
class people lived in various states of servitude to the upper classes (Pollock
1999: 121), and extreme Marxists have argued that in these ‘slave societies’
all the lower classes were slaves. Being bound to the land or to a particular
workshop or patron did not, however, in itself cause a person to be regarded
as a chattel. Individuals who were forced to work for creditors until a debt had
been paid off were different from people sold into permanent and perhaps
hereditary slavery because of indebtedness; they were in effect indentured
labourers. Among the Aztec and Yoruba, temporary debt slaves often lived in
their own homes and worked part of the time for themselves. Moreover, differ-
ent members of a family often substituted for one another (Bascom 1969: 23).
Slaves were sometimes distinguished from the rest of the population by in-
delible brands or by distinctive clothing or hairstyles. They (and often their
descendants) could be bought, sold, or reassigned as their owners wished, and
they were generally excluded from membership in kinship groups. It was their
owners who were answerable to the rest of society for their behaviour. Cus-
tomary or statute law not only protected owners’ rights to control and exploit
slaves but also limited forms of mistreatment that might have provoked slaves
to rebel. Slaves worked, normally without payment, as retainers, household ser-
vants, artisans, miners, construction workers, and farm labourers. They were
not, however, called upon to undertake tasks that were not also performed by
lower-class corv´ee labourers. Some slaves became trusted advisers and assis-
tants of kings and high ofﬁcials and thus acquired considerable informal power.
Slaves in early civilizations tended to be few compared with those of Classical
Greece and Rome.
Those who were enslaved included prisoners of war, criminals who had
been punished by being deprived of their freedom, and individuals who had
been sold to repay debts. Among the Aztec the latter included men who
had bankrupted themselves as a result of gambling (Dur´an 1971: 281). Slaves
were sometimes imported from less developed areas as tribute or merchandise.
These slaves were usually ethnically different from their masters. The legal sta-
tuses of various categories of slaves differed, but these differences were never

158
Sociopolitical Organization
speciﬁed in as much detail as they were in ancient Athens (Westermann 1955).
Temporary debt slaves enjoyed the most rights.
The Aztec generally sacriﬁced male prisoners of war and slaves delivered to
them as tribute, since the high population density of the Valley of Mexico meant
that there was little demand for additional labour. They appear to have em-
ployed slaves mainly as household servants, business agents, and concubines
(Soustelle 1961: 74). The Shang rulers also appear to have sacriﬁced large
numbers of military prisoners. Here population density seems to have been
low, kept that way despite natural increase by expansion into enemy territory.
The Inka did not enslave captives taken in battle; instead, dangerous enemy
leaders were executed, while their followers, except for a few who were slain
as human sacriﬁces in Inka victory celebrations, were sent home or resettled
elsewhere in the kingdom (Rowe 1944: 279). In their wars with neighbouring
city-states, the Early Dynastic Mesopotamians appear to have executed many
male prisoners and blinded or castrated others before setting them to work
performing repetitive forms of manual labour, usually on palace estates. Blind-
ing was intended to make it more difﬁcult for slaves to escape to their nearby
city-states, while castration would have made it impossible for them to resume
a normal life if they had returned. Numerous women captured in intercity
wars were set to work as unpaid weavers for Mesopotamian temple and palace
estates. The generic designation for a male slave was arad. Female slaves
were called g´eme, but that term also designated a free but dependent female
labourer (equivalent to the male guruˇs) (R. McC. Adams 1966: 102; Gelb 1973;
Lerner 1986: 78–83; Maisels 1990: 156; Postgate 1992: 254–55; Siegel 1947).
Incontrast,theEgyptians,withtheirlowoverallpopulationdensity,enslaved
large numbers of foreign captives (sqrw ‘nh˘ ). Male prisoners were employed
as quarrymen, construction workers, household servants, and farmers, and
whole families were settled as agricultural labourers. The Yoruba, who also
had much surplus land, tended to employ large numbers of slaves, originally
acquired as prisoners of war, as agricultural labourers, although others were
used as household servants, tax collectors, and soldiers and bodyguards for
prominent men (Goody 1980: 34–36). They sacriﬁced only a small number of
slaves.
Buying and selling slaves was a signiﬁcant activity in several early civiliza-
tions. Individual Mesopotamians preferred to purchase individuals who had
been born as slaves and were therefore habituated to slavery or had been
imported from distant lands and would have nowhere to which to escape.
The word for ‘slave’ was written with the sign combination nita (man) + kur
(mountain), suggesting that many of them came, either as prisoners of war or
by trade, from the Zagros Mountains to the east (Goody 1980: 18; Postgate

Class Systems and Social Mobility
159
1992: 106–7). In the Valley of Mexico there were specially designated markets
in major urban centres where slaves could be purchased for human sacriﬁce
or domestic service (Clendinnen 1991: 99). Slaves of local origin could not be
sold for sacriﬁce unless they had ﬂagrantly disobeyed successive owners. The
exportation and sale of slaves captured in war was a major source of wealth for
Yoruba military leaders and traders.
The treatment of slaves varied. Many of those owned by public institutions
were little valued as individuals and were routinely overworked, underfed, and
poorly housed and therefore suffered high mortality. Among them were the
female slaves set to work in large weaving establishments attached to temples
and palaces in Mesopotamia (Wright 1996b) and the gangs of men employed
full-time in construction and mining projects by the Egyptian state. The latter
included not only prisoners of war but Egyptians who had been sentenced
to hard labour for evading corv´ee duty and other illegal acts (Hayes 1955;
Kemp 1983: 83). Among the Aztec, debt slaves could accumulate earnings,
own property, purchase their freedom, and marry, and their children were
born free. The descendants of prisoners of war remained slaves for three
generations and those of people enslaved as punishment for treason for four
(L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 402; Soustelle 1961: 74–78).
While there is no evidence of legal slavery among the Inka, there were two
categoriesofpeoplewhoresembledslavesinthatthestatetookthemfromtheir
ayllus as children and, if they were not soon slain as human sacriﬁces, assigned
them to the perpetual service of high-ranking individuals or state institutions.
The aqllakuna (chosen women) who were not distributed as concubines to
the king and to men the king wished to honour were conﬁned for the rest
of their lives to closed houses (aqllawasi). There, as women consecrated to the
service of the sun god, in addition to their religious duties they had to weave,
brew corn beer, and cook food for the state. They were probably better fed
and housed than most of the population but were forbidden to marry or to
have unsupervised contact with other people (Kendall 1973: 192–93). The boys
taken from their families became yanakuna (male servants), who worked for
the king or were permanently assigned by him to particular nobles as household
servants, craftsmen, or farmers. They could not be bought, sold, or given
away by those for whom they worked. They were allowed to marry, probably
initially being assigned young aqllakuna for this purpose, and their descendants
inherited their status. They were not subject to any form of taxation, and the
persons or institutions for whom they worked were responsible for seeing that
they and their families were properly fed, housed, and clothed. Yet everything
they produced belonged to their employers. The legal position of yanakuna
probably differed little from that of farmers bound to the land or craftsmen

160
Sociopolitical Organization
tied to the service of particular institutions in other early civilizations, but
their involuntary servitude in return for their keep resembled the economic
role elsewhere played by slaves (Murra 1980: 165–77).
Shang records identify, in addition to tax-paying farmers, usually called ren,
an inferior group of zhong who did not own land of their own. Their duties
included agricultural labour, tending animals, military service, and construct-
ing buildings – the same work that other commoners performed through the
corv´ee – but they appear to have worked full-time for the king. Men of the
same or analogous status were probably attached to aristocratic households. It
is unknown under what conditions the zhong lived (Keightley 1969: 66–144),
but it is not evident that they were slaves. In many ways they seem to have
resembled yanakuna. In China prisoners of war may have been put to work as
slaves until their fate was decided. Lin Chao (1972: 67–69) suggests that the
term chen originally designated a slave, possibly of foreign origin, who per-
sonally served the king and only gradually came to mean a civil servant. David
Keightley (1969: 357–79), however, ﬁnds no conclusive evidence of slavery in
Shang China.
In Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, foreign prisoners of war and tax default-
ers became government slaves (h
• mw nswt), and some of them were assigned
to high-ranking individuals. Yet in Egypt slaves were not numerous. There
appears to have been relatively little private buying or selling of slaves or en-
slavement of individuals for debt. The terms h
• m and b3k, which later meant
‘slave’, appear originally to have designated free servants and retainers respec-
tively (Wenke 1997: 47). Government slaves and their children seem to have
been absorbed over a few generations into the commoner class. At the same
time, many commoners were bound as agricultural and non-agricultural work-
ers (mrt) to the service of nobles and ofﬁcials (Loprieno 1997; Moreno Garc´ıa
1998). Thus in the three early civilizations where slavery was entirely absent
or limited in extent, the bonding of commoners to the service of upper-class
people appears to have placed some free persons in an analogous situation of
servitude. All three civilizations in which this happened were territorial states.
social mobility
Social mobility was limited in early civilizations by the slowness of technolog-
ical and social change and by a general lack of opportunity to gain access to
knowledge from outside the social group into which a person was born. Most
technical knowledge was transmitted from one generation to the next within
such groups. In addition, in most early civilizations upward mobility either
was regulated by the state or required recognition by the upper classes. This

Class Systems and Social Mobility
161
permitted members of the upper classes to dictate the terms on which their
privileges and powers might be shared with others. The Yoruba positively val-
ued social competition and, at least during the colonial era, expected families
to rotate through cycles of commoner and upper-class status (Stone 1997). Yet
their leaders tried to reinforce their own privileged positions and control social
climbing. Leo Frobenius (1913, 1: 174–75) reports that in precolonial times
the Ogboni society, to which all town and palace title-holders were expected
to belong, could through divination justify judicially killing or offering up as
human sacriﬁces individuals who were in the process of acquiring slaves and
wealth. Such persons were charged with treason, and after they were executed
their possessions were divided among the Ogboni and other ofﬁcials. Frobe-
nius noted, however, that such treatment was meted out only to upstarts who
lacked inﬂuential relatives to protect them. This was therefore an effective
way to restrict upper-class privileges to a small number of already powerful
lineages. To consolidate their higher social standing, vertically mobile Yoruba
also had to acquire titles that were controlled by the king.
Vertical mobility was most common in states that were expanding geograph-
ically or economically, where the need for more decision-makers and adminis-
trators resulted in the recruitment of new members to the upper and adminis-
trative classes. As the Inka state expanded, for example, the Inka rulers turned
their earliest supporters into Inka-by-privilege, giving them hereditary upper-
class status and making them junior partners in governing the kingdom. Up-
ward mobility was most restricted in conquered states and chiefdoms, where
resources were more limited than they might otherwise have been because of
the need to pay tribute to a hegemonic power.
The Aztec illustrate the vertical mobility that occurred in a hegemonic city-
state. As we have seen, warriors who captured four prisoners became eagle
nobles. The state supplied them with food rations or the produce of a plot of
land worked by mayeque, which allowed them to live as pipiltin, and when
they married noble women their children by these women became hereditary
nobles. Some young male commoners who displayed talents that would make
them effective high-level priests or administrators were sent to the special
schools (calmecac) where the sons of nobles were educated. As adults, they
too were absorbed into the nobility. Inﬂuential nobles sought to have their
sons by commoner secondary wives and concubines made pages at the royal
court, where they would receive special training and make contacts that would
help them achieve access to high ofﬁce (Dur´an 1964: 222–23).
By the reign of Mochtezuma II, the Aztec tributary system was no longer
expanding rapidly, and the king had adopted a policy of drawing the sons
of favoured subject rulers from nearby city-states into the administrative

162
Sociopolitical Organization
hierarchy in order to establish Aztec hegemony, at least within the Valley
of Mexico, on a broader, more cooperative basis. To accomplish this goal,
Mochtezuma forbade sons of Aztec nobles to become pages unless their moth-
ers as well as their fathers had been hereditary nobles. This decree debarred
sons by secondary marriages, as well as the sons of eagle nobles, from high
public ofﬁce. It also created a major cleavage within the nobility by distin-
guishing an inferior rank of nobles, descended from only one noble parent,
from a superior rank, descended from two. Mochtezuma is said to have dis-
missed and even executed nobles who were assigned to this new, lower status
but had received high ofﬁces during previous reigns (Dur´an 1964: 223). In
order to emphasize military achievement as the principal service to the state,
from earliest times the Aztec had denied ofﬁcial ofﬁces to the sons of wealthy
merchants and had not allowed them to marry noble women.
Requiring formal recognition for advancement was not, however, the only
way of limiting vertical mobility. Beginning in the Old Kingdom, Egyptian
writings extolled the ideal of the man who achieved success by winning the
favour of his superiors because of his ability and hard work. Egyptian wis-
dom literature emphasized the importance of honouring such men for their
achievements and not despising their humble origins (Lichtheim 1973: 66).
Yet these same wisdom texts took the form of instructions prepared by an
aged ofﬁcial for the beneﬁt of his son and eventual successor. Even though
each ofﬁcial had to work his way up through a series of lesser ofﬁces before
taking over his father’s position or a higher one, inheritance of high ofﬁces
was regarded as normal. While the image of the self-made man expressed
the ofﬁcial ideal of a royal bureaucracy, in reality positions tended to be
inherited.
Another signiﬁcant way to restrict vertical mobility was by strengthening
class endogamy. Sometimes this involved discouraging or explicitly forbidding
marriages between the upper and lower classes. Upper-class men were gen-
erally expected to marry within their own class, and primary marriages with
lower-class women were thought inappropriate. In societies where it was ac-
cepted that lower-class women might be secondary wives or concubines of
upper-class men, the children of these marriages were often subjected to so-
cial disabilities such as those imposed on them by Mochtezuma II. To an even
greater extent, however, vertical mobility was restricted by various forms of
personal self-interest favouring strategic intermarriage within both the upper
and the lower classes.
In general, farmers who collectively possessed land sought to prevent its
alienation by practicing endogamy within units such as ayllus or calpollis. While
the patrilineal Yoruba did not do this, their laws forbade husbands and wives

Class Systems and Social Mobility
163
to inherit from one another in order to ensure that landholdings remained
within the same patrilineage (Ajisafe 1924: 8). Farmers and craft workers
each had their own local interests and, even if their lineages or communities
were exogamous, preferred to contract marriages with groups of similar status
that were close at hand. In this way, such groups could assure themselves of
maximum local support in times of difﬁculty. Aztec who practised a particular
craft, such as metalworking or feather working, belonged to a single calpolli.
The children of Egyptian skilled workers who lived in the same community
frequently married each other. Chinese crafts were generally lineage-based,
but artisans belonging to different clans living close to each other probably
intermarried.
Members of the upper class married over a much wider area than did the
lower classes. In city-state systems, the royal families of different states fre-
quently intermarried to reinforce political alliances. The Aztec kings married
theirdaughtersorthoseofleadingnoblestomajortributaryrulerstoencourage
their allegiance and provide heirs to the thrones of these subordinate states
who were close relatives (Hodge 1984: 138–39). Maya kings married their
daughters to rulers of less powerful neighbouring states in the hope of creat-
ing enduring alliances that would be to their advantage (Schele and Mathews
1991: 245). In Shang China the king appears to have married the daughters
of numerous subordinate lords and in turn used his daughters to consolidate a
network of marital alliances with his more powerful subjects (Vandermeersch
1977: 275–77).
The ultimate assertion of political power was for a ruler to reject marital
ties and hence obligations to other groups. Egyptian and Inka rulers married
their sisters and half-sisters and, in the case of some New Kingdom pharaohs,
their daughters and took female members of high-ranking families as sec-
ondarywives.WiththeInka,thesewomenusuallycamefrompowerfulpanaqas
(Patterson 1991). Yet, because of the transcendant status of Egyptian kings,
relatives of royal wives did not refer in inscriptions to the special relations to
kings that such marriages created (Robins 1993: 28). Daughters of Egyptian
kings also married members of the high nobility. From a male point of view
these marriages had the disadvantage that a husband was expected to defer to
his royal wife. In New Kingdom Egypt, Egyptian rulers married the daughters
of foreign kings but refused, as a sign of their exclusive status, to allow their
daughters to marry foreign kings (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986: 58; Robins
1993: 28, 32).
Marriages were also a way to construct networks of alliances uniting upper-
class families. While in city-state systems such marriages, except at the highest
rank, tended to be within state borders, marriage alliances joined high-level

164
Sociopolitical Organization
upper-class families over large areas. Lower-class alliances rarely extended
beyond a single ward, community, or district. Especially in territorial states,
this gave the upper class a considerable advantage in its efforts to control the
lower classes despite its numerical inferiority.
Rulers and high ofﬁcials often had children by numerous wives and concu-
bines. If all of them had been able to claim a share of family privileges and
resources, it could have undermined the power of the upper classes; hence
it was desirable to prevent the undue expansion of the upper classes. Yoruba
kings possessed large estates and numerous slaves, but these were inherited
with the ofﬁce rather than by their children. Obas’ children could inherit
only the wealth that their fathers and mothers had acquired personally in the
course of their lifetimes. Hence those sons and grandsons of a king who had
little hope of ever becoming kings themselves tried to insert themselves into
their mothers’ patrilineages and claim a share of their resources (Lloyd 1962:
44; Peel 1983: 59). As a result, after a few generations a Yoruba king had few
identiﬁable descendants. The children of Inka kings other than their royal suc-
cessors formed corporate descent groups that had to preserve their wealth and
power by continuing to marry into the royal family and supporting successful
candidates for the throne. In Egypt members of the hereditary nobility had to
struggle as individuals to hold onto lucrative state ofﬁces, and those who were
unsuccessful slipped into the scribal class. In China, where access to high ofﬁce
was channelled by kinship relations, junior branches of noble families likewise
tended to move downward from a governing role to a lower administrative level
(Vandermeersch 1980: 162). On occasion, as with the changes introduced by
Mochtezuma II, the state intervened to debar lesser members of the nobility
from access to major ofﬁces. While few of these actions prevented individuals
from inheriting noble status, they did deprive junior or less successful individ-
uals of the means to realize what was regarded as an appropriate lifestyle. As
upper-class individuals declined into the lower administrative class, this pro-
cess simultaneously forged closer bonds and some antagonism between the
upper-class and administrative levels.
In Mesopotamia and elsewhere the children of purchased slaves belonged to
their owners, but there appear to have been relatively few impediments to the
absorption of slaves into the commoner class. Household slaves, for the most
part, could earn or purchase their freedom, and their children were sometimes
born free. Around a.d. 1505, the Aztec and Texcocans abolished hereditary
slavery except for the descendants of prisoners of war and traitors (Offner 1983:
309; Soustelle 1961: 76–77). Egyptians frequently freed household slaves, and
prosperous farmers and dependent specialists who were childless sometimes
adopted their freed slaves and even arranged for them to marry into their

Class Systems and Social Mobility
165
families in order to ensure that they would care for their former owners in
their old age (Robins 1993: 77). In Early Dynastic III Mesopotamian city-
states, debt slaves were periodically freed in connection with general debt
amnesties (Zagarell 1986: 416). Yoruba extended families also frequently freed
slaves and adopted them as low-ranking lineage members who worked as farm-
ers or professional soldiers (Akintoye 1971: 39–40, 52). In the early civilizations
the upper classes relied principally on the productive capacity of free farmers,
using slaves only as an auxiliary source of labour. Under these circumstances,
the best way to control and motivate slaves was to keep their expectations of
freedom relatively high. It is the limited utility of slaves as a source of labour
that accounts for their frequent manumission and relatively small numbers.
Class systems in early civilizations were characterized by limited vertical
mobility. Class membership was determined mainly by birth and, while verti-
cal mobility did occur (especially in societies that were expanding politically
or economically), promotion in the social hierarchy was decided in the ﬁnal
instance not by personal achievement but by royal or upper-class recognition,
the criteria for which varied from one early civilization to another.
similarities and differences
All early civilizations had class systems. Yet, among early civilizations, there
were signiﬁcant variations in the extent to which class replaced kinship as
the framework of social relations. In some early civilizations kinship relations
occurred only within classes. In others, class divisions cut across functioning
kinship networks. There were also variations in the extent to which the upper
classes were formally delineated and membership in them was hereditary.
Where both of these features were present, it is possible to speak of the upper
classes as a nobility. Slavery, while not of major economic importance in any
early civilization, appears to have been more prominent in city-state systems
than in territorial states. There is no clear evidence of its presence in Inka Peru
or Shang China.
In general, class divisions other than slavery appear to have been formally
delineated more consistently in territorial states than in city-states. In highland
Mesoamerica and probably among the Maya, class differences were heredi-
tary; in Mesopotamia classes were legally distinguished but individuals had to
achieve and maintain upper-class membership. Among the Yoruba, the upper
class was deﬁned by royally conferred titles and ofﬁces that certain kin groups
sought to retain. In all these cases, the upper classes, for political and eco-
nomic reasons, placed more emphasis on solidarity with unrelated members
of their own class than with the lower-class members of the clans and lineage

166
Sociopolitical Organization
groups to which they belonged and whose support they frequently needed.
Especially in territorial states, upper-class solidarity was much more extensive
geographically than lower-class solidarity, which normally manifested itself at
a local level.
Thecross-culturalsimilaritiesinclassstructureweretheexpressionofafairly
speciﬁc set of beliefs about the nature of status that were shared by all the early
civilizations. It was agreed that giving orders was more prestigious than having
to obey orders, that not having to work was superior to having to perform
manual labour, that possessing specialized knowledge and skills was better
than not possessing them, that wealth was superior to poverty, that having
land was preferable to not having it, and that being free was better than being
owned. Finally, although it was accompanied by greater risk of incurring
the displeasure of the upper class or being unduly exploited by it, ordinary
people saw more opportunities for bettering themselves in geographical and
social proximity to the powerful than in remoteness from them. It was these
propositions, which reﬂect considerable uniformity in human thinking about
the nature of inequality in complex societies, that generated the multilayered
social structures just outlined.

9 Family Organization and
Gender Roles
M
any different forms of kin relations were associated with early civi-
lizations. While these relations were intimately connected with fam-
ily life, residence patterns, marital practices, and the nurturing of children,
they were also associated with broader sociocultural practices such as land-
holding, agricultural production, craft organization, inheritance of property,
political and economic activities, value systems, and religious beliefs. They
also constituted the primary sphere in which gender roles were deﬁned, al-
though class differences also affected these roles. Lower-class women in all
early civilizations cooked, cleaned houses, cared for children, and spun and
wove to provide clothing for their families, but the division of domestic labour
among them varied according to the number of women who lived together and
how they allocated household tasks among themselves. The division of labour
and relations of authority between men and women also varied signiﬁcantly
from one civilization to another and according to class.
The seven early civilizations provide examples of kinship systems charac-
terized by patrilineal descent groups (Shang and Zhou China, Yoruba-Benin,
Classic Maya, Mesopotamia), endogamous descent groups or demes (Valley
of Mexico, Inka), and non-corporate descent (ancient Egypt). The Egyptians
did not have, beyond the nuclear family, any kinship unit that possessed land,
political power, or a sense of corporate identity. In no two early civilizations
was family organization precisely the same.
kin and gender relations
Family life in Shang China was structured by patrilineal descent. Each corpo-
rate descent group (zu) inhabited a single community, and its male members
worked a tract of land or practised a particular craft. Among the upper classes,
two or more generations of a family belonging to a corporate descent group
167

168
Sociopolitical Organization
lived, under the authority of its senior male member, in a house composed
of living rooms, shrines, reception halls, and work areas arranged around a
series of open courts. Commoners appear to have lived in smaller, possibly
nuclear-family houses, but married sons remained subject to the authority
of their fathers and uncles. Each corporate descent group traced its origin
to a single male ancestor who was venerated by all his male descendants.
Within the descent group patrilineal descent lines were hierarchically orga-
nized, with descent from elder brothers invariably ranking higher than descent
from younger brothers. The oldest member of the senior line (da zong) was
the group’s leader and the sole person who could perform rituals honouring
the group’s deceased founder and chief guardian spirit. When a group had
expanded until it contained over one hundred nuclear families (this was esti-
mated to take seven generations), it split into two and the junior branch moved
off to establish a new group.
It is generally assumed that already in Shang times all the patrilineal descent
groups that could trace themselves back to a common ancestor shared a sur-
name and constituted an exogamous clan (xing). Clans took the form of large
ramages, which meant that their various descent lines (zu, shi) were ranked in
terms of their genealogical proximity to the clan’s founder. The descent groups
which belonged to the same clan were often geographically widely separated
from one another (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 148–50). The leading clan on the
central plain of northern China during the Shang period was the Zi, and its
senior branch (wang zu) supplied the Shang kings.
While this sort of clan organization was indisputably the basis of society
in the Western Zhou period, L´eon Vandermeersch (1977: 203) argues that,
apart from the Zi clan, there is no evidence of clan organization in the Shang
period. He maintains that only individual patrilineal descent groups existed and
that the king alone practised an ancestral cult. Vandermeersch refers to high-
ranking patrilineal descent groups as ‘territorial houses’. Most scholars assume,
however, that it is the documentation for clans rather than clans themselves
that is lacking for the Shang period. Attempts by Kwang-chih Chang and Liu
Binxiong to demonstrate that each Shang clan was divided into ten sections
held together by cross-cousin marriage remain unsubstantiated (K. Chang
1978; Vandermeersch 1977: 284–93).
Shang rules of exogamy allowed marriage only between different descent
groups and probably only between different clans. Commonly, two families
appear to have been united over many generations by men’s marrying cousins
fromtheirmothers’families,ideallymothers’brothers’daughters(Granet1958
[1930]: 156–57). Women were not only required to live with their husbands’
families but upon marriage forfeited membership in the lineage groups into

Family Organization and Gender Roles
169
which they had been born and joined their husbands’ clans and ancestral cults.
Thus a woman’s position in Chinese society was determined in turn by that of
her father, her husband, and her son. Women nevertheless played an important
role alongside their husbands in the ancestral cult and other religious rituals
of the family into which they had married. Moreover, women who bore sons
couldexpecttobeveneratedafterdeathintheancestralcultsoftheirhusbands’
families.
Most lower-class Shang Chinese were monogamous. To ensure the birth of
sons, who would perpetuate their lineage, upper-class men frequently acquired
secondary wives. In Zhou times these were often younger sisters or other close
relatives of a chief wife who came with her as part of her marriage suite. If the
chief wife died, one of her female relatives would replace her, thus maintaining
the family alliance (Vandermeersch 1977: 311–12). The male heir of a man’s
position was normally the eldest son of his ﬁrst chief wife.
Shang kings appear to have married many women, thus forging or renew-
ing links between the royal family and leading lineages throughout the Shang
kingdom. There is also evidence of royal endogamy within the Zi clan, to which
both King Wu Ding and his consort Fu Hao appear to have belonged (P. Chang
1986: 130). In addition to bearing children, these women, and perhaps the
wives of princes and other ladies living at the royal court, assisted the male
relatives of the royal family in the work of administering the kingdom. They
announced royal decrees, delivered formal messages, performed ancestral rit-
uals and other religious rites, organized agricultural production, supervised
the collection of taxes, raised troops, and on rare occasions led armies. Most
important, they conducted royal business with their parental families and the
regions where they had been born. They may have been the most effective
links between the monarch and powerful families living in various parts of
the Shang kingdom. Thus they performed many of the same court duties as
were later performed by eunuchs, which are not reported before the Zhou
period (Creel 1937: 293). In Zhou times one of the two chief royal stewards
(zai) still had to receive instructions from and report to the queen (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 255). This practice may have been a vestige of the important
administrative roles formerly played by women at the royal court. Mark Lewis
(1990: 73) points out that in the Eastern Zhou period Chinese royal ofﬁcials
were regarded as having the same subordinate position in relation to the king
as royal wives and concubines and treated these women as potential rivals. At
least at the royal court, women appear to have played a different and more
important role during the Shang period than in later times.
In southern Mesopotamia, a father and some of his sons or several broth-
ers, together with their wives and young children, often formed a patrilineal

0
10 m
0
40 m
0
10 m
0
10 m
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
court
0
10 m
0
50 m
garden
(no scale supplied)
(no scale supplied)

Family Organization and Gender Roles
171
extended family. These domestic units, as well as larger temple or palace es-
tates, were called ´e in Sumerian and bˆıtum in Akkadian, words meaning both
‘house’ and ‘household’ (Pollock 1999: 117–18). In the countryside, a num-
ber of rooms, which housed nuclear families or were used for storage, were
loosely arranged around an open compound. In urban centres, houses were
arranged more compactly, with rooms opening off one or more interior court-
yards (Fig. 9.1). In general, extended families appear to have been composed
of fewer nuclear families in urban centres than in the countryside. Extended
households in cities also seem to have diminished in size over time. Fam-
ilies that were patrilineally related sometimes lived in adjacent houses, but
there is no evidence that city wards were kinship units. The governing of these
wards by mayors and councils made up of the heads of leading households
suggests that most of them were not (Crawford 1991: 93–95; Postgate 1992:
82–94, 310; Stone 1987; Van De Mieroop 1999: 104–6). Akkadian-speaking
Mesopotamians seem to have formed larger kin groups than Sumerians, and
wards of Semitic-speakers may have consisted largely of patrilineally related
kin more often than was the case among Sumerian-speakers.
Sons inherited from their fathers land, houses, furniture, animals, slaves, and
temple positions. Joint ownership of family property became less common over
time, the normal practice being for brothers to divide their father’s estate after
his death. Either this division was into equal shares or the eldest brother was
awarded between 10 and 100 percent more than the rest. In return, eldest
sons were expected to care for parents in their old age and make offerings to
their spirits after they died. The idea of extended families’ holding property in
common persisted to the extent that individuals wishing to sell their share of
a house or family land had ﬁrst to offer it to family members and obtain their
approval (Postgate 1992: 94–101).
9.1. Houses in early civilizations: (a) plan of a large Middle Kingdom Egyptian ofﬁcial’s res-
idence at Kahun; (b) an ordinary house from Kahun – Kahun was established to house the
mortuary priests of King Senwosret II; (c) elevation and plan of a Mesopotamian private house
at Ur, from the Isin-Larsa period; (d) reconstruction of such a house; (e) street plan of a small
section of Ur during the Old Babylonian period; (f) lower-class Classic Maya house group;
(g) upper-class house from Chiconauhtla, near Texcoco, in the Valley of Mexico; (h) an Inka
double-kancha enclosure at Ollantaytambo – while these particular structures were constructed
by the government, it is unknown what class of people inhabited them (illustrations not to
common scale). Sources: (a), (b) after Kemp 1989: 152, 158; (c), (d) after L. Woolley, The
Sumerians (Oxford, 1928): ﬁgs. 26, 27; (e) after J. Hawkes & L. Woolley, History of Mankind,
Vol. 1 (New York, 1963): 425; (f) after Wilk & Ashmore 1988: 133; (g) after G. Kubler, The
Art and Architecture of Ancient America (Harmondsworth, 1962): 55; (h) after Gasparini &
Margolies 1980: 190.

172
Sociopolitical Organization
Daughters did not inherit property as such, but in any division of a man’s
estate land and property had to be set aside to provide dowries for unmarried
daughters. Rich men often installed one or more of their daughters as priests in
elitereligiousinstitutions.InOldBabyloniantimessomeofthesenaditumlived
as celibates in walled cloisters (gagˆum) attached to major temples (Postgate
1992: 130–31). This arrangement required an endowment, equivalent to a
dowry, for their support, but it was anticipated that these endowments would
return to their brothers after they died. Thus making it impossible for some
daughters to marry was a way of avoiding the alienation of family property.
Women were legally subject to their husbands, who were designated as their
owners (bˆelu) (Bott´ero 1992: 186). In records they are often referred to not by
their names but as the wife (dam), mother (amma), sister (nia), or daughter
(dumu, munus) of their male kin (Glassner 1989: 82–83). Although women
were not conﬁned to their homes and appeared as witnesses and plaintiffs
in lawsuits (Lerner 1986: 104), any property that married women possessed
(mainly in the form of dowries) was controlled by their husbands, fathers, or
brothers. Respectable women were required to avoid all extramarital sexual re-
lations, while men were free to engage in them provided their female partners
were adults and unmarried (Rohrlich 1980).
Marriages tended to occur among families of equivalent social standing and
were arranged by adult males of these families, normally either the groom or
his father and the bride’s father. Upper-class families used daughters to create
and strengthen economically and politically advantageous alliances. Girls were
frequently betrothed in infancy but continued to live with their parents until
their marriage. They sometimes began to have sexual relations with their future
spouses prior to marriage. The groom was required to provide betrothal
and bridal gifts and the bride’s father a dowry, which could be substantial.
The dowry was managed by the bride’s husband and returned to her on his
death (Lerner 1986: 107–13). With the approval of legal authorities, men were
able to divorce wives they found difﬁcult to live with. A divorced woman’s
dowry had to be returned to her unless she chose to continue to live in her
former husband’s home. When a woman died, her dowry passed to her sons
or, if there were none, to her father or brother. Marriage contracts, written or
verbal, could specify special terms for mutual separation, preclude wives from
being enslaved for debts their husbands had incurred prior to marriage, and
specify special property rights (107).
Marriage was predominantly monogamous. Only a few well-to-do men had
secondary spouses (aˇsˇsatu) or slave concubines (esertu). Such women were
often supplied by a principal wife (h˘ ˆırtu) who was unable to bear a child. Sec-
ondary wives or concubines were also provided for their husbands by certain

Family Organization and Gender Roles
173
high-ranking female priests, who were permitted to marry but required to
abstain from sexual intercourse. In all these situations the principal wife was
recognized as the female head of the family (Bott´ero 1992: 186).
A king normally had a single wife and ﬁve to eight children. Some rulers
of the Ur III Dynasty had more than ﬁfty offspring, many of them apparently
by royal concubines. The seclusion of royal women and the use of eunuchs
to guard them appear to have begun in the Ur III period. Kings’ wives and
daughters were often educated and performed various political and economic
administrative duties. Royal wives managed estates belonging to the palace
and to temples, supervised various economic activities, and sometimes acted
as regents and representatives of rulers. They frequently exchanged presents
just as kings did (Lerner 1986: 61–69; Postgate 1992: 148–49; Silver 1986: 41–
42). Although kings sometimes appointed daughters to be the high priests of
city gods in an attempt to expand royal control over major temples (Postgate
1992: 26), their wives do not appear to have played a major role in state
religious rituals, nor are they represented alongside their husbands in art. In
state rituals the female counterpart of the king appears to have been a female
priest. While kings sometimes married the daughters of foreign rulers, most
royal wives were of local origin, perhaps reﬂecting the pressing need for most
kings to consolidate alliances within their own city-states.
Other upper-class women played various public roles, mainly religious in
nature. Where the principal city deity was male, the top-ranking cult priest
was normally a woman (Oates 1978: 476). Such women were appointed by a
male ofﬁcial (usually the king) and ofﬁciated in temples managed by males.
There were other religious roles for women from wealthy families, such as
high-status temple devotees, whose duties in Old Babylonian times included
presenting offerings to deities on special occasions and tending to their sanc-
tuaries (R. Harris 1975: 307–9). All these women, whether or not they led
cloistered lives, were required to remain celibate. They could engage in busi-
ness dealings, which augmented the endowments that supported them (Silver
1986: 42–44), and possessed their own seals. Other women, apparently of lower
social status, worked for temples in less prestigious ritual capacities. Some of
them joined associations of prostitutes that were connected to temples of the
fertility goddess, Inanna (R. Harris 1989: 149). These associations included
married women who had abandoned their husbands and women who had
joined them as children (Bott´ero 1992: 189–90).
WhilethelegalrightsofSumerianwomenwerelimited,atleastsomewomen
from well-to-do families held administrative posts, owned and bought prop-
erty, engaged in business, and testiﬁed at legal hearings (Glassner 1989: 83;
Oates 1978: 478; Van De Mieroop 1989). From Old Babylonian times there is

174
Sociopolitical Organization
mention of female scribes’ serving cloistered female priests (R. Harris 1975:
196; 1989). At the lower end of the social spectrum, women ran taverns, en-
gagedinfreelanceprostitution,anddabbledinwitchcraft,livingonthemargins
of society both socially and geographically. Many of them resided and carried
on business in isolated locations near the city walls. Lacking families or protec-
tors, they provided examples of an improper female lifestyle and were often
brutally treated. It was maintained that prostitutes made poor wives because
they were untrained and not disposed to look after a home and family (Bott´ero
1992: 195). Also badly treated because they lacked male protectors were the
single women, probably slaves of foreign origin, who worked alongside female
members of debtor families in cloth factories belonging to palaces and temples.
The women at the bottom of Mesopotamian society provided object lessons
that to be secure and respected a woman needed a father, husband, brother, or
son who was willing and able to protect her and defend her interests (Bott´ero
1992: 193–98).
The Yoruba were organized as patrilineal extended families (idile) that
owned residential property in a town or city and farmland in the surround-
ing countryside. In the southern Yoruba states, located in the tropical-forest
zone, extended families tended to live in clusters of small multigenerational
houses. On the savanna to the north, where there was greater need for formal
military organization, entire extended families lived in single large compounds
(ile) surrounded by stamped-earth walls more than two metres high (Lloyd
1962). More than two hundred people sometimes occupied a single com-
pound. Within such a unit individual adults had single rooms of their own ar-
ranged around a series of open courtyards. These compounds also contained
shrines, storerooms, reception rooms, and sometimes even a prison where
family members could be conﬁned.
Clans made up of a number of extended families (agbo ile, many com-
pounds) that traced descent from a still more remote male ancestor (orisun,
spring) sometimes lived adjacent to one another and formed wards or localities
within a community. These groupings were also called idile. Each clan had its
own oral history (itan), and its members shared distinctive personal names
(orile), greetings, hairstyles, facial scars, food taboos, customs, and tutelary
deities.
Every Yoruba extended family had as its head (bale) its eldest competent
male member, regardless of his genealogical relation to his predecessor. Within
theextendedfamily,malesenioritywasreckonedbydateofbirthandfemalese-
niority by the length of time spent with the husband’s relatives. The head of the
idile was usually not one of the extended-family members who held the idile’s
town and palace titles. The bale was responsible for worshipping the extended

Family Organization and Gender Roles
175
family’s gods and ancestors and for preparing supernatural ‘medicines’ that
kept family members healthy and harmonious. He also dealt with government
ofﬁcials on behalf of the extended family and was responsible to them for his
family’s good behaviour. The bale had the power to punish members of his
extended family for various forms of misbehaviour. This power was exercised
by a court composed of the bale, elderly members of the family, and its titled
ofﬁce-holders (Bascom 1944; 1969: 42–45; Lloyd 1955).
Yoruba patrilineages were exogamous, and marriage was forbidden with ma-
ternal kinsmen over at least seven generations. Membership in an extended
familywaslimitedtothechildrenofitsmalemembers(omoile)andpeoplewho
had been formally adopted into it. Wives (aya ile) remained members of their
fathers’ patrilineage, as did ara ile, strangers who were allowed to live in a com-
pound but had not been adopted into its patrilineage (Bascom 1969: 43–44).
Edo (Benin) patrilineages were less elaborate than Yoruba ones. Only those
of high-ranking families were more than two or three generations deep. Land
tended to belong to communities rather than to kin groups, and titles were
inherited by eldest sons if they were inherited at all. Edo families lived in both
nuclear and extended-family residences (Bradbury 1957: 27–31).
The majority of older Yoruba men appear to have had more than one wife,
the number varying according to a man’s personal wealth. Multiple marriages
were generally agreeable to ﬁrst wives, who enjoyed seniority over junior wives
and were relieved by them of many household chores. Women normally mar-
ried only once, widows being inherited by their husbands’ brothers or sons
by other wives. Marriages were viewed as alliances between patrilineages and
constituted a means by which such groups could secure allies for factional com-
petition, trade, and warfare. Hence they were normally contracted between
families of roughly equal social status. Women from the highest-ranking fam-
ilies married either the king (who had many wives) or men from families of
equivalent status to their own (K. Barber 1991: 272), thereby reinforcing sol-
idarity among the most powerful men in each city-state. Class endogamy was
further encouraged by the increase in the bride-price with the status of the
bride’s family (Ajisafe 1924: 53; Lloyd 1974: 34).
Women married in their twenties and most men in their thirties, usually after
a long period spent working for their fathers; however, if a man were wealthy
his son might marry earlier. Girls were often betrothed in their infancy or even
before birth but remained in their fathers’ houses until they were married.
For the betrothal of an adult woman her own consent was required. Marriage
involved both a bride-price, normally paid in three installments by the groom
or his father, and in ordinary families a period of labour service by the groom
which compensated the bride’s family for the loss of her labour. A husband

176
Sociopolitical Organization
had to provide his wife with a room of her own for herself and her children,
adequate food and clothing, and some capital to begin trading. Divorce was
rare but could be obtained on grounds of a wife’s insanity, chronic illness, or
infertility and a husband’s laziness, indebtedness, or cruelty. A Yoruba woman
could own property in her own name and manage it even if she were married
(Bascom 1969: 59–65). Unmarried Yoruba women who became rich as traders
might marry other women, whose children became their heirs (Denzer 1994:
18). As part of their continuing afﬁliation with their natal patrilineages, women
regularly participated in religious rituals and celebrations at their fathers’ com-
pounds and were buried there (Bascom 1969: 60).
Use-rights to land, houses, and any other possessions of a patrilineage could
be transmitted permanently only to a man’s sons or, if he had none, to his
surviving brothers. Yoruba spouses were forbidden to inherit from one another.
This arrangement protected the collective possessions of a patrilineage against
alienation. A woman had access to her family’s agricultural land, houses, cult
places, and ﬁnancial help during her lifetime. Both men and women were able
to pass along to their children the wealth they had earned personally. A man’s
property was divided in equal shares among the children of each of his wives
rather than being bequeathed equally to each child (Lloyd 1962: 27, 292–307).
Women performed household chores under the supervision of the oldest
woman in the compound. They also had the right to engage in business out-
side the home. This was done especially by older women or by senior wives
in polygynous families, who could arrange for their children to be cared for
by their husbands’ younger wives. Many women engaged in local trade, sell-
ing family farm produce, crafts, and cooked food in the marketplaces. Other
women engaged in long-distance trade, and the most successful of them came
to own plantations and numerous slaves and even private armies. By being
able to lend food, weapons, and soldiers to military leaders, some of them also
became politically inﬂuential (W. Clarke 1972: 47, 86). They were rarely able,
however, to convert their economic inﬂuence into political power for them-
selves and were often accused of witchcraft by rivals of men whose political
careers they supported (K. Barber 1991: 232–35). Women also had a monopoly
on producing certain types of manufactured goods, such as pottery, dyed cloth,
palm and other vegetable oils, soap, mats, and beer (Denzer 1994: 7). Women
who manufactured these products tended to organize themselves in commu-
nity craft guilds. Some women fashioned inﬂuential roles as professional praise
singers and leaders of religious cults (K. Barber 1991). Female palace ofﬁcials,
who were appointed from among the inﬂuential women in the community,
helped to select and install new kings and were among their ofﬁcial advis-
ers and agents. Some of them undertook diplomatic missions to other states

Family Organization and Gender Roles
177
on behalf of the ruler. They also conducted rituals for both living and dead
kings. They had their own hierarchy of titles, and their public duties included
supervising the marketplaces. At Ife and Benin high-ranking women were rep-
resented in royal art, though less commonly than kings. Most of the domestic
labour within the palace was performed by less important female members of
the king’s household (Denzer 1994).
Royal wives were mostly of local origin. In Oyo new members of the state
council (Oyo Mesi) gave a daughter in marriage to the king. The king also
occasionally married royal women from non-Yoruba states such as Nupe and
Dahomey (R. Smith 1969: 112). Yoruba and Benin rulers strengthened al-
liances by sending some of their children to live with neighbouring kings
(Barnes and Ben-Amos 1989: 51). A king’s many wives were able to engage in
long-distance trade without having to pay the taxes that were normally imposed
on the movement of goods. Their savings provided an inheritance for their chil-
dren, who were unable to inherit land from their father because his ofﬁcial
estates passed intact to his successor, usually not his son. An oba could transmit
to his descendants only wealth that he had acquired prior to becoming king.
Maya families are generally assumed to have been patrilineal and patrilocal.
Extended families spanning two or three generations appear to have lived in
nuclear-family dwellings arranged around three or four sides of a courtyard.
Poor families lived in houses constructed of wattle and daub, top-ranking
ones in stone houses with poorer dwellings located nearby (Haviland 1968;
Tourtellot 1988). Each such residential group had its own cult centre, and
dead members were buried in the low earth platforms on which the main
buildings were erected. Patrilineal extended families appear to have been
exogamous, and immovable property and political ofﬁces were inherited pa-
trilineally (Abrams 1994; McAnany 1995; Wilk and Ashmore 1988). It has been
argued that patrilineal extended families were less important in major urban
centres such as Tikal than in smaller urban centres or the countryside. It is
unclear to what extent those who lived in a house cluster were members of
a single extended family; the poorer residents may have been dependents or
slaves (Gillespie 2000; Haviland 1988; 1992; Wilk 1988).
Upper-class women appear to have been of considerable importance, at least
ritually and symbolically. Children inherited their status and names from both
their fathers’ and their mothers’ patrilineages. This made marrying daughters
to the rulers of smaller, neighbouring states or communities a potent means
for a king to build political alliances. Female rulers, or at least regents, are
recorded at various times. Royal mothers appear to feature more prominently
thankings’wivesinMayaiconography.Royalwomenaredepictedparticipating
alongside kings and royal heirs in religious rites, especially the accession rituals

178
Sociopolitical Organization
that stressed the continuity and importance of royal dynasties (Graham 1991;
Joyce 1992; 2000: 54–89).
The Aztec emphasized patrilineal descent and had a kin terminology that
stretched over seven generations, but, as did the Maya, they derived signiﬁ-
cant social status from their mothers’ families. Ordinary Aztec families were
monogamous, but wealthy nobles often had secondary wives and concubines,
some of the latter having been acquired before marriage. Mochtezuma II was
reported to have had two wives and many concubines, by whom he had a total
of 150 children (Soustelle 1961: 178). The king of Texcoco was said to have had
more than two thousand ‘wives’ by whom he had had 144 children, 11 born of
his chief wife (Berdan 1982: 68).
Ordinary Aztec lived in extended-family houses constructed of stamped
earth. These houses, which normally housed two to six patrilineally or
bilaterally related nuclear families, had rooms arranged around two to four
sides of a courtyard in which many domestic activities occurred. There also
appear to have been special communal work areas for the women of the fam-
ily. Each nuclear family had its own room or suite of rooms. Noble families
lived in larger, often multistorey stone versions of such houses. In the coun-
tryside, extended-family houses were smaller, and there may also have been
small, detached nuclear-family dwellings (Calnek 1972: 109–11; 1976: 298–
300; Clendinnen 1991: 58).
Adjacent households belonged to the same calpolli or ward, each of which
had from a few hundred to several thousand members. In more remote and
rural parts of the valley calpollis tended to be small, were largely run by con-
sensus, and had commoners as leaders. In urban locations they were larger and
more hierarchical and their leaders had been co-opted into the hereditary no-
bility, with the result that they had access to additional land and resources from
outside their kinship groups. Calpollis were endogamous, collective landown-
ing groups. At least the larger ones had their own stone temples, commoner
schools, and governing hierarchies. The Aztec believed that it was hard for
persons to remain healthy if they remained for a long time out of sight of their
calpolli temple (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 409). Because calpollis were endog-
amous, patrilineal descent did not play a particularly important role in reg-
ulating inheritance. This made marriage patterns of little consequence from
the point of view of conserving communal property. Elderly women acted as
go-betweens in arranging marriages between families. It appears that, even
within calpollis, parents preferred marriages between families of equivalent
rank and status. Both celibacy and divorce were discouraged, but men were
allowed to divorce women who failed to produce children. Widows generally
married one of their husbands’ brothers. Men inherited their fathers’ personal

Family Organization and Gender Roles
179
possessions and women their mothers’. Subject to some form of consent by
calpolli members, public ofﬁces, including the leadership of calpollis, were in-
herited patrilineally, either from father to son or from elder to younger brother
(M. E. Smith 1996: 145–51; Spath 1973).
Aztec women were expected to be virgins when they married and, while
women were believed to continue to enjoy sex in old age more than men
did, to remain faithful to their husbands (Clendinnen 1991: 166). They were,
however, permitted to move about freely, engage in various part-time pro-
fessions, and spend their earnings as they pleased. Many women were active
in marketing, selling cooked food and cloth and the vegetables and hand-
icrafts produced by their male relatives or retailing goods purchased from
long-distance traders. In feather-working families women specialized in dy-
ing feathers. Other women embroidered cloth for temples, rich patrons, and
market sale. Still others catered parties for their neighbours (Clendinnen 1991:
161–63). Wives of long-distance traders managed their husbands’ business
from home while the latter were absent and may have engaged by proxy in
intercity trade (Clendinnen 1991: 135). Other women worked part-time as
midwives, curers, and diviners, perhaps possessing knowledge that was not
available to male physicians (Kellogg 1995).
Women also served as priests in local temples. Most of them did so on a
part-time basis, but some remained celibate and functioned full-time for long
periods as did many higher-ranking male priests. They never occupied the
highest levels of priestly hierarchies, however, and they depended for their
appointments on men (Kellogg 1995). For a woman to remain respectable she
either had to be married or, in the case of celibate female priests, remain part of
her birth family. Women who did not enjoy such protection were often forced
into prostitution. Captive women were kept in state-controlled ‘Houses of Joy’,
where they provided sexual entertainment for unmarried young warriors who
had captured enemy prisoners. Aztec women who did not have families might
work as prostitutes either on their own or under the supervision of a female
protector, usually plying their trade in public marketplaces (Clendinnen 1991:
163–65). Although women played a signiﬁcant role in Aztec military life by
preparing the food that soldiers carried with them on campaigns, the state
granted conquered land and tribute to male ofﬁcials and successful warriors
and not to women. Therefore women were unable to beneﬁt directly from the
vertical mobility that the development of tributary networks made possible
(Nash 1978).
Aztec kings married the daughters of high-ranking Aztec nobles and rulers of
friendly neighbouring states while bestowing their own daughters in marriage
on such men. Land owned by royal families was exchanged as part of the

180
Sociopolitical Organization
dowries associated with interstate marriages, but it was managed by women’s
husbands and sons, not by themselves (Hodge 1984: 138–39). Royal women
played no public roles in Aztec political and religious life, nor are they reported
tohaveappearedinpublicwiththeirhusbandsonanyofﬁcialoccasion.Regents
were appointed from the top ranks of hereditary male ofﬁcials. Nevertheless,
upper-class women played active roles in the political intrigues within and
among the royal and noble families of city-states (Joyce 2000: 133–75; van
Zantwijk 1994).
Most highland Andean nuclear families occupied one-room houses built of
adobe or rough ﬁeld stones. A small number of closely related nuclear fam-
ilies shared an enclosed compound (kancha), their individual houses being
arranged around the inside of the wall (Kendall 1973: 123–27). A number
of these extended families formed an ayllu or endogamous landholding group
consisting of a few hundred people or more. It is debated whether ayllus were a
primordial feature of Andean social organization or arose early in the Christian
era as a form of resistance against developing state structures (Isbell 1997).
Among the Inka and many other Central Andean highland groups descent was
patrilineal, but in some other highland groups it was matrilineal. Inka kin terms
reveal both patrilineal (Omaha) and matrilineal (Crow) tendencies, which may
indicate an underlying pattern of parallel descent (Lounsbury 1986; Zuidema
1977). It has also been argued that the Inka had parallel inheritance, with
some ofﬁces and property passing from fathers to sons and some from moth-
ers to daughters. Supporters of this theory argue that noble women inherited
ﬁelds from their mothers and female commoners inherited rights to ayllu land
which they surrendered upon marriage (Silverblatt 1987: 7, 219). Yet ayllu
land was assigned not to individuals but to nuclear families, and both land and
herds were regularly redistributed in accordance with the changing number
of children and other dependents that a couple had to support. In fact noth-
ing was inherited except the right to a share of ayllu property. The ofﬁce of
queen was not inherited matrilineally but bestowed on the woman chosen to
be the principal wife of the king. Finally, the endogamy of peasant groups en-
sured that marriage did not alienate property however it was inherited. These
observations call into question the practical signiﬁcance of parallel descent.
Each ayllu in a district belonged to one of two moieties, often designated
hanan (upper) and hurin (lower). Ayllus belonging to the same moiety strongly
supported each other economically and socially, while those belonging to op-
posite moieties cooperated politically and ritually. While each moiety had its
own leader, it was agreed that the leader of the lower moiety was the helper
of the leader of the upper one, who alone had the right to speak for both
groups in their dealings with outsiders. Upper moieties frequently claimed

Family Organization and Gender Roles
181
to be descended from pastoralist invaders who had conquered the indige-
nous agricultural lower moiety. In reality, both moieties engaged in agricul-
ture and pastoralism. In Cuzco the upper moiety embraced the descendants
of recent rulers who had expanded the Inka kingdom, while the lower moiety
embraced the decendants of earlier and apparently more peaceful kings (Gose
1996b).
To become an adult member of a community, each male commoner (hatun
runa, ‘big man’) had to have celebrated a coming-of-age (or breech-cloth)
ritual in which he received the name he would keep for the rest of his life.
He also had to be married. Although ordinary people or their families no
doubt decided among themselves who should marry one another, marriage
was obligatory under Inka rule and was solemnized by rituals that government
ofﬁcials performed annually in each community for women between the ages
of sixteen and twenty and men before they were twenty-ﬁve years old. This
ritual symbolized the Inka king’s control over the reproductive capacity of all
subject women (Gose 2000). Since only able-bodied married couples were
taxpayers, it was in the state’s interest to ensure that all young adults were
married. The king personally performed marriage rituals for members of the
royal lineages at Cuzco. The next day royal ofﬁcials married all other people of
appropriate age in the Cuzco area. Ayllu members elsewhere were married
by local leaders, in the presence of Inka administrators. The state provided
each noble married couple with a home, while each ayllu built houses for its
commoner newlyweds (Kendall 1973: 82–83).
The lower classes were monogamous, but a man could be given a second
wife (normally from outside the community) as a reward for his services to the
state. Upper-class males tended to be polygamous. A man’s principal wife was
a woman of his own class, but he also received from the king women captured
in war and young aqllakuna as secondary wives or concubines. If a principal
wife died a man could remarry, but none of his secondary wives was allowed
to become his chief wife. The highest-ranking nobles were allowed to marry
their half-sisters (Rowe 1944: 251–52).
Inka kings are reported to have had hundreds of secondary wives and con-
cubines, who, unlike the quya or queen, were kept in seclusion. Provincial
nobles regarded it as an honour for the king to take their daughters as sec-
ondary wives. These women and their daughters were often referred to by
the name of the province from which the mother had come. Royal concu-
bines were selected from among the young aqllakuna. The queen might be
the king’s sister or half-sister, although some were more remote relatives from
powerful panaqas. Kingship was normally inherited by a son of the quya or,
failing a suitable individual in that category, by the son of a secondary wife who

182
Sociopolitical Organization
belonged to the Inka nobility. A king often had older sons by concubines or
secondary wives who came from the provincial nobility (Kendall 1973: 63–64,
72, 90; Silverblatt 1987: 87, 92).
It has been suggested that there was greater recognition of gender com-
plementarity in Peru than in most other early civilizations. In agriculture this
complementarity took the form of men’s digging ﬁelds and women’s plant-
ing tubers and seeds. It was manifested in mythology by the belief that men
were descended from the sun and women from the moon, both of whom
were children or manifestations of the creator deity, Wiraqucha (Kendall 1973:
182–83). Yet, even if it was the case in terms of ritual and ideology that the
Inka queen ruled all women as the king ruled all men (Rostworowski 1960:
420), the administrative and military hierarchies of the Inka state were staffed
exclusively by men.
Women were important in Inka religious observances but played different
roles at different social levels. At the local level, elderly women as well as men
presided over the cults of ayllu deities. The state cloistered large numbers of
women, selected as children and ranked according to their social status, beauty,
and skills, in houses of chosen women located in Cuzco and the provincial ad-
ministrative centres. The high-ranking women among them, the yuraq (white)
aqllakuna, became mamakuna and were in charge of other aqllakuna. Most
aqllakuna, however, came from non-Inka ayllus, and those who were not sac-
riﬁced to deities, selected as concubines by the king, or bestowed by the king
on lords and honoured commoners as concubines and secondary wives were
classiﬁed as yana (worker) aqllakuna and remained cloistered for the rest of
their lives. Because they were regarded as wives or concubines of the sun god,
they were killed if they became pregnant or were discovered to have had sexual
intercourse (Silverblatt 1987: 81–85). The creation of a substantial group of
celibate women may have helped to limit population growth in areas of high
population density.
Mamakuna were equal in rank to all but the most important male priests
and played major roles in state cults. They presided over the worship of female
deities and heard confessions of sins from other women but also participated in
the worship of male deities. The aqllakuna from humbler backgrounds assisted
them, cooking and brewing the beer that was offered to deities and to the men
and women who participated in state-sponsored rituals and corv´ee labour and
weaving qumpi, the elaborate and highly valued form of cloth that was burned
as sacriﬁces to the gods, worn by the king and nobility, and distributed as
rewards to commoners. Unlike the enslaved female weavers in Mesopotamia,
the aqllakuna were socially revered and better housed and fed than most
commoners.

Family Organization and Gender Roles
183
Queens helped their husbands to govern the Inka state. They often travelled
with the king, and the decision to create yanakuna was attributed to advice a
queen gave her husband in the course of such travels (Murra 1980: 166). Alter-
natively, queens carried out royal duties in Cuzco during the king’s absence and
acted as regents for their young sons. They also participated in rituals alongside
the king and alone presided over the celebration of a major state festival, Quya
Raymi, which marked the beginning of the agricultural year in late September
(Silverblatt 1987: 60–66). These ritual and political roles were validated by
the Inka creation myth, which claimed that the Inka royal family had begun
with four supernatural brothers and their four sister-wives; three of the broth-
ers were transformed into wakas, natural embodiments of spiritual power,
while the fourth and his divine wife became the ﬁrst Inka king and queen
(Urton 1990). Inka queens had their own palaces and farms. Metal statues
of them appear to have been venerated alongside those of their husbands, and
after death they were mummiﬁed and treated as deities just as kings were.
Along with queen mothers and other prominent female members of the lead-
ing royal panaqas, they provided vital political links among the various branches
of the nobility (Patterson 1991). Yet, despite all this, their positions in society
were derived from and clearly subordinate to those of their husbands.
Although the ancient Egyptians kept track of lineal descent and recognized
informal family groupings such as 3bt (kindred?) and mhwt (household?), there
were no formal corporate kin-based units apart from the nuclear family. There
were no primary kin terms other than those which referred to the nuclear
family – no speciﬁc designations for aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, cousin, or
even grandparents and grandchildren. Grandparents and other lineal ances-
tors all were referred to as ıt (father) and mwt (mother), children and all other
lineal descendants as s3 (son) and s3t (daughter), while all collateral relatives
were called sn (brother) and snt (sister). In the New Kingdom even the terms
for husband (hy, h3y) and wife (h
• mt) were largely replaced by sn and snt.
These extensions of nuclear-family terms suggest little interest in distinguish-
ing between immediate and more remote ancestors or descendants or between
maternal and paternal relatives. Such usages accorded with a kinship system
that was focused on the individual (O’Connor 1990: 6–11).
The clear distinction that was drawn between lineal descent and collat-
eral relations was accompanied by an emphasis in Egyptian mythology on
rivalry between a man and his male collateral relatives (brothers, nephews,
and uncles). The most celebrated rivalries were those between the god Seth
and his brother Osiris and later between Seth and Osiris’s son Horus for the
kingship. The ideal of individuals’ being free of institutionalized family en-
cumbrances also accorded with a state ideology that envisioned individuals as

184
Sociopolitical Organization
relating primarily to the bureaucractic hierarchy of the state. In everyday life,
however, Egyptians identiﬁed closely with the villages and towns where they
had been born or lived. Great emphasis was placed on achieving high social
standing within such a community by performing generous acts, while people
from other communities were viewed with suspicion and even hostility (Eyre
1999: 38–39; Janssen and Janssen 1990; 1996).
Ordinary Egyptian houses tended to be small, and it has been suggested, on
the basis of New Kingdom evidence, that their public rooms were centres of
female activity (Meskell 1998a). The homes of high-ranking people contained
complexes of ofﬁces and storerooms, but at the centre was a courtyard off
which opened spacious reception rooms and a series of living and sleeping
rooms for the owner of the house and members of his family (Kemp 1989:
151–55). The Egyptian ideal was neolocal residence; a common expression for
marriage was grg pr (to establish a house) (Watterson 1991: 60). Often, how-
ever, widowed parents, unmarried siblings, adult children, or even a married
son and his family might occupy a house in addition to the owner, his wife, and
their young children (Kemp 1989: 157–58).
Boys generally married between the ages of sixteen and seventeen and
girls between twelve and fourteen. Families arranged marriages, but young
people looked about for suitable spouses and romantic love was idealized.
Male suitors sought to win the approval of a girl’s mother prior to asking both
her parents for permission to marry her. The vast majority of marriages were
monogamous. Wealthier men, including some artisans, possessed concubines
(h
• b syt) in addition to a wife, and some higher ofﬁcials may have been married
to two or more women although this is not certain (Allam 1981; Robins 1993:
60–62; Simpson 1974). Kings had one or more wives simultaneously, as well as
many concubines. They could and did marry their sisters, but doing so was not
essential to inherit the throne. In the New Kingdom kings also married their
daughters, but this seems to have taken place only after the Sed rejuvenation
ritual, which was usually ﬁrst performed in the thirtieth year of a king’s reign.
This ceremony, which involved the ritual rebirth of the king, would have placed
him in the same generation as his daughters, thus making father-daughter
marriages equivalent to brother-sister ones (Troy 1986).
Egyptian men were supposed to love their wives and mothers and treat
them well, but women were regarded as secondary to men (Robins 1993:
107, 191). Family homes were owned by the husband, although a wife was
referred to as the nbt pr (mistress of the house) and it was her responsibility to
care for and manage the house while her husband attended to other business
(92). Also, with the exception of royalty, wives were normally buried in their
husbands’ tombs, where they were accompanied by fewer grave goods and

Family Organization and Gender Roles
185
ones of poorer quality than those buried with their husbands (Meskell 1998b).
In the decoration of tomb chapels, women were represented less frequently
and often on a smaller scale than their husbands. Nevertheless, individual
royal and upper-class women were depicted more frequently in ancient Egypt
than in any other early civilization (Robins 1993: 165–75). Kingship normally
descended from father to son, and Egyptian religious beliefs indicated that
only men could truly be monarchs.
Although the average Egyptian woman possessed less property than her hus-
band, women were not conﬁned to their homes or private quarters (ıpt) and
were fully recognized as legal entities. They could inherit, purchase, adminis-
ter, and sell land, goods, and slaves in their own names. They could sign their
own marriage contracts, make their own wills, and adopt their own heirs. They
kept their own property after marriage, served as witnesses in court hearings,
and initiated lawsuits against other people, including their own husbands and
children. They could divorce a husband for impotence, adultery, or mistreat-
ment. A widow had the legal right to one-third of her husband’s estate, while
her children inherited the rest. Yet, unlike her husband, a married woman
was free to bequeath her own property to whomever she wished and could
disinherit even her own children (Allam 1981; Leprohon 1999; Wenig 1969:
11–13). Women were required to provide corv´ee labour for the state, but this
may have applied only to women who owned property (Robins 1993: 122).
Royal women derived their position and primary titles from their roles as a
king’s daughter, sister, wife, or mother. Some royal princesses accumulated all
four titles. Royal wives performed rituals which usually complemented those
of the king. Queen mothers sometimes acted as regents for their young sons
(Troy 1986). Wives and daughters of nobles and ofﬁcials who were present at
the royal court bore the title hkryt nswt (royal ornament) and nfrt (beauty),
according to whether or not they were married (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986:
77, 81; Robins 1993: 117). In the Old Kingdom many upper-class women,
including queens, served as chief priests of major female deities, especially
Hathor and Neith.
In addition to attending to or overseeing household chores, many women
whose families belonged to the specialist class derived proﬁt from performing
various types of work outside their homes. In the Old Kingdom, female stew-
ards, overseers, scribes, and physicians attended the wives of high ofﬁcials
and managed various aspects of their estates. Royal women may have been
attended solely by female servants and ofﬁcials. The wife of the Sixth Dynasty
vizier Mereruka had a female staff consisting of a steward, inspector of trea-
sure, overseer of ornaments, and overseer of cloth. Female singers, dancers,
and acrobats worked in the royal palace, and women also served as mortuary

186
Sociopolitical Organization
priests (Robins 1993: 116). Some of these tasks required literacy (Desroches-
Noblecourt 1986: 189–93; Robins 1993: 111–13). In general, however, women
only oversaw other women, while males supervised subordinates of either sex.
The mother of King Khufu was an exception; she served as the overseer of the
butchers who prepared the meat offerings for her dead husband (Feucht 1997:
336–37). In the Middle Kingdom a few women may have continued to work as
scribes and to oversee household tasks, but the administration of people and
property had become almost exclusively male (Desroches-Noblecourt 1986:
192; Robins 1993: 116; Ward 1989). It is unclear to what extent in the Old
Kingdom, professional women, such as scribes, worked full- or part-time and
whether they were married.
Lower-class women derived incomes from a variety of part-time occu-
pations, such as weaving, singing, dancing, playing musical instruments,
midwifery, and professional mourning (Robins 1993: 119–20). While women
were active as market traders in the New Kingdom, Old Kingdom scenes
show men doing most of the selling (Kemp 1989: 255). There is no way to
know to what extent this artistic convention reﬂected social norms. In the
Third Dynasty, male and female millers, weavers, and washers worked in sep-
arate establishments in the royal palace, the women probably under female
overseers. Women and men worked together baking bread and brewing beer
in the palace kitchens, although it appears that only men cooked ﬁsh and
meat (Feucht 1997: 336; Fischer 1989). Both married and unmarried women
appear to have earned income as prostitutes. Men were warned against con-
sorting with unknown prostitutes or promiscuous women so that they would
not inadvertently become involved in quarrels with their husbands or fathers
(Robins 1993: 69).
gender roles
The kinship systems of early civilizations have long been thought to display
a patrilineal bias, and Victorian anthropologists viewed this an evolutionary
advance over the matrilineal societies that they believed had preceded them;
however, the bias of family organization in all the early civilizations was mas-
culine but not always patrilineal. There is also no obvious correlation between
their different forms of kinship organization and either territorial or city-states.
Initially I hypothesized that the variations reﬂected the forms of kinship that
prevailed in different regions prior to the rise of states. Important parallels have
been noted between Inka kinship organization and that found among tribal
peoples in central and eastern Brazil (Lounsbury 1986). Highland Mexican
calpollis and Peruvian ayllus may have developed from some early form of

Family Organization and Gender Roles
187
endogamous kinship that was widespread in Central and South America, but
if such an institution existed it does not appear to have been shared by the
Maya. Cross-cultural ethnographic evidence indicates that considerably more
variation in kinship systems existed at a prestate level, both on a regional basis
and in relation to different types of economies, than is found in our admittedly
small sample of early civilizations (Hallpike 1986: 141; Murdock 1949). While
this difference could simply reﬂect sampling error, it suggests that kinship sys-
tems may have shifted in a particular direction as a result of the development
of new and more convergent forms of social organization. Support for such a
shift may be found in the kinship terminologies of early civilizations, which
generally do not display a strong patrilineal bias. Those of the Yoruba, Inka,
Maya, and Aztec appear to have employed a Hawaiian kinship terminology
for designating cousins: both parallel-cousins and cross-cousins were referred
to by terms that were identical or very similar to those used to designate sib-
lings. According to George P. Murdock (1959a; 1959b: 29) such usage is found
in ‘bilateral societies with extended families or corporate kin groups but can
also result from an incompletely assimilated shift from one rule of descent
to another’. This interpretation suggests that not all these societies had been
strongly patrilineal for a long time.
The degree and precise expression of a masculine bias varied from one early
civilization to another, no doubt depending to some extent on the sort of social
organizationthathadexistedpriortothedevelopmentofcivilizationinaregion.
The Asante state, in what is now Ghana, was of recent origin when it was ﬁrst
encountered by Europeans in the eighteenth century. Although Asante society
was based on matrilineal descent, its rulers were already seeking to marry in
ways that would ensure that male descendants would eventually inherit their
ofﬁces (Wilks 1975: 371). The most important factor sanctioning a masculine
bias appears to have been the growing importance of male-dominated political
relations as these societies grew more complex.
Gender is commonly acknowledged to be a ubiquitous and fundamental
component of social identity. It is also generally agreed that, while beliefs con-
cerning masculinity and femininity are culturally constructed, prior to modern
times all gender systems were based on the belief that men and women had
different roles and responsibilities in social reproduction and maintenance.
Men and women in every society dressed and behaved differently from each
other (R. Wright 1996a), and in all preindustrial societies, crafts, or individual
processes within crafts, tended to be segregated according to gender (Costin
1996; Murdock and Provost 1973). There is much evidence that women’s inter-
ests were expressed primarily in relation to their families while men’s concerns
were expressed in relation to the broader sociopolitical sphere. Such focusing

188
Sociopolitical Organization
of expression does not signify that women or men did not exhibit a holistic
interest in the forces that were affecting their lives.
Csilla Dallos (1997) has argued that, as individual identity had to be for-
mulated in more communal and hierarchical terms as societies grew more
complex, both men and women were forced to sacriﬁce their personal auton-
omy to serve the interests of the domestic group that was increasingly being
pressured by society and the state. For men broad political considerations and
for women the welfare of their families acquired increasing precedence over
personal interests. It was as a result of these trends that the household and the
nuclear family came to be viewed as a miniature kingdom, with its male head
as its ruler and women, children, and dependents as his subjects. Under these
conditions, gender relations grew increasingly unequal, and female identity
was subordinated to complementing male gender roles.
One effect of this development was the separation of women in all early civi-
lizations into two classes: those who were respectable and those who were not.
To be respectable a woman had to be honourably attached to a parental family,
husband, or appropriate institution, such as a Mesopotamian temple cloister
or an Inka aqllawasi. Freelance prostitutes, innkeepers, and self-proclaimed
witches were viewed as lacking honour and posing a threat to the moral or-
der. Slave women held in Mesopotamian weaving establishments attached to
palaces and temples were regarded as lacking anyone to protect their honour
and appear to have been subjected to sexual abuse as well as harsh treatment
(R.Wright1996b).ThecaptivewomenwhomtheAzteckeptasstateprostitutes
for the entertainment of young warriors likewise existed outside the normal
moral constraints of society. Women who lacked the protection of male kin
or responsible male ofﬁcials were easy targets for robbery, intimidation, rape,
and other forms of abusive treatment. Although such women were invariably
few, their wretched lives, unsavoury reputations, and lack of legitimate redress
stressed the importance of women’s remaining respectable by continuing to
depend on their male relatives. They also provided a negative example against
which the behaviour of respectable women could be measured (Lerner 1986:
212–16).
Despite their general subordination to men and evidence of widespread
resistance to such subordination in both the family and society in general, the
position of women varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another
(Nelson 1991; Silverblatt 1988a; 1991). Although little is known about the
treatment of ordinary women in Shang and Western Zhou China, they appear
to have been greatly disfavoured, both legally and economically, as a result of
being fully absorbed into their husbands’ patrilineages. The most favourably
positioned women appear to have been those in the Yoruba kingdoms and in

Family Organization and Gender Roles
189
ancient Egypt. Yoruba women remained afﬁliated with their fathers’ descent
groups and therefore could rely on the ongoing active support of blood kin.
The Yoruba also admired individual competitiveness and allowed that it could
occur between men and women. Egyptian society had no lineage structure and
even more strongly stressed individual achievement. In all early civilizations
women as well as men participated in ritual activities. In general, however, the
top positions in religious hierarchies were occupied by males. While men told
women of equal or inferior social status what to do, women gave orders only
to men who were clearly inferior to themselves. Yoruba, Aztec, and Egyptian
women were active in market trade, though in Egypt it involved only the circu-
lation of locally produced goods among the lower classes (Kemp 1989: 253–55).
In territorial states the need for loyal administrators and advisers to assist the
king led to the involvement of upper-class women in administrative activities.
Thus class dominated gender to the extent that upper-class women might give
orders to lower-ranking men as well as women. Yet their administrative roles,
like their roles in the economic and religious spheres, were largely restricted
to assisting their husbands. In other spheres they tended to be limited to di-
recting other women and male domestic servants. In city-state civilizations
royal wives were often selected from leading families within the state, thus
helping to forge alliances between the king and potential sources of signiﬁ-
cant internal opposition. Sometimes they were drawn from the royal families
of neighbouring city-states, such marriages creating or reinforcing interstate
alliances. Maya queens, perhaps most often queen mothers, were depicted
playing important roles in royal and state rituals. Some Mesopotamian queens
owned and seem to have managed their own and temple estates, but major
ritual roles were played by female priests. Aztec and Yoruba royal wives seem
to have been ritually and politically invisible. In these societies public rituals
were performed by female ofﬁce-holders who were not necessarily related to
the king.
Where the documentation is sufﬁcient, there is evidence that the status of
women declined in early civilizations. Female rulers are mentioned for early
times in the later traditions of the Yoruba and in Mesopotamia, but there
is no contemporary evidence for these rulers, and no speciﬁc female rulers
are attested for later and better recorded periods. It is therefore impossible
to determine whether there really had been female rulers in the formative
periods of these civilizations or they were later mythological creations that
ascribed to earlier times practices that were different from those of the present.
June Nash (1978) has indicated that among the Aztec the position of women
declined as a combined result of increasing male specialization, an ideology
that gloriﬁed warfare and male domination, and the beneﬁts that the state

190
Sociopolitical Organization
showered on successful warriors and on men generally. Ofﬁcial Aztec myths
stressed the ideological subordination of women, but life-sustaining goddesses
continued to be honoured by commoners and the community as they had been
in earlier times (Brumﬁel 1996; Kellogg 1995; Nash 1978). The Aztec and their
neighbours used women’s tools as metaphors for subordination and humility;
sendingapresentofrawcotton(usedforspinning)toaforeignrulerconstituted
a gross affront (Nash 1978: 356).
Among the Inka, the growth of political power, which was primarily asso-
ciated with males, reduced gender symmetry and enhanced the patriarchal
character of society (Silverblatt 1987). In Egypt the gradual disappearance of
female bureaucrats and chief priests, even if they had mainly served female
members of the royal family and female deities, represented the removal of
women from the political and administrative spheres and their conﬁnement to
the local economic realm and to subordinate ritual roles. The important roles
played by royal women in Shang society eventually came to be performed by
royal eunuchs, and women were conﬁned to playing subordinate roles in sac-
riﬁcing to their husband’s ancestors. Yet, despite these growing restrictions,
women in early civilizations do not appear to have been as disadvantaged as
they became in some later preindustrial civilizations, such as those of Classical
Greece and Rome.
same-sex relations
What is known about male homosexual behaviour in early civilizations is mainly
normative information that probably reﬂects the views of literate males, whose
opinions may or may not have been congruent with those of other sections of
society. Homosexuality in early civilizations was regarded as a kind of behaviour
rather than the deﬁning characteristic of a particular type of person (Somerville
1997). However, various distinctions relating to morality and character were
drawn according to the circumstances in which individuals engaged in same-
sex behaviour and the extent to which such behaviour precluded other forms
of sexual activity.
In general, people in early civilizations considered reproduction the primary
goal of sexual activity. Where lineages were important or property, power, and
position regularly passed from one generation to the next, it was highly desir-
able to have descendants. It was also believed that only biological descendants
could or would make appropriate offerings to the souls of dead family mem-
bers. Further, people depended on their children to take care of them in their
old age, and the domestic division of labour provided a strong incentive for
both men and women to marry.

Family Organization and Gender Roles
191
The state and the upper classes also had strong reasons to encourage a re-
productively oriented sexuality among commoners. Larger populations meant
increased tax revenues and more corv´ee labourers and soldiers. Therefore pop-
ulation growth became an upper-class ideal even where population density was
high and where the lower classes did not share this ideal. The upper classes
did not necessarily desire to expand their own ranks; rich Mesopotamian fam-
ilies sought to curb the division of landholdings and other family wealth by
restricting the number of people among whom the family’s wealth had to be
shared, enrolling some female members in temples as celibate priests.
All the early civilizations also accorded great material and symbolic impor-
tance to fertility. Successful harvests and the reproduction of domestic animals
were crucial for their survival and prosperity. This reinforced a reproductively
oriented view of human sexuality. Human reproduction was clearly conceived
as analogous to the reproduction of plants and animals. The ancient Egyptians
and Mesopotamians viewed women as fertile ﬁelds and equated male sex-
ual activity with ploughing and sowing such ﬁelds (Lichtheim 1973: 69). The
Egyptians also imagined the divine power that had created the world as a form
of male sexual energy (Robins 1993: 17). In Mesoamerica parallels were drawn
between a woman’s womb and the earth, and sexual activity was seen as a way
of renewing all aspects of the terrestrial world (Townsend 1992: 132–36). Con-
sequently, there was a tendency to regard sexual practices that did not lead to
reproduction as contrary to the natural order of things.
It is clear that the Egyptians strongly privileged heterosexual relations and
in particular heterosexual relations within marriage. Men who were unable
for whatever reason to father children were regarded as pitiable or farcical
(Parkinson 1995). Among forty-two moral and ritual offences that, according
to the New Kingdom Book of the Dead, a dead man had to prove he had
not committed in order to be admitted to the kingdom of the god Osiris were
homosexual acts (Parkinson 1995: 61–62).
The Egyptians differentiated homosexual acts according to whether a man
played an active (male) role or a passive (female) one, the active role be-
ing judged less compromising to an adult male’s sexual identity. Sodomy was
viewedasdemonstratingthepenetrator’spoweroveranothermale,andsodom-
izing an enemy or having sex with a boy (willing or not) when women were un-
available did not call a man’s virility into question. The god Seth was described
as having this sort of intercourse with his nephew Horus in order to demon-
strate that Horus was too young and weak to rule Egypt (Parkinson 1995: 65).
Seth was a powerful deity who played a vital role in protecting the gods, but he
also was a deity associated with confusion and disorder – with political crises,
storms, and the dry, infertile lands beyond the Nile Valley. While his sexual

192
Sociopolitical Organization
appetite was easily aroused, his heterosexual activities were as unproductive as
his homosexual ones. He had no children, and even his sister-wife Nephthys
had become pregnant by the god Osiris, who was a brother to both of them.
A Middle Kingdom folktale portrays a high-ranking general named Sasanet
as remaining unmarried and engaging in sexual activity, as the passive partner,
with King Neferkare, who came every night to his house. Neferkare may have
been King Pepi II, whose long reign marked the end of the Old Kingdom.
While the tale is incompletely preserved, for any king to have engaged in this
sort of relation equated him with Seth and called into question his ability to
maintain the cosmic order (Parkinson 1995: 71–74).
Among the Mesopotamians, homosexuality was not an activity in which the
gods engaged but a disability inﬂicted upon humans to prevent them from
multiplying too quickly and disturbing the gods with their clamour (Postgate
1992: 295). The Code of Hammurabi, although containing numerous injunc-
tions against sexual misconduct, did not explicitly refer to homosexuality. Some
masters are reported to have sodomized their male servants, and there were
guilds of male prostitutes (assinnu, kurgarru, and kulu’u) who played pas-
sive roles (sinniˇsˆanu) in sexual relations. They appear to have been connected
with the cult of the fertility goddess, Ishtar (Inanna), who was believed to
be entertained by their irregular sexual behaviour (asakku) (Bott´ero 1992:
190–98). The gala, or male lamentation singers, attached to temples appear
to have been transvestites, and transvestites or men who engaged in passive
homosexual acts were attached to the royal court, apparently as servants and
entertainers (Bott´ero 1992: 197, 244; Postgate 1992: 126–27). Freelance male
prostitutes, like their female counterparts, lived near the city walls and fre-
quented taverns. They too were socially marginal, isolated, despised, and often
mistreated. While transvestites and habitually homosexual men were assigned
special roles in Mesopotamian society, it was generally agreed that by not mar-
rying and having children, they had failed to realize the proper destiny of a
man. They were probably included among the unclean and depraved persons
who had to be expelled from cities whenever their main temple was restored,
consecrated, and sanctiﬁed (Kramer 1981: 268). The gods had quixotically cre-
ated such persons to be different from others and then had to provide special,
anomalous roles for them in the social order (Bott´ero 1992: 196–97).
The attitude towards homosexuality was more sharply negative among the
Aztec and their neighbours. They viewed sexual intercourse as one of the few
genuine pleasures of a painful and difﬁcult existence, but they also believed
that, by engaging in any form of sexual activity too frequently, young men im-
paired their physical and mental development and condemned themselves
to impotence at an early age. There was therefore strong encouragement

Family Organization and Gender Roles
193
to restrict sexual activities to marital relations. Young, unmarried warriors
were, however, provided with female companions as a reward for their military
achievements. They were individuals believed to possess exceptional supernat-
ural power. Men who habitually engaged in homosexual acts were regarded
as weak, diseased, and withered. Passive homosexuality violated the military
ideals that structured life in this part of the world. Homosexual or transvestite
behaviour was punished by death or by being sold into slavery. Celibacy was
also disapproved of except for ritual reasons (Clendinnen 1991: 169; L´opez
Austin 1988, 1: 303–6).
In the Inka kingdom marriage was obligatory and enforced by the state.
In some Peruvian cultures, homosexual acts were associated with religious
practices, being viewed as a way of transmitting supernatural power from
one man to another in order to facilitate the performance of certain religious
rituals. The Inka government vigorously attempted to suppress non-ritual
homosexual practices within its domain. The punishment for sodomy involved
the execution not only of those who committed it but also of their families
and the burning of their houses (Classen 1993: 60–61; Kendall 1973: 88; von
Hagen 1959: 179, 314).
While the degree of toleration of homosexuality varied from one early civi-
lization to another, such behaviour was regarded at the very least as contrary
to social ideals and at worst as a practice that violated the cosmic order and
had to be punished by death. Even in the most tolerant early civilizations,
those who publicly embraced a homosexual lifestyle were assigned socially
marginal roles. There is no evidence in our sample that attitudes towards ho-
mosexual behaviour varied with formal political organization. Nor does grow-
ing land pressure appear to have encouraged greater tolerance of homosexual
behaviour. The inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, which had the highest pop-
ulation density in our sample, were among the most hostile to it. The desire
of upper-class Mesopotamians to divide their landholdings among as few heirs
as possible may, however, have encouraged a more relaxed attitude towards
homosexuality. On the whole, family and state economic interests encouraged
a negative attitude towards homosexual behaviour that both reﬂected and re-
inforced the increasing patriarchal tendencies in early civilizations.
differences and similarities
Early civilizations exhibited considerable variation in kinship organization,
family residence arrangements, inheritance, the roles and status of women,
and attitudes towards homosexual behaviour. There is no obvious correlation
between these differences and various environmental settings, subsistence

194
Sociopolitical Organization
patterns, or forms of political organization, but there is some regional clus-
tering in patterns of kinship organization. Endogamous descent groups were
conﬁned to indigenous civilizations of the New World. The two civilizations
in which women had the most rights were located in Africa. The ones with
the least hostile recorded attitudes towards homosexual behaviour were Egypt
and Mesopotamia.
All early civilizations displayed varying degrees of masculine bias. It may be
that the increasing importance of political relations for the functioning of com-
plex societies led to a greater emphasis on male roles. If so, the transformation
probably began during the early state period. The position of women appears to
have been inferior to that of men in all the early civilizations, given the growing
importance of male leadership roles, greater male access to wealth as a result of
political manipulation and warfare, and the increasing domination of family life
by society and the state. Patriarchal attitudes towards reproduction probably
also encouraged more negative attitudes towards homosexual behaviour.
Nevertheless, the position of women varied signiﬁcantly from one early
civilization to another. In territorial states upper-class women generally en-
joyed more political power and social visibility as a result of being drawn into
secondary governing and ritual roles alongside their husbands. In city-state civ-
ilizations upper-class women appear to have had the greatest public visibility
among the Classic Maya; in Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico they were
limited to ritual roles, while among the Yoruba the chief public activity of kings’
wives was trade. The distinction between territorial and city-states is far less
useful for predicting the status of ordinary women. In Egypt men and women
enjoyed considerable legal equality, and in highland Peru the complementarity
of men and women in many productive tasks and in rituals was generally rec-
ognized. In Shang China, however, the legal and economic position of women
seems to have been much less favourable. Although Aztec women possessed
considerable economic and social freedom, they had very little role in public
decision making. Women in Mesopotamia appear to have been even more
restricted in terms of what they were allowed to do. The greatest degree of
overall female economic and social freedom and participation in political de-
cision making occurred among the Yoruba. While it might be argued that the
position of ordinary women tended to be more favourable in territorial states
than in city-states and that this reﬂected the higher status enjoyed by upper-
class women in these societies, the sample is too small and the correlations too
weak for this hypothesis to be supported. Moreover, the favourable position of
Yoruba women stands strongly against this generalization. More important is
the observation that, wherever the status of women can be traced over time,
it appears to have declined rather than improved.

10 Administration
W
eberian sociologists blandly deﬁne the state as a government that
possesses a monopoly of the legitimate use of force within a speciﬁc
territory. Marxists more cynically regard the state as a mechanism that deploys
physical coercion to defend the property and privileges of the dominant social
classes (Kamenka 1989: 7–11). While these deﬁnitions suggest what a state
is, they are inadequate to describe, even from a purely political point of view,
how a state operates. Physical force is never sufﬁcient by itself to maintain
order within society. Such order depends on most people’s being prepared
to accept the way things are being done. Social control is also inherent in
communities, economic institutions, and the family, whose leaders exert their
own forms of control through economic, social, and ideological coercion and
by manipulating public opinion (Mann 1986). Within uniﬁed political entities,
public order depends to a large degree on the extent to which those who
control these other sectors of society are prepared to cooperate with the state
and with each other.
The state can also be viewed as an administrative mechanism that extracts
sufﬁcient resources from society to maintain itself, defends the territory it
controls from foreign aggression, and is responsible for maintaining the unity
of its territory, if necessary by force. To do this it must uphold a social and
economic order which convinces ordinary people that, despite the demands
the state imposes on them, it makes their lives more prosperous and secure
than they would be if the state did not exist. An enduring state thus has the
dual task of protecting the privileges of the upper classes and ensuring that
the lower classes are not exploited, impoverished, or disaffected to the point
that their reactions undermine the social order.
To carry out these tasks the state must be able to collect taxes, administer the
properties it owns, fund institutions such as armies, police forces, and public
labour, and curb the dishonesty of ofﬁcials and powerful people generally.
195

196
Sociopolitical Organization
Such an administrative system is inevitably expensive and always in danger of
becoming self-serving and thus undermining rather than helping to preserve
public order (Tainter 1988). In early civilizations only the king, or perhaps the
king and a small number of councillors, had an unequivocal vested interest in
the equitable functioning of the bureaucracy as a whole. When they could get
away with it, most ofﬁcials sought to beneﬁt themselves, their families, and
their friends at the expense of the state through embezzlement and the shifting
of tax burdens to others. As Ibn Khaldun noted in the fourteenth century
a.d., where such behaviour got out of control it undermined the economy,
encouraged social unrest, and eventually destroyed the authority and power
of the state. Those who occupied the upper levels of the administration of
early civilizations had to be sufﬁciently powerful and well-informed that
they could control the ofﬁcials under them and ensure that these ofﬁcials
served the state and not only their personal interests (R. McC. Adams
1965: 71).
Atthispoint,however,aproblemarose.Inallearlycivilizations,rulerssought
to enhance their control by projecting an imposing image of their power and
authority. Yet the productive capacities of early civilizations were severely
limited by comparison with those of modern industrial societies. Because of
this, the ruling classes were disinclined to use more resources for managerial
purposes than were minimally needed to perpetuate the system. Doing so
would have reduced the wealth that they could use to provide themselves
with abundant food, fancy clothing, jewellery, palaces, tombs, and numerous
retainers, all of which made their lives more enjoyable and enhanced their
public image (Trigger 1990a).
The most expedient way to reduce administrative costs was to delegate de-
cision making from higher to lower levels in administrative hierarchies. In all
early civilizations, families, wards, and small communities were permitted and
even encouraged to manage their own affairs to a much greater degree than
is characteristic of developed industrial societies. Aztec calpollis, Inka ayllus,
Egyptian villages, and Yoruba extended families were left to regulate them-
selves, with the state intervening only when self-regulation had conspicuously
failed to work. The most common limitation on the power of such groups
was the requirement that death sentences be approved by higher ofﬁcials and
perhaps ultimately the king.
Effective administration depends on controlling subordinates, and this re-
quires both knowledge and power. A hierarchical approach is essential for
studying territorial states, in which leaders had to create effective ways to keep
regions and localities linked to the central administration. Such an approach
is also appropriate for understanding how villages and small administrative

Administration
197
districts were linked to capitals in those city-states in which most of the pop-
ulation resided outside the main urban centre. It is less useful, however, for
describing political processes in city-states where the population was largely
concentrated in a single urban centre, political power was not strongly cen-
tralized, and the main problem was producing consensus among competing
groups or interests. In some of these city-states kings had enough power to
enforce order but not enough to subordinate the interests of other powerful
groups entirely to their own. In less centralized city-states, kings served as a
symbol of political unity, and experienced ones played a vital role in helping
to broker consensus among competing political factions. Thus, when studying
city-states, it is necessary to consider forms of administration that were het-
erarchical as well as hierarchical (Crumley 1987; Ehrenreich, Crumley, and
Levy 1995).
city-state administration
Elizabeth Stone (1997) has suggested that the large proportion of the popula-
tion living in urban centres in early civilizations reﬂected the direct participa-
tion of large numbers of people in the government of such states. Yet there was
no regular mass participation in government in the early civilizations compa-
rable to that in the democratic city-states of Classical Greece. Political power
may have been shared by members of numerous groups, but it remained the
prerogative of a small minority of upper-class people, most of whom lived in
the capitals.
Administrativerelationsbetweentheurbancentresandtheruralhinterlands
of city-states were shaped by the numerical dominance of the centre. Urban
centres that contained more than 50 percent of the population dominated the
hinterland politically, economically, and militarily as well as demographically.
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia only a small population appears to have lived
in the countryside full-time. Among the Yoruba, many individuals shifted back
and forth between city and countryside, and a substantial minority were politi-
cally associated with small towns or villages that enjoyed local self-government
and whose leaders were connected as clients to politically important lineages
in the capitals. Likewise, in the Valley of Mexico and especially among the
Classic Maya, many city-state urban centres were surrounded by secondary
administrative centres and rural communities whose leaders were afﬁliated
with the political leadership in the capital.
Among the Yoruba, individual patrilineal extended families regulated their
internal civil, religious, legal, and military affairs under the leadership of their
bale, advised and assisted by a committee of elders. Leadership at this level

198
Sociopolitical Organization
was gerontocratic, but these ofﬁcials exerted no signiﬁcant inﬂuence beyond
their own residential groups. When issues of major importance had to be
discussed, meetings were held which all the adult residents of the group, as
well as the (mainly female) members of the extended family living elsewhere,
could attend. Genealogically related or neighbouring extended families also
managed their collective affairs at the precinct (ogbon) and ward (adugbo)
levels of Yoruba cities. Hereditary ofﬁce-holders at both levels regulated the
collective activities of these groups and presided over the public meetings that
were held to discuss major issues (Bascom 1969: 30, 44–46).
Many political ofﬁces, including kingship, were hereditary in particular lin-
eages, but since no exclusive rule of inheritance was speciﬁed they were the
subject of ﬁerce competition involving the eligible male members of the lin-
eage. A number of the most important non-royal lineages in the capital had
members who composed a small but very important state council, which shared
power with the king. Often these ofﬁcials were also ward leaders. Over time,
an extended family that was in political decline might be deprived of its seat
on the state council, while other important individuals or a representative of
a newly important extended family might be appointed to it. The members of
the state council, whose large compounds were often located adjacent to the
royal palace, commanded the army, headed the cults of important deities, and
played a major role in foreign affairs. They also collected a share of the fees
paid for legal services, taxes on goods being transported from one community
or state to another, and taxes and tribute levied on their own and conquered
peoples. The leader of the state council of Oyo was commander in chief of
the army and became regent on the death of a king. While the king had to
approve the appointment of all new members of the state council, the council
in turn selected a new king in consultation with spokesmen for the major royal
patrilineages. The members of the state council could also, if they were in
unanimous agreement, demand that a king abdicate or commit suicide (Law
1977: 73–74).
Yoruba life was also managed by age-grades and numerous voluntary as-
sociations (egbe) (Eades 1980: 99). The membership of these societies cut
across lineage divisions and hence both promoted community integration and
further decentralized political decision-making. The leaders of the more im-
portant voluntary associations played signiﬁcant roles in the political life of
their communities, especially in the smaller polities, where the power of both
the king and the state council members was weak.
Voluntary societies included the Ogboni, some of whose leaders were those
involved in electing and installing kings and leading ofﬁcials. The initiates of
this society judged some legal cases (Bascom 1969: 36–37). The main role of

Administration
199
the Oro society was to clear communities of evil spirits, but its members also
arrested criminals, settled quarrels, quelled civil strife, and executed kings who
refused to commit suicide when ordered to do so by the state council (93).
Age-grade societies, which bestowed titles on their members and collected
initiation fees from them, performed various forms of corv´ee labour for the
community, often under the direction of elderly compound heads. Craft as-
sociations not only organized and regulated various trades but, through their
titled leaders, gave the members of different professions a voice at the higher
levels of community government (Eades 1980: 85–86).
Despitetheking’ssupremeritualimportance,hisrequiredseclusionenabled
the members of the state council to derive vast political inﬂuence from their
greater freedom of movement. Opportunities for the king to increase his power
developed only if divisions arose among members of the state council or if he
was able to forge an alliance with rising political leaders who were not yet
members of it (Law 1977: 77–82).
Yoruba kings, as ofﬁce-holders, possessed large amounts of land and numer-
ous slaves, and therefore they were able to engage in foreign trade and supply
horses and soldiers to military campaigns. In return, they received a large share
of the booty collected in wartime, often in the form of slaves, and of the tribute
that was paid by conquered states in peacetime. Kings used their share of this
wealth to enhance their political importance in their kingdoms. Palace staffs,
supported by the king’s largesse, were made up of large numbers of ofﬁcials,
slaves, and household servants who bore palace titles and performed numer-
ous domestic and political functions. Many royal ofﬁcials who were eunuchs
carried out administrative, military, judicial, and ritual roles outside the palace
as the king’s personal representatives (ajele). Slaves guarded the king and also
acted as his agents in dealing with townspeople, village leaders, and rulers
of foreign states. Slaves and eunuchs were valued because they did not have
family interests that they might put ahead of those of the king. Women who
bore palace titles also performed administrative tasks such as supervising and
keeping order in the urban markets and among traders (Bascom 1969: 34–36;
Law 1977: 233–42).
In theory the king ruled the capital through a hierarchy of state councillors
and ward, precinct, and compound leaders and outlying communities through
town and palace ofﬁcials, leaders of outlying local centres, and bales. In reality
his control over both the urban centre and the outlying communities was
shared with quasi-hereditary leaders who belonged to non-royal lineages and
with the ofﬁce-holders of various voluntary, craft, and age-grade organizations.
The revenues of the state were divided between the king and powerful state
councillors, who created parallel administrative structures that vied with one

200
Sociopolitical Organization
another for inﬂuence in and beyond the capital (Bascom 1969: 29–30; Law
1977: 98–118).
PoliticallythemostcentralizedstateintheYorubaculturalspherewasBenin.
There the kingship and most other hereditary ofﬁces were inherited patrilin-
eally through male primogeniture. Although the uzama, the hereditary leaders
who were equivalent to the members of the state council in Oyo and other
Yoruba states, provided military commanders in chief and played an impor-
tant symbolic role in the installation of kings, their power had been radically
diminished by comparison with that of their counterparts in Oyo and Ife.
Moreover, most other titles had become non-hereditary and were in the king’s
gift. The palace title system was greatly expanded and opened up, so that any
man able to afford the initiation fees could enter its lower grades. As a result,
men personally loyal to the king were found throughout the kingdom. City
ofﬁcials represented a wealthy and inﬂuential section of the population that
could exert pressure on the king, but with rare exceptions their titles too were
non-hereditary, and the king could use his power to reassign them to attract
powerful people to his service. The Benin state council was made up of the
largely ceremonial uzama, the main palace and city ofﬁcials, and a number of
other military leaders. In Benin the king was the sole source of legislative and
state policy, and military leaders were directly responsible to him (Bradbury
1957: 35–43).
Unlike Oyo, which was a relatively small city-state exerting hegemony over
weaker, self-governing neighbouring kingdoms, Benin was surrounded by
small communities directly subject to its king (Mercier 1962: 150–51). The
territory ruled by the king was divided into a large number of tax units con-
sisting of chiefdoms, villages, and wards. Each tax unit was controlled by a
title-holder in Benin City, who acted as an intermediary in all dealings be-
tween its leaders and the royal court (Bradbury 1957: 42–43). Benin villages
usually had as their head the oldest active man (odiowere), but some also had a
hereditary co-ruler (onogie). These leaders and all the members of the oldest
age-grade in the community constituted the village council (32–34).
It is unclear whether the political organization of Benin is better viewed
as the most centralized variant of Yoruba kingship or as something different
that resulted from the imposition of Yoruba ideas about political organization
on an Edo society. Edo polities that were not inﬂuenced by Benin consisted
of autonomous local communities. Yet, despite the control that the Benin
monarch exerted over appointments to titled ofﬁces, the presence of inﬂuential
city leaders meant that even in Benin City royal power did not go uncontested.
None of the Yoruba states had a broadly participatory form of government,
but kings did share authority with the representatives of powerful lineages,

Administration
201
voluntary societies, craft guilds, and age-grades. Those individuals participated
in many types of decision-making that affected the administration of city-states.
Despite the seeming fragility of these arrangements and occasional lapses into
civic disorder, Yoruba cities endured for long periods. There is no evidence
that a relatively decentralized state such as Oyo was politically less powerful
than a more centralized one such as Benin.
Mesopotamian cosmological myths have sometimes been interpreted as
embodying memories of a time when cities were governed by councils (ukkin;
Akk. puh˘
rum) composed of elders and presided over by an en. This, it is
suggested, was probably an ofﬁce that elders occupied in rotation. Assemblies
of all free males may have met occasionally to approve or reject proposals made
by elders or ens, especially proposals that concerned waging war against other
states (Jacobsen 1943; Van De Mieroop 1999: 133–39). Iconographic evidence
has been viewed as indicating, however, that kings played a signiﬁcant role as
early as the Uruk period. If such assemblies ever existed, they were obsolete be-
fore the earliest records of contemporary political events. The Mesopotamians
themselves believed, at least in later times, that kingship had descended from
the sky world during the era of creation as a god-given model for conducting
human affairs. In historical times kings and temple administrators played
the major role in decision-making, although in each city councils composed
of elders (abba; Akk. ˇs¯ıb¯utum), who were outstanding citizens or heads of
powerful patrilineages, and even some ordinary citizens judged legal cases,
discussed matters of common interest, and performed various administrative
duties.
The internal affairs of each city ward were handled by a council composed
of representatives of the leading households in that ward. The council made
legal decisions, supervised land sales, and was responsible for maintaining law
and order. It was headed by a rubi¯anum (mayor), who held ofﬁce for a year and
served as the main link between the constituency he represented and the king.
In at least some cities, each ward ofﬁcial was aided by a policeman (ukuuˇs)
(R. Harris 1975: 58; Postgate 1992: 81; Van De Mieroop 1999: 120–33).
In Early Dynastic times much of the population of southern Mesopotamia
lived in urban settlements, and many people who had houses in nearby ham-
lets may have been city dwellers who inhabited these small settlements only
while they were cultivating their ﬁelds. It is unclear how the growing number of
people who lived year-round in rural settlements in later times governed them-
selves or were represented at the city-state level. If most of them worked land
that belonged to kings, temples, or rich landowners, they would have had no
direct role in government at the state level. By Old Babylonian times, however,
the inhabitants of villages (¯alum) administered their communities’ affairs by

202
Sociopolitical Organization
means of councils of elders and must have enjoyed a status corresponding to
that of the wards of capital cities (Postgate 1992: 83).
Kings may originally have been part-time military commanders, but by the
historical period they were full-time leaders whose ofﬁce was endowed with
extensive agricultural land and herds of livestock. Kings alone were respon-
sible for dealing with other states – maintaining and equipping professional
soldiers, training citizen conscripts for military campaigns, coordinating the
construction and maintenance of walls around cities, and conducting diplo-
matic relations with the rulers of other states. They also sought to control
the internal affairs of their cities to varying degrees. In their capacity as the
chief servant, or bailiff, of the city’s patron deity, kings frequently claimed the
right to review legal decisions made by lower courts. They required large ad-
ministrative staffs to manage palace lands, purchase and store imported raw
materials, manufacture the special equipment needed by the army, supervise
public construction work, exchange gifts with rulers of other states, and coordi-
nate economic, legal, and political activities with the leaders of wards, villages,
and craft associations and with powerful landowners. Palace administrators
in turn required the services of large numbers of scribes, who kept detailed
records and oversaw the physical labour that was vital for the palace’s eco-
nomic functioning. In theory administrative and scribal positions were royal
appointments, but in practice they often passed from father to son (Postgate
1992: 149–53).
Although temples existed in Mesopotamia long before any evidence of
palaces, the rise of royal power appears to have been accompanied by the
expansion of the temple estates that administered land viewed as the prop-
erty of major deities. Temples were controlled by chief administrators or small
groups of ofﬁcials. These administrators were usually not the chief priests who
served the deity, especially if those priests were women. The highest-ranking
administrators directed the work of large numbers of priests (male and female),
lesser administrators and accountants, and various craftsmen, tenant farmers,
farm labourers, and slaves. Temple estates played a major role in looking after
impoverished, sick, and crippled members of the community, many of whom
were absorbed into the permanent temple workforce. Impoverished families
often dedicated their children and other family members to temples. Temples
lent grain to ordinary citizens at a lower interest rate than palaces, private
landowners, or merchants. They also lent capital for the ransom of soldiers
captured in battle (Postgate 1992: 117–36).
Temple estates appear to have expanded as much land that had been com-
munally owned by patrilineal extended families passed into royal and private
ownership. It is unclear to what extent their expansion was a form of corporate

Administration
203
resistance to royal power or a response to the economic dislocation that re-
sulted from the increasing privatization of land. While gods did not treat their
tenants and workforce much more generously than other landowners, temples
do appear to have looked after the poor and helpless better than other insti-
tutions were prepared to. Various kings sought to increase their wealth and
power by assuming control over temple estates, but these attempts were not
always successful (Kramer 1963: 79–83).
The competition for power among kings, temple leaders, wealthy private
landowners, and the heads of patrilineal landowning groups created a ﬂuid
situation as power was negotiated at the ward and state levels. The king’s role
in government varied from one city to another and from one period to another
in the same city. Mesopotamia is the only early civilization to produce detailed
evidence of popular unrest as a result of economic exploitation and of efforts,
usually by kings, to counter such unrest by freeing community members en-
slaved for debt and decreeing amnesties on debts that involved the pawning or
loss of land (Postgate 1992: 195). Kings may have been more powerful in the
northern, more Semitic-speaking parts of southern Mesopotamia than they
were in the far south, and royal power may have grown as northern rulers
came to control the south (Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 143–46). Nevertheless,
in all southern Mesopotamian cities political power remained relatively de-
centralized as different groups competed for political control. J. N. Postgate
(1991: 301) maintains that a form of administration based upon consensus
survived the growth of hegemonic and later regional states in Mesopotamia.
While political power generally appears to have been concentrated in fewer
institutions than among the Yoruba, the structures of government in these two
civilizations were very similar.
Tenochtitlan’s extraordinary size, political power, and role as the centre of a
tributary network that extended far beyond the Valley of Mexico made its
political organization different in many respects from that of neighbouring
city-states. All the city-states in the valley participated in a regional economy
controlled to a large extent by the Aztec and were subject in varying degrees
to Aztec domination.
The smallest unit of Aztec political organization was the calpolli. Tenochti-
tlan was said to have been composed of twenty large calpollis, each of which
played a part in the city’s complex ritual life (van Zantwijk 1985). For religious
reasons there may have been resistance to increasing this number. In reality,
by 1519 Tenochtitlan may have had four times that number of calpollis (called
tlaxilacalli) (Clendinnen 1991: 33; M. E. Smith 1996: 312). Each calpolli or
tlaxilacalli had one or two calpollecs (hereditary leaders). Their task was to
manage the group’s affairs with the advice and assistance of a council of elders

204
Sociopolitical Organization
drawn from member families. Together they oversaw the operation of the
calpolli temple, the school where young commoners were trained as soldiers,
and the military brigade. The leadership also settled internal disputes, col-
lected taxes, and organized corv´ees to carry out public works, which included
cleaning streets and dredging canals. Taxes in kind consisted largely of crops
produced by young men working ﬁelds that remained the collective property of
calpollis. This food was used to support corporate institutions and leaders and
to pay taxes to the central government. Leaders were also responsible for keep-
ing records, in particular concerning the assignment of land to members. They
were assisted in collecting taxes and organizing corv´ee work by ﬁscal ofﬁcers
(tequitlatoque) who supervised groups of twenty to one hundred households
(Berdan 1982: 59). It is unclear to what extent these ofﬁcers were the same
as the elders who sat on the calpolli council. Calpolli leaders had intermarried
with the royal family soon after the establishment of the Aztec monarchy and
thus had acquired noble status (M. E. Smith 1996: 145–51; Spath 1973). The
power of the calpolli leaders in Tenochtitlan had been curtailed by the state
administration. According to the Spanish, calpolli leaders had to report to the
palace daily to receive orders from royal ﬁscal ofﬁcers (Soustelle 1961: 41).
Frederic Hicks (1982) suggests that in Texcoco, in contrast to Tenochtitlan,
calpollis were no longer self-governing but organized and controlled by the
upper classes.
At the top of the state administration were the king and the chief decision-
makers, who bore the title tecuhtli (lord). In Tenochtitlan next in rank after the
king among this group were the cihuacoatl and the members of the Council of
Four. The cihuacoatl became regent when the king was ill or not in the capital,
routinely supervised the priesthood, and was in charge of various ﬁscal and
legal matters. Two members of the Council of Four were the commanders
in chief of the army. Together the four were the king’s chief advisers and
administrators and may have governed the four quarters into which the capital
was divided (Dur´an 1964: 40; Hassig 1985: 105; Soustelle 1961: 92).
The king and these ﬁve ofﬁcials headed a hierarchy of administrative, mil-
itary, and religious ofﬁcials recruited from among the members of the royal
family, other members of the nobility, and ennobled warriors. None of these
ofﬁces was hereditary; individuals were appointed to them by the king. Ap-
pointment to the most important ofﬁces, however, depended on the high status
of the candidate’s forebears as well as on his own talents and achievements.
High-ranking ofﬁcials assisted the king in formulating major policy decisions
and administered the palace law courts with the help of numerous secondary
ofﬁcials called calpixque. These lower-ranking members of the nobility over-
saw the collection and distribution of taxes and tribute, the construction of

Administration
205
state temples and public works such as causeways, aqueducts, and dykes to
control water levels, the management of state land and royal property, and the
amassing of the weapons, armour, and food supplies that were needed to pro-
vision the armies while on campaigns. Most ofﬁcials worked in Tenochtitlan,
but some were located in major towns throughout the regions that the Aztec
dominated to supervise relations with subject states, oversee the collection of
tribute, and ensure the delivery of food grown on ﬁelds that had been ceded
to the Aztec as tribute. These ofﬁcials were probably assisted by numerous
record-keepers, the youngest and least recognized members of the hereditary
nobility. All administrators and record-keepers would have required training in
the schools where members of the nobility were educated (Soustelle 1961: 49).
Former commoners who had been ennobled as a reward for military valour
but lacked special administrative training guarded the king and various public
buildings, arrested and executed people on orders from the king and high
ofﬁcials, and trained young men to be soldiers in the commoner schools of
the calpollis from which they came. The markets were regulated by pochteca
(long-distance traders) who were empowered by the king to establish fair
prices, control weights and the quality of goods being sold, and impose ﬁnes
and other penalties on those who defrauded buyers (Berdan 1982: 42; Hassig
1988: 29).
In Tenochtitlan the power of the king and nobles was greatly strengthened
by military success and royal control of the material resources received from
the Aztec tributary network. In smaller and less powerful city-states the inﬂu-
ence of calpolli and other community leaders remained stronger. Although the
Texcocan king shared hegemony with the Aztec monarch, the much smaller
Texcocan capital consisted of six wards, each with its own ruler and palace
(Hodge 1984: 24–25; Offner 1983: 5–7). The Texcocan ruler had, however,
gone farther than the Aztec king in integrating neighbouring city-states into a
common political system. Fourteen small nearby city-states that were tributary
to Texcoco participated to some extent in a common government. The tlatoani
of Texcoco was advised by a high council attended by the kings of these neigh-
bouring states as well as by the high-ranking Texcocan ofﬁcials who presided
over the councils of war, ﬁnance, religion, and justice. Commoners, palace of-
ﬁcials, and other nobles from these subordinate city-states and from Texcoco
served on these councils (Offner 1983: 147–49).
In some much smaller and weaker states there was more than one tlatoani,
and decisions relating to the community had to be reached by consensus among
these leaders. In small states with a single king, councils representing sectional
interests such as those of quarters, calpollis, and communities played general
decision-making roles that were much more important than the roles played by

206
Sociopolitical Organization
corresponding bodies in Tenochtitlan and Texcoco. Towns and villages located
beyond city-state capitals were composed of one or more calpollis. While some
larger communities had their own council and a subordinate ruler as their
head, other communities had the same relation to the king as calpollis in
urban centres (Hodge 1984).
While there was a vast amount of variation in the degree of internal cen-
tralization among the states in the Valley of Mexico, on the whole there ap-
pears to have been more centralization in this region than there was among
the Yoruba or in southern Mesopotamia. At least in part this difference may
be attributable to the sharp distinction between hereditary nobles and com-
moners (Stone 1997), which provided a basis for consolidating power struc-
tures that the other two city-state systems lacked.
Surviving texts reveal little about the ofﬁcials and administrators who served
the Maya’s divine rulers. Except to a limited degree in Terminal Classic times,
inscribed monuments were created solely to celebrate these rulers. Some of
these texts mention ofﬁcials with the titles ahaw and sahal (plural sahalob).
Ahaw may have been close relatives of kings or simply nobles (Hammond
1991: 270); sahalob, mentioned in inscriptions only in the western lowlands,
were hereditary ofﬁcials at the royal court and governed secondary centres and
rural districts (Hammond 1991: 280; Schele and Mathews 1998: 88–89, 339–
40; Tate 1992: 20). The title ah chul na (person of the sacred house/temple)
appears to have been bestowed on some important court ofﬁcials as well as on
members of the royal family and occurs in the names of some royal spouses
(Houston 1993: 130–34).
The distribution of high-status residences has been interpreted as evidence
that Maya kingdoms may have been divided into small provinces ruled from
local administrative centres by the hereditary leaders of the area’s highest-
ranking patrilineages. These districts, it is argued, were in turn composed of
a number of communities or small districts governed by subordinate heredi-
tary rulers. Comparisons have been drawn with the hereditary town and ward
leaders that the Spanish encountered among the Maya in the sixteenth century
(Marcus 1993). Alternatively, it has been suggested, that Maya political orga-
nization was more variable than this model suggests. While some Maya kings
may have ruled over nested hierarchies of hereditary rulers, others may have
created more unitary polities by replacing such rulers with their own specially
appointed kinsmen or unrelated ofﬁcials (Haviland 1992; Montmollin 1989).
The claim that rulers at the district and local levels constituted an endur-
ing hereditary element in Classic Maya political organization while particular
kingdoms grew, broke apart, and sometimes ceased to exist requires further
documentation.

Administration
207
The relatively dispersed nature of Maya settlement may have encouraged
the development of hierarchical administrative structures that on a small scale
more closely resembled those of territorial states than they did the adminis-
trative structures of any other city-state system in our sample. It remains to be
determined how this affected Maya economic organization and beliefs. The
Maya also seem to have resembled the highland Mexicans and differed from
the Mesopotamians and the Yoruba in having a well-deﬁned hereditary nobil-
ity. This, combined with the dispersed nature of Maya settlement, may have
encouraged administrative structures to be segmentary and under the control
of high-status patrilineal kin groups. What is not known is the extent to which
kings were able to overcome the centrifugal tendencies inherent in such an
administrative arrangement and replace it with a more centralized structure.
territorial states
While city-states required systems to administer the territories beyond their
urban centres, these territories were small, and a large proportion of the popu-
lation, resources, and wealth of these states was concentrated in their capitals.
Territorial states required much more elaborate regional administrations to
deal with the serious problems of keeping large territories subject to some
degree of centralized control. Egypt was divided into as many as forty-two
provinces (sp3t). These administrative divisions mostly straddled short sections
of the Nile Valley south of Memphis and consisted of areas of slightly raised
ground bounded by Nile distributaries in the Delta. During the Old Kingdom
a typical province had between forty thousand and seventy-ﬁve thousand in-
habitants, while by the New Kingdom the average population of a province
had probably risen to 112,000 people. The Inka organized their kingdom by
provinces,eachideallycontainingfortythousandfamiliesortwohundredthou-
sand people. The Shang state appears to have had at least a two-tiered system
of regional government, with the units at both the provincial and local levels
controlled by leaders of patrilineages linked in some fashion to the royal family.
Because of their size and numerous subdivisions, the governments of
territorial states had to be hierarchical. Some of them were organized in
a ‘delegational’ and others in a bureaucratic fashion (Kamenka 1989: 1–5;
Weber1968).Delegationalsystemshavealsobeencalled‘segmentary’systems,
and recent discussions of them are derived from Aidan Southall’s Alur Society
(1956) by way of Burton Stein’s (1980) application of his ideas to the Hindu
state of Vijayanagara (see also Southall 1988). The terms ‘segmentary’ and
‘delegational’ are in fact both problematic. ‘Delegational’ implies that effective
centralized control existed over the whole of a territory before power was

208
Sociopolitical Organization
assigned to local ofﬁcials to administer its parts; ‘segmentary’ suggests that
larger political structures were created by linking together smaller chiefdoms
whose rulers and local governments largely remained in place. In reality, both
processes were involved in the creation of territorial states and often in the
formation of the same state. The term ‘delegational’ is employed here mainly
because ‘segmentary’ was originally developed to classify prestate societies and
is therefore potentially the more misleading when applied to early civilizations
(Marcus and Feinman 1998). ‘Delegational’ is also preferable because even
minimal success in building territorial states required the creation of structures
that would bind incorporated polities to the larger entities.
In delegational systems responsibility for all the affairs of a region located
beyond the royal capital district devolved upon a single high-level ofﬁcial and
his staff. This ofﬁcial ensured the maintenance of order in the region, was
responsible for its defence, carried out public works, and collected taxes, a
portion of which he remitted to the central government. Territorial states
required multiple tiers of delegated authority. Ofﬁcials at each administrative
level were answerable to the king not only for their own conduct but also
for that of all the lower-level district ofﬁcials to whom authority within their
jurisdictions had been delegated. Yet, in practice, higher-level ofﬁcials often
had no direct control over regions administered by subordinate ofﬁcials and
no direct access to their resources. The great attraction of such a wholesale
delegation of plenipotentiary powers to regional and local leaders was that it
constituted a relatively inexpensive way to administer a large state. The main
challenge for the central government was to prevent a state administered in
this fashion from disintegrating.
Kingdoms organized in this manner varied radically in the way in which the
central government controlled regional ofﬁcials. In some, rulers of formerly
autonomous regions were retained as hereditary regional ofﬁcials, with suc-
cession to ofﬁce sometimes requiring royal approval. In such instances, the
incorporation of conquered regions into a territorial state remained weak even
if the local rulers were eventually linked to the king by marital ties. Alterna-
tively, when a regional polity was incorporated into a larger kingdom, its former
ruler was sometimes replaced by a governor selected from the king’s family or
entourage. In this instance the incorporation of the conquered territory was
more secure, especially if older polities were dismembered or rearranged and
new levels of regional control were established, but even here there was con-
siderable variation in control. A king’s powers were limited at the provincial
level unless he regularly replaced regional governors or could remove them
at will. While delegational systems were relatively simple to establish and in-
expensive to operate, they placed little power to control local resources in the

Administration
209
hands of the central government, and kingdoms tended to fall apart quickly if
the central government faltered.
The alternative arrangement in territorial states was a bureaucratic admin-
istrative structure, in which central, provincial, and local governments were
managed by ofﬁcials who were individually responsible for speciﬁc aspects of
administration. A province might be administered by separate military, le-
gal, and ﬁscal ofﬁcers, each of whom was assigned a particular sphere of
responsibility and resisted encroachment on his domain. Ofﬁcials were often
transferred at regular intervals from one province and one branch of adminis-
tration to another. With such arrangements, kings were better able to control
what was happening at the local level and keep provincial ofﬁcials closely tied to
the central government. This form of administration was more expensive to op-
erate and probably less efﬁcient at the local level than a delegational form. Be-
cause ofﬁcials were frequently transferred from place to place, they knew less
about the regions they were governing than if they had remained in the same
place for a long time. As a result, much de facto power remained in the hands of
the indigenous population. The limited differentiation of early bureaucracies,
by comparison with those found in modern industrial societies, and their more
personal and less rule-bound style of governing suggest that rulers of large
kingdoms were rarely willing or able to assume the full economic and admin-
istrative burden of controlling the lower levels of these administrative hierar-
chies. This difference led Max Weber to distinguish ancient patrimonial from
more ‘rationalized’ modern bureaucracies and to view early administrative sys-
tems as extensions of the management of royal households (Kamenka 1989: 1).
After Egypt was uniﬁed, the rulers and members of some of the leading
families of the small states and chiefdoms that had previously existed may
have been allowed to continue as provincial administrators within their former
territories, but within a few generations hereditary regional leaders had been
entirely replaced by itinerant ofﬁcials. In addition, some communities that
had been capitals of signiﬁcant rival polities prior to uniﬁcation were replaced
by new provincial administrative centres (T. Wilkinson 1999: 344–65). Village
leadership may have remained hereditary, but the tombs of these leaders grew
smaller as the power of the central government increased during the early Old
Kingdom (Reisner 1932).
In its developed form, during the Old Kingdom, the civil service was headed
by one or more viziers (t3ty) who administered the country, or major divisions
of it, in the name of the king. Under their supervision were government de-
partments concerned with collecting surplus grain, administering royal estates
and land registration, overseeing government supplies of linen, wood, wine,
metals, and other valuable commodities, carrying out construction projects and

210
Sociopolitical Organization
supervising craft production in government workshops, and maintaining law
and order and dealing with all legal matters that were of concern to the central
government. Most of these departments were divided into parallel sections
for Upper and Lower Egypt – a separation that may have been operational
or largely symbolic (Strudwick 1985). The centralized administration of food
offerings for royal funerary cults during the Fifth Dynasty suggests that many
estates and sources of revenue ofﬁcially assigned to individuals were managed
collectively by a single bureaucratic organization (Eyre 1987a: 23).
The civil service was distinguished from the royal household staff, which
included individuals of high rank who were the king’s companions or man-
aged his household and personal estates and numerous personal attendants of
various ranks and with specialized skills. Some of these ofﬁcials carried out spe-
cial political commissions for the king. The regular government departments
had their headquarters in the capital and branch ofﬁces in provincial centres
as well as in smaller local centres within each province (Hassan 1993). The
provincial units, at least in Upper Egypt, were of economic importance, since
some of them had constituted maximal irrigation units since late Predynastic
times (Butzer 1976). In the Old Kingdom the chief ofﬁcial representing the
king or a vizier at the provincial level held a title such as ımy-r wpt (overseer
of commissions), h
• q3 sp3t (ruler of a province), or sˇsm t3 (leader of the land).
Although he was responsible for ensuring that royal wishes were carried out,
this ofﬁcial could not prevent ofﬁcials working for other departments from
reporting directly to their superiors at the capital. A single overseer of com-
missions was frequently responsible for several adjacent provinces (Baer 1960;
Kanawati 1980).
At the top level of the administrative hierarchy, immediately under the vizier,
were a number of srw (singular sr) (high ofﬁcials). Those in the capital had easy
access to the king, while the rest represented royal authority in the provinces.
The srw and the high-ranking courtiers who attended the king and managed
his household together would have totalled at most a few hundred individuals.
Each government department was headed by a sr, who was designated as the
overseer (ımy-r, ‘giver of orders’) of that department. Working under each
sr were lesser-ranking overseers (ımy-r) and scribes (sˇsw, singular sˇs). The
total number of literate Egyptians would not have exceeded 1 percent of the
population during the Old and Middle Kingdoms (Baines 1983: 584). Ordinary
overseers made low-level decisions but did not formulate general policies,
while scribes were the record-keepers who carried out their orders. Many low-
level ofﬁcials were tax collectors and overseers of public works. Others were
assigned more speciﬁc responsibilities, among them administering particular
fortresses, dockyards, royal estates, and armouries and supervising particular

Administration
211
groups of priests, soldiers, carpenters, and herdsmen (Kanawati 1977: 15–33;
Strudwick 1985).
The ideal was for an administrator to occupy a series of posts of ever higher
rank that would take him from one part of Egypt to another. He might in
succession be a minor tax collector, in charge of a temple estate, manager of
the food supply for the army, and then the civil administrator in charge of
a province. His ambition was eventually to secure a high-ranking position in
the central administration at Memphis and be buried near the pyramid of the
king or the tomb of an important ancestor (near an older royal tomb). Sons
of high-ranking ofﬁcials aspired to take over their fathers’ ﬁnal and highest
posts or to secure even more exalted ones, and many ofﬁcials did in fact
succeed their fathers. Yet the ideal of the Egyptian state – working one’s way
up the administrative hierarchy by earning the approval of senior ofﬁcials and
the king – also inﬂuenced career patterns. Egypt achieved the extreme in
bureaucratic organization among early civilizations (Frankfort 1956: 99–103;
Janssen 1978).
The civil service hierarchy was remodelled repeatedly during the Old King-
dom. In the Fourth Dynasty the highest state ofﬁces were held by close male
relatives of the king under the joint supervision of the vizier, who collected
taxes and oversaw the legal system, and the ‘overseer of all the works of the king’
(ımy-r k3t nbt nt nswt), who was in charge of public works. King Menkaure
and his successors excluded members of the royal family from all high ofﬁces,
including that of vizier. King Neferirkare of the Fifth Dynasty further abol-
ished honorary court titles for close royal kin. At the same time, the number
of administrative titles was increased, the tasks assigned to each ofﬁcial were
more carefully deﬁned, and positions were more precisely ranked. As a result
of these changes, the civil service became separated from the royal family. The
king now shared power not with the hereditary nobility but with a much larger
number of individually more dispensable civil servants. Thus, contrary to what
is generally believed, the king’s control over his ofﬁcials was increased.
KingDjedkare-Isesialteredtherankingsystemtoreducethepowerofsenior
ofﬁcials, dividing the vizierate into three: one each for Upper and Lower Egypt
and one for the whole country. Viziers could once again be appointed from
the hereditary nobility or even from among the king’s sons. At the same time,
the number of high titles that an ofﬁcial might hold at one time was reduced.
Hereafter the organization of the civil service was modiﬁed in every reign but
one until the end of the Old Kingdom. It appears that the kings repeatedly
altered the way of doing things and the titles that accompanied government
ofﬁces as one way of maintaining control over the bureaucracy (Baer 1960;
Kanawati 1980; Strudwick 1985).

212
Sociopolitical Organization
The Inka state has been described as ‘proto-bureaucratic’ (Gose 1996a:
21). Its rulers constructed a complex nested hierarchy of units organized as
similarly at any particular level as local conditions permitted. Ten adminis-
trative levels extended from the monarch down to and often into the ayllu.
The top three levels were staffed exclusively by members of the Inka nobility
and included the central administration, the governing of the four quarters
of the kingdom, and the governments of approximately eighty provinces.
Five middle levels were governed by kurakas, or hereditary non-Inka ofﬁcials
who were members of various ethnic groups that had accepted Inka
sovereignty, arranged in nested levels according to whether they governed
approximately ten thousand, ﬁve thousand, one thousand, ﬁve hundred, or
one hundred families. The kurakas in charge of at least the higher of these
levels were recognized by the Inka as constituting a non-Inka nobility. In areas
where leadership previously either had not existed at these levels or had not
been hereditary, the Inka installed local notables as hereditary rulers. While
the smallest group often coincided with the ayllu, larger or smaller ayllus may
have corresponded with higher or lower administrative levels. The Inka further
divided groups of one hundred families into units of ﬁfty and ten families each
underthesupervisionofnon-hereditaryforemenwhowerecommonersoflocal
origin. Low-level ofﬁcials transmitted orders from their superiors and saw that
they were carried out. The non-Inka nobility was responsible for maintaining
order and ensuring that the local people performed their duties to the Inka
state. The middle and lower levels of the Inka administration were allowed no
role in the formulation of policy (Patterson 1987; Rowe 1944: 262–64).
Hereditary leaders from the hunu kuraka, the ethnic nobles governing
ten thousand families, down to the ayllu level tended to be descended from
families that had ruled an area prior to the Inka conquest. Because the Inka
divided large polities or united small ones to create administrative units close
to their ideal size, continuity in ofﬁce-holding from pre-Inka times was far
from complete. Moreover, while the leaders of these groups were hereditary,
their succession to ofﬁce had to be approved by the local Inka governor or
the Inka monarch. Kurakas’ loyalty to the Inka was reinforced by the increase
in their personal incomes that was a result of state control and agricultural
development (D’Altroy 1987b). Those at the highest levels were required to
visit Cuzco periodically, and houses were provided for them and their retainers
in the ring of settlements surrounding the elite centre. Inka ofﬁcials replaced
kurakas they suspected of disloyalty with more dependable members of their
families or ethnic groups and sometimes rewarded conscripted soldiers for
special acts of valour by making them foremen of ﬁfty or ten families. They
did not hesitate to intervene directly in the affairs of even small groups of

Administration
213
their subjects. While they stressed loyalty to the Inka state, they encouraged
rivalries and antagonisms among these small groups as a way of reducing the
chances of their combining to oppose Inka rule. In addition to dividing ethnic
groups and resettling portions of them alongside unrelated ones, they symbol-
ically emphasized ethnic differences and encouraged ritual battles that kept
alive memories of long-standing local disputes (D’Altroy 1992; Kendall 1973:
108–11; C. Morris 1998; Spalding 1984).
Provincial governors (tukuyrikuq) and all higher ofﬁcers were appointed by
the king from the various levels of the Inka nobility. A provincial governor lived
in the administrative centre of each province but had to report regularly in per-
son to the king. Governors were periodically transferred from one province to
another to prevent them from acquiring a local power base, and their principal
residences remained in or near Cuzco. Various itinerant inspectors and secret
agents monitored their behaviour and reported on their loyalty to the king.
A governor was assisted by a chief aide and a staff of priests, record-keepers,
and ofﬁcials in charge of corv´ee labour for public works. A rotating workforce
of four hundred corv´ee labourers was always available at the provincial ad-
ministrative centre, and larger corv´ees periodically repaired roads and erected
buildings throughout the province, served in the army, and carried out mining
operations. In general, military leadership was separate from the provincial
administration, as were the overseers of crown estates and the ofﬁcials who
visited ayllus to select children to become aqllakuna and yanakuna (S. Moore
1958: 96–114; Rowe 1944: 269).
In the Cuzco area there was a similar range of overseers and administrators
in charge of storage facilities, religious institutions, and state building projects.
The construction of the fortress of Saqsawaman was directed by four master
builders responsible to one of the king’s many brothers. In addition, special
government facilities were located at Cuzco, such as the schools for training
the young men of the royal family and the sons of high-ranking administrators
to be ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 78, 130; Niles 1993: 161).
The most important ofﬁces of the central government were held by broth-
ers, half-brothers, and other close male relatives of the king. The highest of
these ofﬁces were the four apukuna or prefects of the quarters into which
the Inka state was divided. These administrators helped the king to supervise
the provincial governors in their quadrants. The king delegated many of his
religious responsibilities throughout the kingdom to the high priest of the sun
and his military responsibilities to top-ranking army ofﬁcers, who served under
a royal commander in chief (apusquipay). He was also assisted by a chamber-
lain, who routinely issued orders in his name and acted as an intermediary
between him and other high-ranking ofﬁcials. It is suggested that all these

214
Sociopolitical Organization
ofﬁcials were viewed as substitutes for the king, who derived their power from
speaking for him much as oracles spoke for gods and dead kings. None of
these positions was hereditary. Yet together these ofﬁcials extended the role
of the king in governing the administrative, military, and religious spheres.
While the higher administration of the Inka state was patrimonial rather than
strongly bureaucratic, an effort was made to keep power under royal control
by separating the military and the religious from the civil administration. By
having a small number of close relatives act and speak for the king, it was also
possible for a monarch who was largely reclusive for ritual reasons to maintain
the appearance of infallibility (Gose 1996a).
While the Inka government was largely delegational within provinces, stren-
uous efforts were made to prevent provincial and higher government ofﬁces
from becoming hereditary. The military was separated from the civil adminis-
tration at the provincial level, and there was a tripartite division of administra-
tive,military,andreligiouspowersatstillhigherlevels.HadtheInkastatelasted
longer, its administration might have become more completely bureaucratized.
In Shang China kin ties were used to structure political relations. The Shang
kingdom was divided into a series of provinces or districts ruled by hereditary
ofﬁcials who bore the title hou or bo. Each of them, together with subordi-
nate ofﬁcials and retainers, occupied a fortiﬁed administrative centre (yi). The
construction of such a centre appears to have required the consent of the king
(Keightley 1969: 332). Each hou or bo controlled the population of the sur-
rounding region, collected taxes, supervised agricultural production on state
land, and commanded military units. It has been proposed that originally bo
governed border regions while hou presided over more centrally located dis-
tricts. Both types of ofﬁcials are occasionally recorded as rebelling against the
kings. While these titles may originally have denoted different functions, by
the Late Shang period the functions had become blurred and the titles seem
instead to have distinguished different ranks of the nobility and perhaps dif-
ferences in the size or population of the territory they controlled. Both appear
to have served as court ofﬁcials as well as regional administrators. While this
arrangement may have preﬁgured the ﬁve grades of lords who governed terri-
tories in Western Zhou times, there is no evidence that a ﬁve-tiered hierarchy
existed during the Shang period (Chao 1972: 99–109).
These regional authorities belonged to a network of high-ranking lineages
related to the Shang kings by blood or marriage. Some of them, including the
earliest known Zhou rulers, appear to have been descendants of local leaders
subdued by the Shang kings. Others were descendants of Shang kings or other
high-ranking members of the Shang state who had replaced defeated local
rulers. While the governors of provinces were granted hereditary control of

Administration
215
them and peripheral provinces sometimes rebelled against Shang rule, Chao
(1972: 115) maintains that the Shang kings were able to intervene actively in
the management of these political divisions. Western Zhou kings dismissed or
demoted regional ofﬁcials whom they mistrusted, and so perhaps did Shang
kings. Many regional ofﬁcials appear to have been consanguineal members
of the Shang royal family sent by the king to impose control over a region or
to rule over conquered territories with the help of other members of their
patrilineage. As genealogical relations between the heirs of such ofﬁcials and
the king grew more remote, their loyalty may have diminished (Shaughnessy
1999: 323). To counteract this tendency, such ofﬁcials and their lineages appear
to have been shifted from one location to another. A similar situation prevailed
duringtheWesternZhouperiod,when,itisnoted,theseofﬁcials‘couldmigrate
from one locality to another, and territoriality was of minor concern’ (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 268). Court ofﬁcials and regional rulers also looked to the king
to establish their younger sons as rulers of new districts as the Shang state
expanded. Those who did not secure such positions usually became landless
ofﬁcials working for their landholding kinsmen.
Hou and bo each controlled a variable number of tian, who ruled over small
areas from their own more modest centres. Some tian were the heads of local
ruling families who had accepted Shang rule. Like hou and bo, tian were
hereditary rulers and, provided that they paid taxes and supplied military aid
when called upon to do so, were probably left to manage the affairs of their
district relatively independently (Chao 1972: 110–11). The available evidence
suggests that the Shang state was governed by a nested hierarchy that had
at least three major administrative levels. At the top a single hereditary king
(wang) ruled from one or more capitals (da yi, ‘big yi’), while under him hou
and bo, and below them tian ruled from their own administrative centres.
The three top hereditary titles were zi (king’s son), hou, and bo. The zi
may have included some individuals who were honoured by adoption into the
royal family as well as the actual descendants of Shang monarchs. All these
were members of the royal clan (Chao 1972: 110; Chou 1968: 52–76). Many
zi served as court ofﬁcials, while others may have ruled over provinces and
hence also been called hou or bo. Close kin of the reigning monarch appear
to have lived near him, occupying high administrative posts and advising and
supporting him.
The oracle-bone inscriptions reveal that a large number of ofﬁcial titles
were used at the Shang court. Civil titles, each often divided into several
grades, included yin (administrator), chu (ﬁscal ofﬁcer, treasurer), shi (envoy),
chen (retainer, courtier), gong (ofﬁcer in charge of artisans or public works),
and zai (steward in charge of household servants). Envoys carried messages

216
Sociopolitical Organization
between the royal court and provincial or foreign rulers, while courtiers, who
were personal servants of the king, appear to have discharged many func-
tions of public administration, both civil and military (Chou 1968). Written
commands were issued by senior ofﬁcials to ofﬁcials of lower rank, who were
often addressed collectively and solely by title. This suggests that court ofﬁ-
cials were hierarchically ordered (Keightley 1978b: 221). Yet the wide range
of activities that the bearers of individual titles performed indicates limited
bureaucractic specialization. It appears that younger sons of senior ofﬁcials for
whom provincial governorships could not be found slipped into courtier roles
(Vandermeersch 1980: 41–43). The oracle-bone texts mention frontier guards
(shu), who may have commanded border garrisons. It is not clear whether they
were under the command of the governors of outlying provinces or directly
under the authority of the king.
The administration of the Shang state seems to have been organized on
delegational principles to a far greater extent than was Old Kingdom Egypt
or the Inka realm. The Egyptian rulers sought to bureaucratize administra-
tion at all but the village level and rotated ofﬁce-holders in order to maintain
centralized political, economic, and religious control down to the local level.
The Inka delegated most powers but rotated provincial governors and made
some attempt to separate military, civil, and religious authority. The Shang
kings and their Zhou successors tended to allow provincial and local control to
become or remain hereditary, although they did occasionally move rulers and
their lineages from one place to another. The strongly delegational nature of
Shang territorial administration seems to have been linked to the important
role played by patrilineal kin groups in Chinese society. The strength of such
lineage structures may have inhibited the rapid development of bureaucra-
tization such as occurred in Old Kingdom Egypt and appears to have been
happening in the Inka state. Chinese rulers eventually succeeded in replacing
a delegational state organization built around lineage structures with a bu-
reaucratic form of administration, but this transformation required more than
a millennium.
political processes
The political systems of early civilizations were dynamic ones. In territorial
states bureaucratic ofﬁcials might aspire to become provincial rulers if they
could avoid being moved from one place to another and combine a wide
range of powers under their control. Delegational systems could be trans-
formed into bureaucratic ones if the monarch could divide the powers that
belonged to provincial governors among various ofﬁcials responsible to the

Administration
217
central government. These processes could result not only in major changes in
administrative structures but also in the disintegration or territorial expansion
of states.
The early growth of Tenochtitlan led its inhabitants, lacking nobles of their
own, to solicit a foreign noble to become their king. As a result of this and
subsequent marriages between kings’ daughters and calpolli leaders, a noble
classdevelopedthatcutacrossexistingcalpolliandethnicdivisions.LaterAztec
military domination and exploitation of a growing number of neighbouring
city-states increased the economic power of the Aztec nobility and promoted
the expansion of this class as commoners who were successful warriors were
recruited into it. The ability of the Aztec king to control the distribution of
tribute resulted in an increase of royal authority beyond what was found in any
other state in the Valley of Mexico. Calpolli leaders, while part of the noble
class, were reduced to the status of minor ofﬁcials who managed their own
groups’ internal affairs and carried out the orders of the central government.
Decisions concerning the collective goals of Aztec society were made increas-
ingly by the king and a small circle of hereditary members of the upper class
(Davies 1980; Dur´an 1964).
Among the Yoruba the expansion of the Oyo tributary system increased the
number of palace slaves and royal ofﬁcials and might have resulted in an expan-
sion of royal power if non-royal lineages in the capital had not seized power and
made one of their own members the commander of the city’s military system.
The king now had to share with representatives of the dominant non-royal
lineages not only political power but much of the tribute paid by conquered
states. Despite this decentralization, Oyo remained the most powerful Yoruba
kingdom until the nineteenth century. In the late eighteenth century, the oba
Abiodun managed to harness military power in rural areas of his kingdom to
defeat the non-royal urban lineages, but soon after this happened the Oyo
tributary system disintegrated (Law 1977; R. Smith 1969: 32–50).
In the hegemonic city-state of Benin, royal authority was more centralized
than in any of the Yoruba states. This had been accomplished by introducing
royalprimogenitureandmakingmostpublicofﬁcesnon-hereditaryandsubject
to royal appointment. Even so, as a result of occasional civil wars over royal
succession, episodes of royal control and urban prosperity in Benin alternated
with interludes of political chaos and immiseration (Bradbury 1957: 20–21).
Within city-states realignments in political alliances and ﬂuctuations in the
extent of royal power could occur rapidly and frequently. Because of the com-
plex ways in which economic, political, and military practices were articulated,
it is not always possible to correlate periods of political centralization with
political stability or hegemonic power.

218
Sociopolitical Organization
In Old Kingdom Egypt, beginning in the reign of the Sixth Dynasty king,
Merenre, there was an increase in the number of administrators assigned
to each province. Overseers of commissions were replaced by provincial
governors (h
• ry tp 3), each of whom had his own overseer of granaries and
overseer of the treasury. Many ofﬁcials were now buried in the provinces,
and remaining in a single province became a desirable alternative to a career
that culminated in holding high ofﬁce at the royal court. It is unclear whether
this change was initiated to improve the quality of provincial administration
or to counteract the concentration of power in the hands of high ofﬁcials at
the capital or occurred because successive monarchs were for the ﬁrst time
unable to prevent the development of local and eventually hereditary power
bases. In the late Sixth Dynasty the size and number of tombs of major ofﬁcials
in the Memphis area declined as fewer revenues reached the capital. At the
end of the Sixth Dynasty Egypt split apart to form a number of independent
provinces and competing small kingdoms (Fischer 1968; Kanawati 1977;
1980).
The Middle Kingdom rulers reunited Egypt but still had to cope with pow-
erful hereditary provincial rulers in some areas, especially Middle Egypt. The
kings of the early Twelfth Dynasty developed the Fayum area as a source
of revenue and used part of this revenue to increase the military forces that
were under their direct control. By the reign of Senwosret III the king was
strongenoughtoabolishtheremaininghereditaryprovincialrulers.Hedivided
Egypt into three administrative districts, or wrt, each controlled by ofﬁcials
who were individually responsible to the vizier for legal matters, agriculture,
ﬁnance, and general administration. Centralized control was thus reestab-
lished. This completed a cycle of rebuilding the bureaucratic control that the
central administration had lost in the late Sixth Dynasty (Grimal 1992: 166–68).
Despite a tendency for governments to ﬂuctuate between more and less
centralized control and between delegational and bureaucratic forms of ad-
ministration, ideals concerning what was politically normal served as templates
for action. In Egypt the ideal was that a single monarch should control a united
Egypt and the world. When Egypt split apart to form a number of competing
states at the end of the Old Kingdom, its rulers found themselves without a
mechanism for securing and distributing the raw materials from abroad that
were regarded as essential for upper-class burials and needed to produce lux-
ury goods for the living. As a result, neither the most powerful rulers nor
the wealthiest individuals were able to live in the style that, during the Old
Kingdom,Egyptianshadcometobelievewasnormalforpeopleoftheirstation.
Moreover, even powerful local rulers were severely limited in their ability to tax
their subjects or control them, since dissident groups could threaten to declare

Administration
219
their independence or switch their allegiance to competing leaders. Thus no
ruler commanded the resources to build an elaborate tomb or produce high-
quality art. Ordinary people appear to have had more possessions than under
the Old Kingdom, but their lives were less secure because of endemic warfare
(Seidlmayer 1987). This promoted a widespread desire for the reuniﬁcation
of Egypt and the reestablishment of a moderate degree of centralized royal
power.
Elizabeth Stone (1997: 25) has argued that the city-state ideology of
southern Mesopotamia prevailed over the regional-state ideology of northern
Mesopotamia even though political uniﬁcation became a regional reality. In
Mesopotamia the city-state ideal endured into the ﬁrst millennium b.c. despite
the development of larger states and empires. Cities were still conceptualized
as divine estates and the property of their patron deities, with consequent rights
of self-government. Powerful Mesopotamian kings continued to be regarded
as human servants of the gods as much weaker kings had been in early city-
states. This too was a cultural template that Mesopotamian kings who wished
to be regarded as divine found impossible to overcome (Baines and Yoffee
1998). In their art and in the political regimes they attempted to construct,
the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico in the Late Aztec period also appear to
have been consciously modelling themselves on what they accepted were the
traditions of the long-vanished hegemonic city-state of Tollan (Richards and
Van Buren 2000).
The governments of early civilizations employed a mixture of bureaucratic
and delegational administrative structures. Rulers sought to control ofﬁcials,
regions, kin groups, and institutions, while these groups sought to retain or
establish their own full or partial autonomy.
City-states were characterized by perennial struggles between royal author-
ity and more decentralized forms of political control. Those that lacked a
hereditary nobility tended to exhibit more extreme heterarchical features, but
no city-state found in early civilizations was governed ‘democratically’ by an as-
sembly of its male citizens. Decisions were made by a relatively small number
of leaders, who might include politically powerful individuals, representatives
ofpowerfulfamilies,andtheleadersofmajorinstitutions.InAristotle’spolitical
terminology, such societies were not democracies but aristocracies. While the
Aztec city-state grew increasingly centralized as its military power and wealth
increased, successful Yoruba states such as Oyo combined military success with
decentralized government.
Territorial states had to develop complex, multilevel administrative hierar-
chies.BureaucraticfeatureswerestrongestinOldKingdomEgyptandweakest
in Shang China. The apparently rapid development of bureaucratic structures

220
Sociopolitical Organization
in Egypt and Peru but not in China raises the question to what degree a
strong emphasis on corporate patrilineages favoured the development and re-
tention of delegational administrative structures in some territorial states and
constituted a basis for resistance to centralization in city-states such as those
of the Yoruba. Shifts in the degree of centralization and bureaucratization
indicate considerable ﬂexibility and the ability to conceptualize alternative po-
litical structures. There is also evidence of a tendency to idealize and preserve
political arrangements over time.

11 Law
A
n important function of states is to maintain public order. One of the
ways this is done is by legal action – settling disputes that might lead to
violence, restraining and punishing those whose behaviour harms individuals
or society, ensuring that government orders are obeyed, and validating cer-
tain controversial actions by individuals and groups (Postgate 1992: 275). Law
frequently claims to serve the interests of society as a whole and actually does
so insofar as public order beneﬁts everybody. Yet, in early civilizations, the
upper classes and the major institutions they controlled had far more wealth
and privileges to protect than did commoners, and they relied on the law to
do this.
The power to punish crimes, in particular with death, was an important
manifestation of a ruler’s authority. Among the Yoruba, the sword of state
symbolized the exclusive and godlike prerogative of the monarch to execute
criminals (Bascom 1969: 83–84). Laws were often claimed to originate with
thegods,whotransmittedthemtohumansthroughtheproclamationsofrulers.
The Aztec term for ‘laws’, nahuatilli, meant ‘a set of commands’ (Offner 1983:
83, 242–45, 282). Laws were a means by which human society was not only
regulated but also aligned with a cosmic order that was profoundly hierarchical.
The Babylonian word m ˆe ˇsaru and the Egyptian m3t referred both to the
cosmic order and to legal justice (Bott´ero 1992: 182). The Inka state claimed
that subjects’ commission of crimes such as murder, witchcraft, theft, and
neglect of religious cults threatened the health of the king and considered
them sacrilege (Rowe 1944: 305). Later evidence from China indicates that
law(fa)wasbelievedtohavebeencreatedbysuperhumanbeingsinaccordance
with divine models and interests (Lewis 1990: 198). To promote order on earth,
rulers sought to suppress blood feuds and punish murder, treason, theft, incest,
and many other forms of misconduct.
221

222
Sociopolitical Organization
Supernatural powers were believed to support the legal process by revealing
guilt or innocence through oracles and ordeals and by punishing oath-breakers.
The gods punished individuals whose crimes went undetected or unpunished
by humans. The Babylonian king Hammurabi claimed to have assembled his
law code at the command of the god Utu, or Shamash, who, because as the
sun god he saw everything that humans did, was also the patron deity of
justice (Pritchard 1955: 163–65). Promulgating this law code gave Hammurabi
an earthly role analogous to that of Enlil, the chief executive deity of the
Sumerian pantheon. The laws proclaimed by the Aztec ruler Mochtezuma I
were described as ‘ﬂashes that the great king . . . [had] sown in his breast, from
the divine ﬁre, for the total health of his kingdom’ (Offner 1983: 83). This
claim referred to the divine powers that were implanted in the Aztec monarch
at the time of his enthronement. The early Chinese believed that improper
conduct was supernaturally punished.
Yet the coercive powers of the state were severely limited. Although exem-
plary and, by modern standards, often extremely cruel punishments were in-
ﬂicted on criminals, they were in fact an indication of the weakness rather than
the strength of law enforcement. Settlement patterns indicate that the main-
tenance of law and order was not as effective as the rulers of early civilizations
would have wished. The upper classes normally lived in urban centres, many
of which were walled or had their outskirts patrolled so that the movement
of individuals in and out of them could be carefully monitored. Such arrange-
ments protected urban dwellers against assaults by criminals and rebellious
peasants as well as foreign armies. Within walled cities, temples, palaces, gov-
ernment ofﬁces, and storehouses were often surrounded by walls. In addition
to emphasizing the importance and sanctity of such structures, these walls pro-
tected the people and goods inside them against thieves and casual intruders.
Houses, especially those of wealthy families, frequently had a single, guarded
entrance and no external windows, at least on the ground ﬂoor; rooms opened
off interior courtyards. In New Kingdom Egypt upper-class houses were built
inside walled enclosures, and Classic Maya houses faced inward from three or
four sides of a courtyard. These arrangements suggest a concern for security as
well as privacy (Flannery 1998; P. Wilson 1988). They also indicate that neither
the state nor supernatural powers could ensure the safety of temples, palaces,
and houses.
Signiﬁcant state intervention at the lowest level of a polity was difﬁcult where
collecting information and conveying decisions were cumbersome and expen-
sive. In keeping with their approach to administration generally, kings and
government ofﬁcials tolerated and encouraged self-regulation in legal matters
at the local and family levels and by craft guilds and other local organizations.

