Trade and Craft Specialization
339
using the lost-wax method (Connah 1975; Dark 1973; Forman, Forman, and
Dark 1960; Shaw 1978; Willett 1967).
In southern Mesopotamia during the third millennium b.c., copper, silver,
lead, and gold were used to manufacture bowls, statues, ornaments, and jew-
ellery. Gold objects ﬁrst became abundant in the context of growing royal
power during the Early Dynastic III period (Huot 1989: 115). While arsenic-
copper and other alloys had been used still earlier, by Early Dynastic III times
bronze was being cast as well, using tin that came from Afghanistan and pos-
sibly also from Anatolia (Yoffee 1995: 298). Weapons such as spearheads and
daggers, as well as axes, adzes, and more specialized carpenters’ tools, were
also being manufactured from copper and bronze. Mesopotamian metalwork-
ers were skilled at using single and two-part moulds and the lost-wax casting
technique as well as at hammer-shaping metal. They also produced metal wire
and decorated metal objects with gold leaf, metal granules, and cloisonn´e.
During the third millennium b.c. an increasing number of agricultural tools
came to be made of copper and bronze. Christopher Edens (1992: 126) argues
that, by the end of the Akkadian period, copper had become an ‘industrial’ as
well as an ornamental metal. By Ur III times the standard bronze alloy con-
tained 17 percent tin, although different amounts of tin were being added to
copper for speciﬁc purposes (Crawford 1991: 131–37; Moorey 1985; Postgate
1992: 225–29).
The Inka created numerous luxury goods and religious objects from gold,
silver, copper alloys, and platinum, including jewellery, decorations for clothes,
metal cups and other tableware, and statues. Lead was used as a decorative
inlay. The alloying of copper and tin to make bronze had been invented in
Bolivia about a.d. 700 (Kendall 1973: 167). Metals were mined or panned from
rivers and smelted using crude but effective and quickly learned techniques
(Franklin 1990: 114–15). Many mines occurred in the southern, sparsely set-
tled part of the Inka kingdom, in modern Bolivia and Chile. Rivers in Ecuador
produced platinum that was mixed with gold dust to reduce its high melting
point. Skilled Inka craft workers were familiar with many techniques for work-
ing metal but generally hammered gold and silver objects from sheet metal and
cast bronze ones (Rowe 1944: 246–48). They knew how to gild and plate metal
but preferred to create alloys and then treat their surfaces in ways that would
increase the abundance of the more highly valued metal. Inka weavers like-
wise preferred to weave complicated multicoloured designs into cloth rather
than to decorate it by embroidery or dyeing, and Heather Lechtman (1993)
argues that the two Andean crafts exhibited a unique approach to technology.
The Inka also manufactured numerous weapons, especially battleaxes, from
bronze, as well as crowbars, chisels, knives, and other implements for working

340
Economy
soft stone and wood that were made available to workmen engaged in state
enterprises. Some foot ploughs were provided with bronze blades, but this
treatment was probably limited to ceremonial implements. Other tools were
made of stone, bone, and wood (Rowe 1944: 247–48).
The ancient Egyptians worked gold, silver, copper, and electrum, a natu-
rally occurring mixture of gold and silver. Bronze remained virtually unknown
during the Old and Middle Kingdoms. Jewellery, vessels, and statues were
usually made by beating sheets of metal into shape, although some statues
were made of carved wood covered with gold foil and small ones might be
cast. Weapons such as daggers were regularly cast from copper (Andreu 1997:
68–69), but as late as the Middle Kingdom government forces were supplied
with spears and arrows tipped with expertly worked ﬂint points (Vila 1970).
Whereas carpenters and sculptors who worked for the government were pro-
vided with copper tools, in the remains of Kahun, the town attached to the
funerary complex of the Middle Kingdom ruler Senwosret II, surviving ﬂint
tools outnumbered metal ones (David 1986: 93). Granite and much limestone
were worked using naturally occurring nodules of diorite (a much harder stone)
as hammers. Agricultural tools were generally manufactured from stone and
wood.
The Shang Chinese were superb metalworkers and had easy access to copper
and tin. They cast ritual vessels by pouring bronze into multisectional moulds,
which allowed them to produce extremely complex shapes. The purpose of
sectional moulds does not seem to have been to turn out multiple copies
of the same vessel, since no two vessels appear to have been precisely the
same. Lead was sometimes added to the bronze alloy to alter its colour and
ﬂuidity. Shang metallurgists also manufactured bronze buckles, bells, other
musical instruments, weapons, and ﬁttings and ornaments for chariots and
horse harnesses. The surface of the metal was often extensively worked after
casting and sometimes inlaid with gold and silver (Chˆeng 1960: 156–76). Metal
was not commonly used, however, to make jewellery. The Chinese preferred to
wear smooth, cool stones, such as jade, believing that they promoted calmness;
because of its association with ﬁre, direct contact with metal was considered
disturbing (Franklin 1983: 95; Franklin, Berthong, and Chan 1985). Few if
any bronze tools and no metal agricultural implements have been identiﬁed,
although moulds for making bronze hoes and picks appear to have been found
in one workshop at Zhengzhou. Royal artisans manufactured more arrowheads
from bone than from metal (Keightley 1969: 40, 92). This pattern of metal use
continued during the Western Zhou period. Iron – cast rather than forged –
was used extensively only in late Zhou times, and only then did metal farming
implements and household tools become common.

Trade and Craft Specialization
341
Craft workers in the Valley of Mexico worked gold, silver, and copper by
hammering, open-mould casting, and lost-wax casting. They used these metals
principally to make jewellery, including small bells that were sewn onto clothes.
Copper was frequently combined with gold to produce an alloy called tumbaga
or covered with gold leaf. While they also manufactured some drills, chisels,
awls, axes, sewing needles, and ﬁshhooks from copper, the vast majority of their
tools and weapons were made of wood and bone edged with obsidian blades.
A large obsidian-edged sword (maquahuitl) could cut a human body in two
(M. E. Smith 1996: 171). Some small bronze tools were reaching the Valley of
Mexico from towns located adjacent to Tarascan territory, in western Mexico,
where a knowledge of bronze-working had been introduced from Peru about
a.d. 1200 (96–98). No one in the Valley of Mexico knew how to manufacture
bronze objects. Agricultural tools were not made of metal.
There is no evidence that the Classic Maya worked or had signiﬁcant access
to metal, although imported metal ﬁgurines are occasionally found in ritual
caches (Baudez 1994: 59; Schele and Freidel 1990: 434). That they erected
impressive stone buildings and carved magniﬁcent limestone stelae employing
only stone and bone tools demonstrates that metal tools were not a prerequisite
for creating or sustaining an early civilization.
The evidence suggests that in early civilizations copper was used ﬁrst to man-
ufacture ornaments and ritual objects and only later to fashion weapons, craft
tools, and ﬁnally agricultural implements. Copper and bronze tended to be
used only to manufacture luxury goods, weapons, and craft workers’ tools until
abundant supplies of copper and tin became available with the development of
more efﬁcient mining and more cost-efﬁcient transportation. Iron is far more
prevalent in nature than either copper or tin, and once it was known how to
reﬁne iron ore it became possible to produce a wide range of tools. The eco-
nomic and social potentials of copper-bronze and iron technologies were there-
fore radically different (Heichelheim 1958). While substantial iron-working
developed considerably later than bronze-working in southwestern Asia and
China, in sub-Saharan Africa there is no evidence of a Bronze Age prior to an
Iron Age.
Early civilizations were associated with a wide range of cutting-tool tech-
nologies. There was no obvious correlation between the formal complexity
of these technologies and signiﬁcant measures of social complexity such as
population density or the division of labour, and therefore the development
of metallurgy cannot have been a key factor shaping the development of early
civilizations. Stone tools long continued to be used for agricultural and con-
struction work where specialized craft workers were being supplied with metal
tools. Finally, because obtaining stone to make cutting and hammering tools

342
Economy
sometimes presented the same logistical problems as did procuring metal or
metallic ores, the general impact of the use of metal on the division of labour
in early civilizations was not much different from that associated with the use
of stone. Stone tools persisted not as a result of cultural inertia but because so-
cieties were not convinced that it was worth making the various organizational
changes necessary to adopt a new technology.
What stimulated increased economic interdependence and political inte-
gration in early civilizations seems to have been the trade and craft special-
ization encouraged by the politically motivated demands of the upper classes
for prestige goods and by expanding markets for better-quality mass-produced
commodities as population densities increased.
trade
In early civilizations, most of the goods that people used in everyday life were
produced and sold locally. Long-distance trade differed from local trade in
scale and organization, and because rulers were concerned with its political
ramiﬁcations they related to it differently in city- and territorial states. In
most city-states the decentralized nature of political power encouraged the
development of intercity trade as an independent enterprise. Because city-
states were often at war with one another, major economic advantages were
also derived from conducting such trade at arm’s length from political authority.
In territorial states, government control of long-distance trade and of exotic
goods generally was an important source of power for rulers.
In Mesopotamia intercity trade and trade with more remote regions were
conducted by professional merchants. The merchants in each city-state be-
longed to one or more merchants’ associations (damgar). The head of the
merchant association (gal damgar) was either its highest-ranking member,
who had also been granted a palace title, or a palace ofﬁcial who acted as the
king’s chief liaison with the merchants. Traders received allotments of temple
land and were exempt from performing corv´ee labour (R. McC. Adams 1974a;
Leemans 1960b; Postgate 1992: 211; Silver 1986: 132–33).
It used to be believed that long-distance traders were originally employed
full-time by palaces or temples, which provided them with a ﬁxed income in
the form of an allotment of land. Polanyi (1957) argued that the economy
was so deeply embedded in the political organization of early civilizations that
what modern scholars wrongly imagined was ‘foreign trade’ was in reality gift
exchanges among the rulers of city-states, who did not seek to derive any
economic proﬁt from these exchanges. While few experts would now accept
this interpretation as accurate for the late third millennium, some argue that

Trade and Craft Specialization
343
this was probably the form that intercity exchanges took in Early Dynastic
times (Crawford 1991: 25; Foster 1981). The still later Ur III government
may have engaged in some long-distance sea trade, but even this is uncertain
(Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 160–63; Postgate 1992: 220–21).
The earliest available evidence indicates that, already by the Early Dynastic
period, intercity and interregional trade was being carried on for proﬁt and
that merchants acted as independent agents. By the Old Babylonian period
merchants were establishing joint-stock companies (naruqqu, ‘sacks’) in which
a number of merchants invested capital for a ﬁxed period, speciﬁed a division
of proﬁts and losses, and appointed a particular merchant to conduct the trade
(Silver 1986: 88; Van De Mieroop 1999: 197–202). Merchants traded goods
owned by temples, kings, wealthy landowners, and kin groups on a commission
basis and bought and sold goods on their own account. An important export
from Mesopotamian cities was food staples such as grain and dates. A temple
in Lagash arranged to have a merchant transport over thirteen thousand ﬁsh
caught by its workers to Nippur and sell them there (R. McC. Adams 1974a:
248). Merchants also traded wool, cloth, and other Mesopotamian manufac-
tures with far-off regions in return for metals, wood, semiprecious stones, and
other raw materials. In pre-Akkadian times foreign trade was mainly conducted
to secure raw materials for making luxury goods, but with the growing use of
copper agricultural tools foreign trade also became essential for food produc-
tion (Edens 1992: 126–32). Only small amounts of manufactured goods were
imported from abroad.
Mesopotamian merchants established trading posts near foreign towns in
what is now Turkey and perhaps also in Iran and around the Persian Gulf.
There resident Mesopotamian merchants could trade with the local people
on a regular basis while their subordinates managed the transport of goods.
Long-distance merchants also cultivated good relations with merchants in
other Mesopotamian city-states. Intercity trade was important for securing
goodsfromabroad,sincespeciﬁcrawmaterialsenteredsouthernMesopotamia
from different directions and hence came ﬁrst to different city-states (R. McC.
Adams 1974a: 246–47; Lamberg-Karlovsky 1996: 157; Van De Mieroop 1999:
185–93). Intercity trade also facilitated more specialized production in indi-
vidual city-states. Isin, for example, was a major centre of leather production,
while Lagash became a centre for the slave trade (Crawford 1991: 124–25).
Hegemonic Mesopotamian cities used their political power to ensure that their
own merchants could trade with foreign regions, unhampered by intervening
city-states.
Merchants belonging to different Mesopotamian city-states developed com-
plex commercial relations with each other. Instead of paying for all goods as

344
Economy
they were received, they built up credit and incurred debts with each other.
A merchant living in Ur could have what he owed to a merchant in Lagash
paid by a third merchant in Nippur who was indebted to him. The success-
ful operation of such a credit system required elaborate record-keeping, in-
cluding detailed contracts and receipts. Given the lack of a single unit of
account, it also required complex accounting techniques. No less important
was the need for mutual trust among trading partners; it was essential that
their good relations survive even wars between their respective city-states
(Larsen 1976; Leemans 1950; 1954; 1960a; 1960b; Snell 1982; Van De Mieroop
1999: 212).
It is also clear that a proﬁt motive was active in long-distance trade. A
Mesopotamian merchant could sell cloth he had purchased in his home town
for several times its original value in Turkey and buy silver there that he could
sell back home for three times what he had paid for it (R. McC. Adams 1974a:
246). Such increases in value more than covered the cost of transporting goods
by river, sea, or donkey. Grain prices also ﬂuctuated according to scarcity,
both on a seasonal basis and depending on the size of the annual harvest. Ef-
forts by governments to control rising prices by decreeing maximum amounts
that could be charged for goods were only partly successful (Silver 1986:
78–79).
No obvious market-places have been identiﬁed in Mesopotamian cities.
Commercialtransactionsappeartohavetakenplacenearthecitygates,insmall
shops, and along a ‘street of purchases’. The city of Sippar had a square (ribitu)
wheretaverns,whichfunctionedasmalesocialclubs,andshopsthatsoldluxury
goods were located (R. Harris 1975: 17; Postgate 1992: 79, 192–93). Specialists
mayhaveproducedgoodsinorneartheirhomesandsoldthemtheretofarmers
and other craft workers. Merchants also may have sold imported goods from
their houses, although they no doubt delivered bulk consignments directly to
temples, palaces, and the homes of rich clients.
In the Valley of Mexico and adjacent parts of central Mexico, long-distance
traders (pochteca) were excusively male, although female members of their
families invested in trading expeditions and looked after their husbands’ busi-
nesses while these men were abroad trading. The pochteca in each major
city-state were organized into one or more traders’ associations, each of which
was also a calpolli. Membership in such a calpolli was hereditary, although
individuals could join it by adoption. Male pochteca were stratiﬁed by age
and wealth. Each pochteca group had its own school (telpochcalli), where its
young men learned to bear arms so that they could defend themselves while
travelling abroad. The pochteca did not, however, serve in the army. Instead
they risked their lives travelling into foreign and even hostile regions to trade

Trade and Craft Specialization
345
for exotic goods (M. E. Smith 1996: 120–23). Some boys from trader families
attended nobles’ schools (calmecacs), where they learned to keep accounts
(van Zantwijk 1985: 144).
Pochteca were highly rivalrous among themselves. Individual traders sought
eminence by investing some of the proﬁts they derived from successful long-
distance trade in lavish, competitive feasting of other pochteca. Once a year all
the traders displayed their wealth at their calpolli temple and each boasted of
his accomplishments, resourcefulness, and bravery. The long-distance traders
also taunted local market traders for their lack of courage and initiative
(Clendinnen 1991: 138–39). Yet they attributed their success to their plain liv-
ing, hard work, solidarity among themselves, generosity to other long-distance
traders, and respect for foreign trading partners (van Zantwijk 1985: 171).
Each pochteca calpolli had two headmen (pochtecatlatoque) who repre-
sented their fellow traders in dealings with the king (van Zantwijk 1985: 143).
Only medium-sized and large cities had resident groups of pochteca, and the
largest cities often had several. There were twelve cities with resident pochteca
in the Valley of Mexico, but the traders from only ﬁve of these cities, includ-
ing Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, were permitted to trade beyond the tributary
system of the Triple Alliance. Pochteca from different regions traded with one
another over the whole of central Mexico and when travelling would stay at
each other’s homes. Farther south, where there were no traders’ associations,
they exchanged goods with rulers and their representatives (Townsend 1992:
190). Goods were transported by human bearers (tlameme), who were usually
free but landless men from outside the valley.
Long-distance traders usually travelled in groups and were armed to defend
themselves. Because of the many uncertainties and dangers they encountered,
trading expeditions were the foci of numerous religious observances. Divina-
tion was practised before leaving to ascertain unsuspected dangers and the
chances of success. Merchants did not wash their bodies until they returned
to their homes, arriving at night to conceal the quantity of goods they had pur-
chased abroad. They celebrated each successful trading expedition by hosting
a communal feast but only after having visited their calpolli temple to thank
their patron deity for their safe return (van Zantwijk 1985: 158–60).
Pochteca did business abroad for kings and nobles on a commission basis
but also exchanged wares with local market traders over a large area. They
brought into the Valley of Mexico exotic raw materials that artisans needed.
For the elites of Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, their most important task was
to obtain exotic luxury goods from outside the tributary network that their
states controlled, especially quetzal feathers. In city-states that did not have
access to tribute, rulers and commoners alike depended wholly on pochteca

346
Economy
to supply foods and raw materials from warmer ecological zones and luxury
products from distant cities. Trading practices among long-distance merchants
were simpler and more direct than in Mesopotamia because record-keeping, if
employed at all, must have been limited to recording ideographically the type,
number, origin, and destination of goods. Merchants had to commit details of
contracts to their memories.
Cities in the Valley of Mexico had large central markets (tianquiztli). Those
in the main urban centres (Tenochtitlan, Tlatelolco, and Texcoco) met daily,
with a larger assembly occurring every ﬁve days. The Spanish estimated that
forty thousand to ﬁfty thousand people attended the Tlatelolco market on
peak days. In the various quarters of large cities and in smaller cities and
settlements, markets usually met every ﬁve days, with a larger and more varied
market being held every twenty days. The biggest market-place in any city was
located near its centre, close to the main temples and the royal palace, and
was usually surrounded by a wall that was colonnaded on the inside. Market
days were arranged so that neighbouring markets did not coincide, giving both
buyers and sellers an opportunity to do business at a number of them. This
arrangement also gave local traders a chance to transport goods from larger
markets to smaller ones (Hassig 1985: 73–84). It has been argued that the
Aztec and Texcocan rulers altered the locations and operation of markets to
reduce the wealth and power of subordinate rulers and increase the size of
the main market in their own capitals. If so, such actions reinforced changes
in marketing patterns that were already being brought about by the collection
of large amounts of tribute by these two cities and by their increasing wealth
and population (Berdan et al. 1996).
At urban markets, buyers exchanged mainly maize and cloth for more per-
ishable foodstuffs, beverages, raw materials such as wood, hides, and salt,
goods manufactured locally or in nearby parts of the Valley of Mexico, and
exotic raw materials and manufactured items imported from more remote ar-
eas by the pochteca. Female traders played an active role in the operation
of local markets, where they sold food and manufactured goods produced by
their male relatives or purchased wholesale from long-distance traders (van
Zantwijk 1985: 131–32).
Some markets were noted for particular specialties: Alcolman for dogs, Az-
catpotzalco for slaves and birds (which were valued for their feathers), and
Texcoco for clothes, pottery, and painted gourds (Hassig 1985: 73). Markets
were also frequented by barbers, porters, craft workers, and prostitutes seek-
ing customers. Kings and nobles, through their agents or ofﬁcials, used the
markets to exchange the large amounts of food and cloth they received as trib-
ute and from their estates for any items they needed or wanted. It was illegal

Trade and Craft Specialization
347
for individuals to buy or sell goods elsewhere than at a public market, where
the state imposed a tax on all transactions (Townsend 1992: 173).
Different sections of markets were reserved for particular categories of
goods. This arrangement made it easy for buyers to compare what was being
offered for sale. While Aztec sumptuary laws determined who could publicly
wear or display certain products, every kind of goods could be sold at public
markets. The markets were patrolled by ofﬁcers and presided over by judges
who maintained order, settled disputes, and punished theft and fraud. At the
great market at Tlatelolco these powers were delegated to the city’s pochteca
(Hassig 1985: 67).
Yoruba itinerant or long-distance traders (alajapa) were less formally consti-
tuted than were the pochteca. Long-distance traders came from many different
classes. They included the wives and sons of kings who were seeking to acquire
wealth from trade because royal children could not hope to inherit much from
their fathers. Royal traders’ goods were free from transport and sales taxes,
and they could expect to be provided with free lodgings and food wherever
they travelled. Yet anyone was free to become a long-distance trader, the main
prerequisite being the ability to amass enough capital to get started. Women
played a major role in Yoruba trade at both the intercity and the local level.
Because they were not as likely to be attacked by soldiers, it was less dangerous
for women than for men to engage in intercity trading during wartime. Thus
women could ensure that essential commodities continued to circulate among
states. Capital to begin trading was often provided by a woman’s husband
(Bascom 1969: 65). Slave trading and trading beyond Yoruba ethnic territories
tended to be done by men, some of whom were organized in special associa-
tions (Law 1977: 210).
To travel more safely through dangerous regions, merchants formed cara-
vans and hired soldiers to protect them. They bought slaves or engaged porters
to carry their goods or carried them themselves. Each trader could join or leave
a caravan at any point along the way. While many traders, especially female
ones, travelled relatively short distances, a single caravan might journey from
the Guinea coast as far north as the Nupe and Hausa markets, transporting
slaves, horses, and natural produce from one region to another. The circula-
tion of manufactured goods encouraged specialization in weaving and dyeing,
pottery manufacture, and gold and silver working in Yoruba cities or regions
(Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 46). By transporting goods from one place to an-
other, traders could increase the value of these goods by up to ﬁvefold (Falola
1991). Long-distance traders bought and sold goods not at urban markets but
through local brokers (alarobo), and this allowed them to handle goods in bulk
quantities. Foreign merchants sometimes were explicitly forbidden to trade

348
Economy
at local markets. Government ofﬁcials, associations of local merchants, and
commercial brokers provided lodging and storage facilities for traders from
other towns (Falola 1991: 131).
Yoruba cities normally had several markets (oja). The main market was
located in the centre of the community, usually in front of the royal palace. It
was referred to as the oja oba (king’s market), and it normally met twice daily
or every second day. Smaller markets, each controlled by a local ofﬁcial called a
bale oloja, met in various wards of a city and in smaller communities every eight
or sixteen days. In general, local products predominated at neighbourhood
markets, while both local and imported goods were traded at the central urban
markets and at other major ones that developed along important trade routes,
especially near the borders of states and at transition points between ecological
zones. The establishment of a new market had to be approved by the local king
(Bascom 1969: 25–26; Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 19–96).
Much food, both raw and cooked, was sold at Yoruba markets. Because of
the remoteness of many farms from urban centres and the problems involved
in storing most Yoruba agricultural produce for long periods, it was probably
expedient for families to sell much of their farm produce in bulk through the
markets and to buy fresh food as they needed it (Krapf-Askari 1969: 155).
While most of this food was sold by women, a woman normally turned the
proﬁt over to her husband on the ground that he had grown it (Bascom 1969:
25). Because of the long time and the large amount of fuel required to cook
many types of Yoruba food, even poor people found it more economical to buy
such food already cooked (Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 103). Local market women
bought goods at main markets in order to resell them at smaller community
markets and kept these proﬁts for themselves.
Markets were policed by the local traders’ association. The woman who
headed this association often had the palace title iya oja (market mother)
and served as the chief palace liaison with all the craft associations in the
city (Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 55). Minimum sale prices were established
each market day among the sellers, but how much each item actually sold for
was determined by haggling. Food and other goods were sold by number or
container size rather than by weight.
The king of Benin, unlike neighbouring Yoruba rulers, controlled his peo-
ple’s trade with Europeans at the seaport of Ughoto (Gwatto). He claimed a
monopoly there over all trade in slaves, ivory, palm kernels, and pepper. Ofﬁ-
cials and commoners could trade other goods with Europeans but only after
senior palace ofﬁcials had ﬁnished conducting the king’s business (Bradbury
1957: 25).
The Maya rulers and nobles of historical times controlled interstate trade
(Coe 1993: 170), and it may be signiﬁcant that ‘God L’, who was associated with

Trade and Craft Specialization
349
the western Maya region in Classic Maya times, is iconographically identiﬁed
as a merchant of royal status (Taube 1992: 79–88). Archaeologists have failed
to identify market-places in Classic Maya urban centres. If considerable food
was being grown around house clusters in urban centres as well as elsewhere,
there may have been less stimulus for exchange between the urban nobility
and craft specialists, on the one hand, and farmers, on the other, than there
later was in highland Mexico. This, combined with the more dispersed dis-
tribution of Maya urban centres, might have encouraged classic Maya rulers
to control interstate trade (Schele and Freidel 1990: 93). Trading networks
were able to distribute substantial quantities of obsidian originating in Central
America throughout the Maya lowlands, where it was transformed into blades
that reached farmers as well as the urban elite (Sidrys 1979). This broad distri-
bution of imported raw materials differs from distribution patterns in territorial
states.
Among the Mesopotamians, the people living in the Valley of Mexico, and
the Yoruba, long-distance traders derived substantial proﬁts from transporting
various types of goods from regions where they were abundant and relatively
cheap to places where they were scarcer or did not naturally occur. In the
Valley of Mexico, pochteca were able to exchange the surplus food and cloth
thattheupperclassesderivedfromtheirlands,taxes,andtributeforrare,exotic
items that these people highly prized. They also acted as spies and agents for
their king, observing political and economic conditions in the various states
they visited both within and beyond the Triple Alliance’s tributary system. In
return, the Aztec king undertook to avenge traders from his own state who
were killed or molested by foreigners; attacks on pochteca travelling abroad
provided him with a good excuse to declare war on hostile or uncooperative
states. Pochteca also were exempt from corv´ee labour (Berdan 1982: 31).
Yet relations between merchants and other Aztec males were characterized
by antagonism. The Aztec believed that social mobility or conﬁrmation of high
status was legitimate only as a reward for outstanding military service. The
proﬁts merchants derived from peaceful, long-distance trade, usually with real
or potential enemies, were stigmatized as ignoble. Whereas individual warriors
proclaimed their high status publicly and proudly, however rich a merchant
became and however close his semiclandestine dealings with the palace and the
king, he was required to appear in public as a simple commoner, barefoot and
dressed in maguey-ﬁbre clothes. Merchants who ﬂagrantly disregarded this
regulation risked conﬁscation of their property or execution (Clendinnen 1991:
136; Soustelle 1961: 64). Merchants were also forbidden to hold public ofﬁce
or marry into the noble class. Successful merchants sought to acquire public
prestige by ritually sacriﬁcing foreign slaves they had purchased. Sponsoring
such a sacriﬁce was necessary to become a slave trader or the head of a pochteca

350
Economy
calpolli. Yet a long-distance trader could carry out this sacriﬁce only if he could
secure the cooperation of a high-ranking warrior, and this required feasting and
giving many costly presents to the warrior and his friends (Clendinnen 1991:
136–40; van Zantwijk 1985: 148). Thus even this ceremony dramatized the
social and political superiority of warriors over traders. Despite their wealth,
the pochteca were effectively deprived of an autonomous public role in Aztec
political and community life.
In Mesopotamia there is evidence of an analogous though much less marked
prejudice against merchants. Long-distance traders had close relations with
temple administrators and palace staffs, but they worked and may have lived
in walled-off ‘harbour’ (karj; Akk. karum) areas located along the outer walls
of cities rather than inside the city proper. These ‘harbours’ were centres of
foreign trade, where visiting merchants from other city-states and foreign lands
were lodged. They had separate legal status and their own courts and enjoyed
a degree of administrative independence under an ‘innkeeper of the harbour’
who looked after and may have been held responsible for the behaviour of
foreign traders. As in the Valley of Mexico, the close contacts that long-distance
traders had with merchants in other, often hostile, communities rendered them
suspect among their own people. Mesopotamian merchants invested their
proﬁts in land and houses, and when they could live comfortably from such
investments and lending their surplus wealth they seem to have abandoned
trade and moved into the city (Oppenheim 1969: 6, 11).
Among the Yoruba no stigma appears to have been attached to being a trader.
Traders included the wives and sons of reigning kings. In towns where there
were no merchants’ associations, local notables frequently acted as brokers and
landlords for long-distance traders. Successful traders, no less than success-
ful military leaders, were able to invest their proﬁts in slaves and develop an
agricultural base for supporting retainers. Yet a large number of long-distance
traderswerewomen,andmaletraderscamefromabroadsocialspectrum.Suc-
cessful trading appears to have been a less certain way to seek political power
and obtain titles than was military prowess. Thus the social situation of Yoruba
traders may not have been so different from that of traders in Mesopotamia
and the Valley of Mexico.
If interstate trade among the Maya was directly controlled by the upper
classes, their arrangements were signiﬁcantly different from those found in
other city-state systems. Benin demonstrates, however, that direct control of
some aspects of trade by rulers occurred in other city-states.
Territorial states appear to have replaced long-distance commercial trade
with the controlled acquisition of key resources by the central government. In
these states monopolistic control of exotic raw materials and of the production

Trade and Craft Specialization
351
and distribution of coveted luxury goods were important for reinforcing gov-
ernment authority.
In Old and Middle Kingdom Egypt, foreign trade was carried on by the
government. Large government ships were sent to Byblos, in what is now
Lebanon, to purchase commodities such as silver, which, because it had to be
imported, was worth more than gold in Egypt. They also obtained at Byblos
lapis lazuli from Afghanistan and local Lebanese cedar wood and tree resins.
Olive oil was imported overland from Canaan. In the Old Kingdom, Egyptian
ofﬁcials led donkey caravans south into the Sudan to obtain ivory, ebony, gold,
and animal skins from local rulers, while ships sailed south along the Red Sea to
Punt, in the Horn of Africa, to trade for myrrh for religious rituals and embalm-
ing and many other African products. Cattle may have been purchased from
the Libyans. While the state paid for the goods it obtained from neighbour-
ing peoples, all exchanges were subject to the threat that the more powerful
Egyptians might attack these peoples if they did not cooperate. The govern-
ment also sent expeditions to quarry various kinds of stone and to mine gold,
electrum, and copper in the eastern and western deserts adjacent to Egypt
and Lower Nubia and copper and turquoise in the Sinai Peninsula. In the
Middle Kingdom, Nubian traders coming from the south were compelled to
unload their cargoes and exchange them with ofﬁcials at border fortiﬁcations
near the Second Cataract. Asian merchants appear to have brought goods to
Egypt, but they too had to pass border control points and trade with Egyptian
ofﬁcials. Only later, in the New Kingdom, do Asian traders appear to have done
business with Egyptians who were not government ofﬁcials (Frankfort 1956:
118–19; Kemp 1989: 172–78).
When the central government collapsed at the end of the Old Kingdom, the
privileged classes lamented their inability to obtain the cedar wood needed
to manufacture cofﬁns to bury their dead properly (Lichtheim 1973: 152).
Control of materials that were valued because they were used to manufac-
ture luxury goods and perform rituals was a source of power for rulers. By
monopolizing foreign trade and the procurement of exotic raw materials, the
government was able to restrict access to these materials to artisans in its own
employ.
Internal trade was limited to everyday objects that part-time craft workers
made from local materials. Such trade occurred in villages, small towns, and
provincial capitals. Markets (mryt) appear to have been small, informal assem-
blies at quaysides that were of little concern to the government except perhaps
as a minor source of tax revenue. In depictions of Old Kingdom markets, the
traders were mostly men (Kemp 1989: 255), but in the New Kingdom female
traders were frequently shown. The main items that were traded appear to

352
Economy
have been cooked food, drinks, vegetables, fruit, ﬁsh, and household goods
such as mats, baskets, and pottery (Eyre 1987a: 31–32). Some low-value goods
from settlements bordering the Nile Valley may also have been sold at these
markets. Natron, which was mixed with water for daily ablutions and used
to embalm the dead, was brought into the Nile Valley from nearby oases at
least partly by ordinary farmers who were also entrepreneurs (Lichtheim 1973:
170). In the New Kingdom traders (ˇswty) travelled along the Nile exchanging
agricultural products for other goods needed by temples and private persons.
They appear to have worked for temples or for one or more individuals, but
it is not clear whether they were paid employees, operated on a commission
basis, or kept a share of the proﬁts. They were neither wealthy nor high-status
persons, and some may have been slaves (Kemp 1989: 257–59). There is no
evidence that such traders had existed before.
The Inka rulers reluctantly allowed entrepreneurs to continue trading be-
yond the borders of their kingdom, especially to the north (Salomon 1986;
1987). Some of this trading involved voyages on large balsa rafts northward
along the Paciﬁc coast. These traders obtained goods that were not available
within the Inka kingdom, such as spondylus shells, which played an important
role in religious rituals (Gose 1993), and they provided the Inka rulers with
intelligence that helped them to expand the kingdom. One of the main places
where these long-distance traders interacted with the government was the
northernmost Inka administrative centre of Quito. Llama herders continued
to trade produce in the course of their travels between the southern highlands
and the coast as they had done in pre-Inka times (van Buren 1996), but in gen-
eral the government appears to have discouraged interregional trade within
the Inka kingdom. Inka ofﬁcials monitored the transport of luxury goods from
one region to another at provincial administrative centres, ofﬁcial rest stops,
and bridges. The movement of people and goods into and out of the Cuzco
district was carefully controlled. Individuals had to have ofﬁcial authorization
to travel from one province to another. All gold that was mined had to be sent
to Cuzco, and removing gold objects from the city without ofﬁcial permission
was a capital offence (von Hagen 1959: 148). Interregional trade was further
discouraged by satisfying the traditional desire of highland ayllus for economic
self-sufﬁciency – extending zones of cultivation down valley sides and provid-
ing highland ayllus with secure access to plots of land at lower altitudes (Earle
1987; Rowe 1944: 233). Large areas south of Lake Titicaca that had little agri-
cultural potential but were rich in gold, silver, copper, and tin were annexed,
and mining and reﬁning in the state-owned mines were supervised by local
leaders who forwarded the metal they produced to provincial administrative
centres (D’Altroy and Earle 1985; Earle 1987: 74).

Trade and Craft Specialization
353
While it has often been asserted that the Inka had no markets, both Thupa
Inka Yupanki and Wayna Qhapaq were reported to have ordered or sanctioned
their presence in all provinces and towns. A market was held every ﬁve days in
Cusipata, one of the two main squares in central Cuzco, while another market
ﬁve leagues from the city centre occurred every nine days, probably to serve
the ring of service settlements that surrounded the upper-class urban core.
The Spanish described the goods that were exchanged at these markets as
being triﬂes of low value that people purchased in small quantities. Most sales
were made by women, and no market tax was collected (Earle 1985; La Lone
1982; S. Moore 1958: 86, 133; Murra 1980: 142–47). In modern times Andean
women tend to barter within communities and men in broader contexts (Urton
1981: 21). Presumably these markets, like Egyptian ones, were places where
ordinary people exchanged food and local handicrafts and hence were a vital
aspect of village life.
Very little is known about trading in Shang and Western Zhou China,
although in later times merchants were called shang ren (Shang people)
(K. Chang 1980: 241; Creel 1937: 316). Raw materials such as the turtle shells
used for divination appear to have been imported from beyond the borders
of the Shang kingdom. Men who belonged to certain lineages seem to have
worked as commercial agents, although it is not clear whether they were in-
dependent traders or government ofﬁcials. As in highland Mexico and Peru,
long-distance traders are said to have acted as spies for the government (Creel
1937: 317). Cowrie shells were used to store wealth, for gift-giving, and to pay
for the manufacturing of valuable objects.
Exchanges between individuals in early civilizations were done by barter.
Although the buyers and sellers in each early civilization must have possessed
roughly equivalent understandings of the relative value of most goods, the
value of food varied according to scarcity, both seasonally and from year to
year. Skilled or highly reputed artisans demanded more for their wares than
ordinary workers. Individual exchanges involved haggling and were compli-
cated by the need for the buyer to provide items that the seller was willing to
take in exchange. Often the purchase of an item involved the seller’s accepting
a variety of goods, measured by number, size, or weight, in exchange (Kemp
1989: 248–50).
To simplify exchanges, ‘currencies’ were used to pay for items. In the Valley
of Mexico, hollow quills ﬁlled with gold dust, T-shaped copper bars, standard
pieces of cotton cloth (quachtli), and cacao beans, singly or in bags, provided
units of exchange of different values. Depending on their size and quality,
pieces of cloth used in commercial transactions were equivalent to between
sixty-ﬁve and three hundred cacao beans. These ‘currencies’ were used to even

354
Economy
out differences in the value of goods that were being exchanged (Berdan 1982:
43; M. E. Smith 1996: 124–26; Soustelle 1961: 81–82). The Yoruba and the
Chinese employed cowrie shells to pay for purchases. In Benin brass bracelets
and pieces of cloth were also used (Bradbury 1957: 46). In Mesopotamia pieces
of copper and silver stamped by the king to certify the quality of the metal were
used in trading, but these were still weighed individually to determine their
value, and pieces of metal could be broken off to cover a lesser amount. In
early times, Mesopotamian traders calculated the value of goods in relation to
barley, copper, or tin, depending on the worth of the transaction, but by Ur III
times silver had replaced copper as a signiﬁcant measure of value. In the Old
Babylonianperiodmerchantswereusingsilverastheirprimaryaccountingunit
in dealings among themselves and with major institutions. The government,
for its part, sought to convert surplus wool into silver, even though this involved
selling wool in bulk to merchants at less than its market value (R. Harris 1975:
49). Yet, while prices were often calculated and quoted in silver, payments in
this metal appear to have been rare. Most silver made its way into and stayed in
palace and temple treasuries (Oppenheim 1964: 87; Postgate 1992: 200–204).
In the Old Kingdom the Egyptians used the unidentiﬁed ˇsty as a standard
unit in connection with bartering (Kemp 1989: 255). It has been suggested
that in the New Kingdom this unit was a silver disk weighing about 7.5 grams
(Strouhal 1992: 198–99), but this seems unlikely to have been the case earlier;
a Fifth Dynasty market scene indicates that a single piece of cloth was worth
six ˇsty (Kemp 1989: 255). Most of these ‘currencies’ (cacao beans being a
conspicuous exception) were not only a means for facilitating exchanges but
also a way to store value. There is no evidence that in any early civilization a
single commodity came to be used as the sole measure of value for everything
else that was bought and sold.
Long-distance trade was embedded in political processes to varying degrees.
In the two adequately documented territorial states, both foreign trade and the
mining of stone and mineral resources were controlled by the central govern-
ment. In three well-documented city-state systems, foreign trade was carried
on by individuals or groups operating independently of the state, and therefore
trade was possible among states that were hostile or even at war. Political power
was the principal way to acquire wealth, while wealth was essential to main-
tain political power. Wealth acquired from trade could not easily be translated
into power. The Aztec value system stigmatized as dishonourable wealth that
was not acquired through warfare. Mesopotamians downgraded merchants by
comparison with property owners. Even the Yoruba limited the political role
of successful female traders to supporting male aspirants for high ofﬁce, while
such men sought to distinguish themselves as soldiers. If Classic Maya rulers

Trade and Craft Specialization
355
monopolized long-distance trade, their political prominence facilitated such
control; it did not result from it. In city-states merchants were able to acquire
wealth but were to varying degrees politically constrained; in territorial states,
long-distance traders were largely replaced by government ofﬁcials.
communication networks
Intercity trade depended on transport. Yet, in general, the transport of goods
continued, like agriculture, to rely on relatively simple and labour-intensive
means. In Egypt and Mesopotamia boats played a signiﬁcant role in transport-
ing goods by river and sea and donkeys were used to carry loads overland.
While wheeled vehicles were constructed in Mesopotamia, there is no evi-
dence that carts played a signiﬁcant role in long-distance trade. Although the
Egyptians were familiar with the principle of the wheel as early as the Old
Kingdom, no wheeled vehicles of any sort were used in Egypt until after the
Middle Kingdom. In highland Peru llamas carried loads of medium weight,
and in Mesoamerica canoes were used wherever possible. Yet, in highland
Mexico and among the Maya and Yoruba, human carriers transported most
goods over long distances. Mountainous and swampy terrain and the absence
of large domestic animals (or the problems involved in breeding them in un-
favourable climates) explain the heavy reliance on human carriers in these
regions. Human labour was also important for transporting goods in Peru. In
Mesopotamia and China, rulers and some soldiers drove chariots, and among
the Yoruba leaders and elite soldiers rode horses. In other early civilizations,
upper-class people travelled either on foot or in boats and litters.
In most early civilizations relatively little effort was expended on the con-
struction and maintenance of roads or footpaths. In central Mexico, despite
the importance of trade and the absence of navigable waterways (except for
the large lakes in the centre of the Valley of Mexico), there was little emphasis
on road construction. The causeways leading into Tenochtitlan from the adja-
cent mainland were impressive feats of engineering. The wooden bridges that
could be taken up at various points along the causeways served a defensive
role as well as allowing for essential water ﬂow and canoe trafﬁc. Yet, while the
streets of Tenochtitlan and other major cities were broad and straight, even the
main thoroughfares were paved only with compressed earth. Corv´ees drawn
from various calpolli kept streets clean and in good repair.
In the highland Mexican countryside, roads were nothing more than beaten
paths that varied in width according to how much they were used. Local au-
thorities, who were responsible for such care as was taken of roads, probably
feared them as avenues of invasion as much as they valued them as a means

356
Economy
to facilitate trade. Despite such fears, all settlements were connected by roads
to neighbouring communities. Rather than running straight, each major road
linked a maximum number of urban settlements. There was no main road
directly linking any community on the Gulf of Mexico with Tenochtitlan but
rather a series of alternative routes running through different intervening ur-
ban centres. This arrangement was adapted not to the needs of an empire or
even of a hegemonic system but to those of warring city-states. It permitted
alternative routes to be used for trade and communication if any particular
segment of the road system was blocked by intercity conﬂict. Travellers spent
each night in closely spaced urban centres (Hassig 1985: 171; Santley 1991).
All Yoruba roads were unpaved. The principal roads, along which most trade
movedwiththepermissionoflocalrulers,rannorth-souththroughmajorurban
centres. These roads were linked to smaller communities by east-west feeder
routes which also joined larger communities to one another. Along the main
roads were caravanserais (aroje) where traders spent the night if they were
unable to reach the next town (Falola 1991; Hodder and Ukwu 1969: 27–29).
In Mesopotamia most goods were probably transported from one city to
another by water, but urban centres were also linked by dirt roads. Shulgi,
a king of the Ur III dynasty, boasted of having created a system of messen-
gers and road stations as part of his increasing bureaucratic control over the
whole region (Postgate 1992: 42). Private travel between cities appears to have
been infrequent and dangerous, and even the sending of personal letters was
uncommon (Oppenheim 1964: 120).
The Egyptians depended largely on the Nile for travel and transport. The
river was connected by canals and loading basins to major temples and palaces
and, at least during the ﬂood season, to the royal pyramids, which were located
just beyond the edge of the ﬂoodplain. Canals also permitted water transporta-
tion into the heart of major cities such as Memphis and Thebes. In addition,
trails located in the adjacent deserts cut across bends in the Nile Valley, joined
the valley to the western oases, the Red Sea coast, and desert quarries and
mining sites, and probably ran parallel to the Nile the whole length of Egypt.
These trails permitted messages to be conveyed more quickly by runners than
by water and would have allowed government soldiers to approach communi-
ties from the desert as well as from the river.
The most complex road system in any early civilization was constructed by
the Inka, in part by incorporating already existing roads. This network ran from
Quito in the north to the Mendoza River in Chile in the south and is estimated
to have consisted of a total of forty thousand kilometres of roads. Of these,
twenty-three thousand kilometres were part of the main lattice, while the
rest led to speciﬁc communities. Although the Inka conceptualized four main

Trade and Craft Specialization
357
roads extending from Cuzco through the primary divisions of the kingdom,
there were in fact two major roads running north-south that were connected
by a series of shorter east-west roads. The main road through the highlands
was strategically more important than the one that ran parallel to it along the
coast. The Inka rulers regarded it as the artery that allowed them to dominate
both the highland and lowland portions of their kingdom. The widest and
best-constructed portion of that road ran between Cuzco and Quito.
Roads were built and maintained by local corv´ee labour under Inka super-
vision. While only short sections of roads were paved, the Inka rulers made
an effort to keep the entire system passable during all seasons. Roads were
regularly cleared of stones and were provided, where required, with drainage
channels and stairways. Rope bridges were used to cross deeply incised rivers
and balsa rafts to cross unfordable coastal ones. In general, the Inka sought
to build roads that were as straight as possible and to do that skirted irregular
terrain. The principal roads also avoided mountain passes that rose above ﬁve
thousand metres. Where possible, the main north-south route ran through
major highland administrative centres.
The main purpose of the Inka roads was to transport state information, gov-
ernment troops and corv´ee labourers, and government supplies (Gose 1993:
483); they were not intended for private use. Government inns (tampu), well
stocked with food and clothing, provided overnight lodging for soldiers, corv´ee
labourers, and ofﬁcials travelling on government business. Whether located in
administrative centres or in the countryside, these service centres were one
day’s journey apart. In addition, runners’ stations (chaskiwasi) were established
every three to six kilometres along the main roads, and runners stood ready
there to relay messages or goods. In addition to facilitating government busi-
ness, the royal road (qhapaq ˜nan) was a substantial and pervasive symbol of
the Inka state (Hyslop 1984; von Hagen 1959).
For Shang and Western Zhou China, oracle-bone inscriptions suggest that
travel by kings, ofﬁcials, and armies over an extensive road network played a
major role in maintaining the integrity of the state (Keightley 1979–80). Roads
are said to have been kept in good repair and provided with rest houses for
the use of government ofﬁcials (Creel 1937: 316).
Important as intercity trade may have been in some city-state systems, it
did not encourage the development of complex transportation and commu-
nications systems. The value of such systems for trade was counterbalanced
by the fear that they would facilitate attack by neighbouring states. Only a
hegemon seeking to unify a region might attempt to construct a more efﬁcient
road system. In contrast, government activities in ancient Egypt and China
and especially in the Inka kingdom led to considerable investment in the

358
Economy
construction and maintenance of transport systems. In the Andes, the con-
trolled movement of people and goods was essential for maintaining the unity
of the state.
craft production
Many everyday goods used in early civilizations were produced by farmers
in their spare time. Farm labour was often seasonal, and during slack peri-
ods farmers and their families manufactured tools, baskets, sandals, clothing,
furniture, and ornaments for themselves and to exchange with their neigh-
bours. If individuals or families concentrated on manufacturing a single type
of product, they could hone their skills and produce higher-quality goods. The
development of part-time specialization required broader exchange networks,
with exchange usually occurring at markets located in villages and small towns.
Still better-quality goods were produced by full-time specialists. Full-time
metalworkersmightmanufacturebronzeorirontoolsthatotherpeopleneeded
but lacked the equipment, raw materials, and technological knowledge to make
for themselves. Other full-time craft workers might produce pottery, basketry,
or leatherware superior to what part-time craft workers could manufacture
but inexpensive enough that most people could afford them. These goods
were sold at village and city markets, and both the volume of goods produced
and the degree of specialization increased with population density and the
size of urban centres. Full-time craft workers functioned as individuals or in
family groups. Some potters and leather workers and a larger percentage of
metallurgists might be employed full-time by temples, palaces, and private
patrons.
At the top of the craft hierarchy were the elite craft workers who specialized
in producing goods of exceptional quality and high value for the state and the
upper classes. These goods were frequently manufactured from imported raw
materials. Teams of full-time specialists possessing a variety of complementary
skills often worked together to create these objects. The intrinsic value of the
raw materials from which such goods were made and the time-consuming
labour needed to manufacture them made possession of such goods a sign of
high status or royal favour. Some elite craft workers sold such goods on the
openmarket,andotherscombinedindependentproductionwithworkingpart-
time on commission for upper-class individuals or institutions. Still others were
employed full-time by governments, temples, or wealthy patrons and, though
treated with considerable respect, were bound to their employers in much the
same manner as were less skilled craft workers or household servants (Trigger
1968: 54).

Trade and Craft Specialization
359
Cross-cultural studies indicate that in preindustrial societies particular crafts
were performed either by men or by women but not by both. When men and
women worked at the same craft, they usually performed different tasks. The
same craft was not, however, practised by the same gender in every culture
(Costin 1996; Murdock and Provost 1973). In early civilizations, both cross-
cultural regularity in the gendering of crafts and male professionalization ap-
pear to have been more pervasive than in less complex societies. As most
crafts grew technologically more complicated and were practised in workshop
settings rather than in the home, they tended to become male activities. In
manufacturing ceramics men generally replaced women as mass production
and the use of the potter’s wheel increased. Men also dominated tasks that did
not have a domestic origin, such as metallurgy. Large numbers of women con-
tinued to be involved in domestic tasks such as brewing and baking when these
became full-time occupations within palaces, temples, and state institutions.
Such tasks provided employment for lower-class women in Egypt and were
among the duties assigned to chosen women in Peru. In Egypt, however, men
soon became professional brewers and bakers and monopolized speciﬁc forms
of food processing, such as the drying and cooking of ﬁsh and meat (Feucht
1997: 336–37). Among the elite feather workers (amanteca) in Tenochtitlan,
women cleaned and dyed feathers while men sewed and glued them onto cloth
or wood to produce costumes and decorations (M. E. Smith 1996: 100–102).
Craft knowledge tended to be passed from generation to generation within
families. Girls learned from their mothers and aunts, boys from their fathers
and other older male relatives. There was little chance for outsiders to learn
crafts, although apprenticeship occurred, sometimes in the guise of adoption.
Most craft workers could not read or write, and therefore knowledge relating
to their work was transmitted orally, sometimes as trade secrets. Because of
this, much of the speciﬁc craft lore even of literate early civilizations has been
irretrievably lost.
The production of cloth was a major activity in all early civilizations and
played as great a role in the lives of most women as agriculture did in men’s
(E. Barber 1994). It remained a domestic task but also underwent consider-
able specialization. It was one area of production in which women played a
signiﬁcant role in ‘industrial’ as well as household production, although men
as well as women became involved in the production of cloth for commercial
and other special purposes.
While large amounts of ordinary cloth were needed for clothing and other
domestic purposes, high-quality cloth became an important status symbol.
Cloth of this sort was woven from valuable raw materials, such as silk in
China or cotton, which had to be imported from the lowlands, in the Valley

360
Economy
of Mexico. It could also be richly ornamented with special colours and designs,
very ﬁnely woven, or woven in complex patterns. Among the Inka, fancy cloth
(qumpi), decorated with complex patterns and bright colours and ﬁnished on
both sides, was manufactured for the government. The Maya upper class, es-
pecially women, are shown wearing richly patterned robes, while upper-class
Egyptians prized very ﬁnely woven linen.
Cloth also had ritual signiﬁcance in some early civilizations. The Inka burned
cloth as offerings to the gods and used large amounts of it to wrap and peri-
odically rewrap the bodies of their ancestors (Murra 1962). Egyptian priests
were allowed to wear linen but not woollen clothing while serving in temples.
Clothing of special patterns or styles emphasized the divine qualities of kings,
and particular types of vestments were regarded as appropriate to be worn
while performing particular rituals. Because cloth weighed little, was highly
variable in design, and required much labour to produce, it was also a major
commodity in long-distance trade. While every woman knew how to produce
ordinary cloth, the production of fancy cloth required special training, time,
and often access to better-quality materials. It also encouraged an enhanced
division of labour.
In all early civilizations cloth was manufactured from plant ﬁbres. Linen
was used in Egypt and Mesopotamia, maguey ﬁbres, hemp, and New World
cotton in the Valley of Mexico, hemp and cotton by the Maya and the Inka,
Old World cotton by the Yoruba, and hemp and linen by the Chinese. Woollen
cloth was woven from sheep and goat hair in Egypt and Mesopotamia and
from llama, alpaca, and wild vicu˜na wool and even bat hair in Peru (Rowe
1944: 240). The Chinese produced silk from insect cocoons. All forms of cloth
production required considerable labour to grow or collect the raw materials
and to process, spin, dye, and weave them.
Women generally produced the ordinary cloth that was worn by their fam-
ilies (Fig. 16.1). In most societies the role of women as domestic cloth pro-
ducers was the symbolic counterpart of the primary role claimed by men as
food producers. In Inka society, where women were acknowledged to play an
important role in agricultural production, elderly men helped to spin thread
(Rowe 1944: 241). Although they did not join in many other forms of household
labour, upper-class women supervised and even participated in the production
of clothes for their families.
The Inka required all the married women of commoner families to spin
and weave ﬁxed quantities of wool that were assigned to them each year from
state and religious herds. Producing ordinary cloth was a form of labour tax.
The state issued this cloth to soldiers and other corv´ee labourers who were
away from their homes for long periods (Murra 1980: 68–70). The Egyptian
government may have collected one-tenth of the cloth produced by each

Trade and Craft Specialization
361
a
b
c
d
16.1. Female weavers in early civilizations: (a) Inka woman weaving on a backstrap loom (from
Guaman Poma de Ayala); (b) bird’s eye view of Egyptian women using a ground loom, tomb of
the Middle Kingdom provincial ruler Khnumhotep II at Beni Hasan (BH 3); (c) a seven-year-old
Aztec girl being taught to spin by her mother (Codex Mendoza); (d) a fourteen-year-old Aztec
girl learning to weave using a backstrap loom (Codex Mendoza). Sources: (a) after Pomo de
Ayala, 215; (b) after P. T. Nicholson & I. Shaw (eds.), Ancient Egyptian Materials and Technology
(Cambridge, 2000), 277; (c), (d) after J. Cooper-Clark, The Codex Mendoza (London, 1938).
household as a tax, and estate owners had tenants’ wives weave cloth that the
owners could sell. It is unclear whether this weaving constituted part of the pay-
ment for renting land or these women were remunerated for their work (James
1962).
In addition, the state and large institutions in some early civilizations de-
veloped weaving as an industry. In Mesopotamia as many as 750 women were
assigned to individual workshops belonging to temples, palaces, and private es-
tates to weave both ordinary and high-quality cloth. Many of these women were
slaves; others belonged to indebted families. They usually worked in teams of
twenty under a male or female supervisor. Weaving shops were recorded as
early as the Early Dynastic period, and in Ur III times, six thousand weavers

362
Economy
were working in such establishments, many of them under very poor condi-
tions, in the city of Girsu alone (Postgate 1992: 235; R. Wright 1996b). The
cloth they produced was distributed to temple and palace staff and used for
foreign trade. Among the Inka fancy cloth was woven by the chosen women
and by full-time male specialists (qumpikamayoq) attached to the state or
the upper classes (Costin 1998b). Whereas ordinary cloth was produced by
farm women using backstrap looms, fancy cloth was woven on vertical looms
(Kendall 1973: 179–80). In Egypt, secondary royal wives, concubines, and their
female servants, who lived in royal palaces scattered throughout the country,
wove cloth for the king, sometimes on a large scale (Kemp 1989: 222). Many
smaller estates belonging to Egyptian ofﬁcials also had weaving shops. In the
Old and Middle Kingdoms weaving was done both at home and in workshops
by women using horizontal looms. In the New Kingdom, following the intro-
duction of the vertical loom, men gradually replaced women in workshops
(Andreu 1997: 71–72). David Keightley (1969: 48–49) believes that in Shang
China high-quality textiles, especially those made of silk, were produced by
specialized artisans working in royal workshops.
Finally, many Aztec and Egyptian women wove cloth at home and sold it
in public markets. Yoruba men and women produced cloth for sale on both
a part-time and a full-time basis. Yoruba men used horizontal or belt looms
to weave narrow bands of highly decorated cloth, while women wove wider
sheets on vertical looms. The Yoruba believed that if men or women used
each other’s looms they would change sex. Male involvement in commercial
weaving was most common in the northern part of the Yoruba country, where
farm labour was more seasonal (Ojo 1966a: 86–87).
Thus in all the early civilizations, the manufacture of cloth was an important
aspect of domestic production. In addition, it was a widespread household
industry. In some early civilizations, weaving was also the most ‘industrialized’
form of production in terms of the number of people working in a factory
setting.
The rulers of early civilizations are often said to have sought to control the
production of luxury goods in order to increase their political power (G. Stein
1998: 21–22). It has been assumed that they did this by requiring craft spe-
cialists to work for them and by monopolizing the supplies of raw materials
that craft workers required. Childe (1965 [1936]: 212–13) further argued that
the role played by palace and temple ofﬁcials in setting production targets
and evaluating production stiﬂed innovation and inhibited the further devel-
opment of craft skills. This view is, however, partial and misleading. Relations
between craft workers and ofﬁcials varied considerably among early civiliza-
tions, especially between city- and territorial states.

Trade and Craft Specialization
363
In Mesopotamia there were many different types of full-time craft workers
(giˇskinti). Ordinary craft workers, such as woodworkers, basket makers, rope
makers, house builders, boat builders, leather workers, and potters, have to
be distinguished from more highly skilled smiths, stone carvers, and ivory and
wood carvers (Moorey 1994; Postgate 1992: 232). Different categories of work-
ers worshipped particular patron deities and seem to have had spokespeople
who represented their interests, but it is unclear if, like the merchants, they
belonged to formal associations (Postgate 1992: 229; Van De Mieroop 1999:
183–85).
Mass-produced wheel-made pottery already predominated in southern
Mesopotamia by the start of the third millennium b.c., and copper and bronze
tools slowly replaced stone ones over the course of the next thousand years. In
thethirdmillennium,ensuringtheproductionofspecializedweaponrybecame
the responsibility of palaces, while temples employed increasing amounts of
metal cult equipment. Both palace and temple estates needed large numbers
of metal implements and agricultural tools. Groups of smiths (simug) fre-
quently worked for temples and palaces under the direction of a foreman who
was responsible to the general overseer of the institution. Among the foreman’s
duties was checking the weight of the metal supplied to smiths against the
weight of the objects that the smiths produced. In the Old Babylonian period
some smiths and stone workers were full-time employees of temples, but it is
not clear if this had been the case in earlier times. Gold workers were employed
on a part-time basis and sometimes recruited from other cities (Postgate
1992: 229). The only clearly documented manufacturing by workers wholly
controlled by palaces and temples was that performed in weaving factories.
Major institutions may not have tried so hard to control labour that supplied
ﬂuctuating needs as opposed to producing goods they used or sold on a regular
basis.
Archaeological evidence indicates major workshops in residential areas of
Mesopotamian cities. While the largest potteries and stoneworking sites were
located on the leeward side of cities, in order to reduce smoke and dust pol-
lution, copper and gold workers, who used already smelted metals, had work-
shops along streets near urban centres. There is also evidence that each ward
had resident potters, smiths, and lapidaries who supplied local wants (Silver
1986: 119; Stone 1997: 20). This indicates that all urban dwellers had access
to most if not all major types of craft specialists working in their own neigh-
bourhoods. It also suggests that ordinary people could obtain manufactured
goods directly rather than having to purchase or receive them as payment from
temples. Since there is no evidence that the people who worked for a particular
temple or for the palace were residentially segregated in Mesopotamian cities,

364
Economy
it appears unlikely that these craft workers were the full-time employees of
a temple or palace. Independent craft workers would have been able to pur-
chase supplies of copper, tin, and other imported raw materials directly from
long-distance traders (Van De Mieroop 1999: 176–83).
J. N. Postgate (1992: 225–29) maintains that temples, with their great corpo-
rate wealth and demand for luxury goods, played a major role in encouraging
technological development in Mesopotamia. Robert McC. Adams (1966: 140–
43) has argued that the growing need of palaces for more effective armaments
had the same effect. It remains to be determined whether these institutions
exerted their inﬂuence mainly as purchasers or as the actual organizers of pro-
duction. Except for hegemonic states such as Akkad and Ur III, whose rulers
patronized the production of outstanding works of art, the quality of stone
carving and metalwork does not suggest a sharp division between elite craft
workers labouring exclusively for major institutions and full-time specialists
producing for a broader market. State efforts to control production may have
been focused on palace workshops and on the role of supervisory personnel.
Yet, while many ordinary Mesopotamian craft workers may have worked full-
time for institutions and institutions may have provided the major market for
more specialized goods, it seems unlikely that most craft workers were legally
or contractually tied to these institutions (R. Wright 1998).
In the Valley of Mexico utilitarian goods such as pots, reed mats, woodwork,
leather goods, and canoes appear to have been produced both by full-time craft
workers in urban centres and by farmer-craft workers in rural as well as urban
areas. Elite craft workers lived almost exclusively in urban centres, where they
could most easily obtain exotic raw materials and sell their products to the
upper classes and the pochteca at large central markets. The most skilled craft
workers tended to gravitate towards Tenochtitlan, which, being the valley’s
largest and wealthiest city, provided the most buyers for their goods.
Craft specialization was organized by calpollis. In some calpollis all men
specialized in a particular craft; in others some worked as full-time craftsmen
while others were farmers or combined farming and part-time craft work
(Brumﬁel 1998). The urban calpollis that produced luxury goods may have
been composed largely of elite craft specialists. These producers of luxury
goods were called toltecca, implying that their skills were derived, like the
institutions of nobility and kingship, from the ancient city of Tollan, where
they had a supernatural origin. These specialists included goldsmiths, who
produced jewellery, feather workers, who manufactured fans, shields, warriors’
costumes, capes, headdresses, and tapestries, and lapidaries, who ground lip
and ear plugs, beaded necklaces, bracelets, and other ornaments from jade,
obsidian, and other attractive stones (M. E. Smith 1996: 99–107). Sons of gold

Trade and Craft Specialization
365
workers and feather workers received some training in the schools for nobles
or at their own versions of such schools to familiarize them with the details
of Aztec religious iconography (Clendinnen 1991: 132). Also included among
these specialists were mural painters and sculptors, who carved stone both in
the round and in relief (Berdan 1982: 153).
While most Aztec elite craft workers obtained raw materials and sold their
products in market-places, the most skillful were also commissioned to pro-
duce goods for the king, sometimes in special workshops in royal palaces.
Most stone sculptors and mural painters probably worked for the king most
of the time, since there was little other demand for their specialized prod-
ucts. In hegemonic states, especially Texcoco and Tenochtitlan, royal patron-
age encouraged the carving of stone statues, ritual bowls, altars, cult objects,
and decorative plaques, some of which were works of great size. These arts
achieved exceptional levels of reﬁnement. Kings presented such objects to
major temples and used them to adorn their palaces (Townsend 1979). They
also distributed to the nobility and to outstanding warriors luxury goods that
other craft specialists sold to or manufactured for the palace. Skilled craftsmen
were lavishly rewarded for their services to the king (Brumﬁel 1987).
Luxury goods were also produced in smaller cities, and there was some re-
gional specialization. Azcatpotzalco, for example, was renowned for its silver-
smithing, while the best-quality pottery came from Cholula, outside the Valley
of Mexico; the Aztec king would use no other. Craft workers in still smaller
centres tended to specialize in utilitarian crafts. Masons from Coyoacan and
carpenters from Xochimilco were in much demand for major construction
projects in Tenochtitlan (Berdan 1982: 176). The production of household
pottery, obsidian blades, and textiles was carried on in rural and urban settings
throughout the Valley of Mexico. Elizabeth Brumﬁel (1980: 466) argues that
increasing craft production in urban centres in Late Aztec times resulted in
a decline in craft production and a growing emphasis on food production in
rural areas.
Among the Yoruba, particular crafts were practised by extended families.
Depending on demand, craft production might be full-time or part-time, but
all extended families included full-time farmers. Specialists who practised the
same craft in a particular city but belonged to more than one patrilineage
formed craft associations that set standards, established prices, and regulated
other matters of common interest. There were associations of brass-workers,
iron-workers, wood- and ivory-carvers, calabash-carvers, mat-weavers, leather-
workers, drum-makers, and potters, as well as of doctors, hunters, and traders
(Eades 1980: 85–86; Ojo 1966a: 80–102; R. Smith 1969: 118). Most were
associations of male craft workers, but potters’ associations and those of the

366
Economy
broadcloth weavers were female. The distinction between luxury and utilitar-
ian crafts was less marked than in the Valley of Mexico and more resembled the
situation in Mesopotamia. Each craft association had its patron deity, and its
leaders were in contact with palace ofﬁcials about matters of mutual interest.
In Benin, each craft association was located in a separate ward of the ‘town’,
as distinguished from the ‘palace’, district of the city (Bradbury 1957: 34).
While most skilled Yoruba craft workers laboured in urban centres, crafts
such as smithing, potting, and mat-weaving were also practised in villages (Peel
1983: 74–75). Ritual and utilitarian pottery was brought to Benin from villages
to the north and west (Bradbury 1957: 26). Craft specialization also occurred
regionally: the Ijebu area was noted for its gold and silver work, Oyo for its
leather and calabash-carving, Ogbomoso for its dyeing and weaving, Ilorin for
its pottery, and Ife for its brass-casting and production of glass beads (Ojo
1966a: 102). Most craft work was done within family compounds, but kings
sometimes commissioned famous metalworkers and wood-carvers to carry out
special projects at their palaces. The royal palace at Old Oyo was famous for
the one hundred brass-covered posts that hold up a roof running around the
four sides of one of its courtyards or long corridors. In Old Oyo there was also
a group of craft workers whose sole employment was to sew and embroider
with beads crowns, staffs, robes, and leather work for the palace (S. Johnson
1921: 45, 153, 258). The role of blacksmiths in forging weapons created close
economic relations between them and kings, high ofﬁcials, and other military
leaders, but these links did not prevent them from producing identical weapons
for general sale.
The king of Benin had special relations with members of the city’s brass-
workers’ association. During the installation of a new ruler, these specialists
were required to come to the palace, where, with the ritual assistance of the
new king, they cast brass portrait heads and other regalia that would be used
in the cult that was being established for the previous ruler. Creating these
objects required an exceptionally high level of skill in making moulds and
casting and polishing metal. The smiths were forbidden to cast similar ritual
objects for anyone else; other families had to use less prestigious wooden or
ceramic heads for their ancestral cults. The same craft workers also produced
elaborate brass plaques and other decorations for the royal palace. Their largest
castings weighed as much as twenty-two kilograms and required many cru-
cibles of molten metal (Garrard 1983: 19). The king lavishly rewarded these
craft workers with farms, slaves, cowrie shells, and other gifts. The brass-
smiths’ slaves and other dependents worked farms that provided them with
food and an income that was independent of their craft work (Bradbury 1957:
34). The smiths also manufactured jewellery and other goods in their own ward

Trade and Craft Specialization
367
for general sale. While the work they were permitted to do was limited by the
king’s insistence on monopolizing their ﬁnest creations, royal ﬁnancing sup-
ported a division of labour and levels of expertise that could create works of
exceptional quality whenever required.
The king of Benin also regulated all ivory-carving, which could be done only
for him. He distributed ivory staffs to ofﬁce-holders, including village leaders,
who in the absence of his special favour had to be content with wooden ones.
In addition, the ruler of Benin employed weavers from the Onwina Nido ward
of Benin City to produce cloth with special patterns that could be worn only
by the king and high-ranking ofﬁcials. This work was done both in the weavers’
ward and at the palace (Bradbury 1957: 26).
Maya craft specialization appears from archaeological evidence to have been
associated with residential groups and therefore perhaps with extended fami-
lies. As among the Yoruba, it seems that not all members of a residential group
were craft workers; craft specialists may have lived with upper-class patrons
or with kinsmen, servants, or retainers who produced food for them. There is
evidence that at least some elite craft workers were attached to and supported
by high-status households, including those of kings. Some elite craft workers,
such as master vase-painters and stela-designers, are inferred from their ti-
tles to have belonged to royal lineages, although these titles may have merely
signiﬁed royal support or patronage. Less skilled craft workers seem to have
belonged to commoner extended families (Aldenderfer, Kimball, and Sievert
1989; Haviland 1974; Inomata 2001; McAnany 1993: 71; Reents-Budet 1998;
Tate 1992: 20, 47).
The known distribution of different craft specializations in Maya urban set-
tings does not suggest a geographical clustering of speciﬁc occupations. Nor
do particular craft specializations correspond to the differential elaboration
of houses in residential clusters or the locations of house clusters in relation
to urban centres. While utilitarian crafts may for the most part have been
part-time ones, upper-class patronage would have allowed many forms of elite
production, such as jade carving and the production of the most elaborate
painted pottery, to have developed into full-time occupations (Becker 1973;
Moholy-Nagy 1997).
Smaller Maya communities, such as Colha, in Belize, specialized in pro-
ducing stone tools for export (Hester and Shafer 1994). Individual workshops
produced different stages or types of tools (King and Potter 1994). Utilitar-
ian pottery was made in small villages on the peripheries of urban centres,
especially in agriculturally less productive areas. This pottery appears to have
circulated directly to the area around its production site rather than through
nearby urban centres. Maya potters specialized in making particular styles of

368
Economy
pottery rather than a limited range of functional categories (Ball 1993: 244–45;
Potter and King 1995). This, together with the lack of concentration of elite
craft production near the centre of cities and the absence of any physical evi-
dence of market-places, casts further doubt on the existence of a hierarchical
market system among the Classic Maya.
There is ﬁnally the question of whether some Maya artisans worked ex-
clusively for the king. Except near the end of the Classic period, only kings
appear to have erected carved stone monuments, which were clearly the work
of master designers and master stonemasons. Some stelae are inscribed with
the names of several craft workers. Master craftsmen seem occasionally to
have worked in more than one polity and may have been free to move from
one state to another. Alternatively, they may have been despatched by royal
patrons to produce monumental works for friendly rulers or been carried off
by victorious kings (Schele and Miller 1986: 219; Tate 1992: 40–49). While
palaces controlled the work of some craft workers in other city-state systems,
upper-class control of elite production among the Maya would have been
greater overall if kings and nobles had monopolized long-distance trade and
the acquisition of luxury raw materials.
In at least three of the four city-state civilizations we have examined, craft
production was closely linked to markets and long-distance trade, which pro-
vided exotic raw materials and a means of selling surplus produce to buyers
over a large area. In general, market prices determined what products were
available to people of differing means. In the Valley of Mexico and Benin and
perhaps among the Maya, rulers imposed sumptuary regulations on certain lux-
ury goods or directly controlled their production and distribution. Because of
their abundant wealth and their ability to sponsor highly skilled craft workers,
hegemonic rulers were especially effective patrons of the arts. Public markets
encouraged more ordinary full-time production, which made better-quality
goods available to most people. City-state systems gave farmers easy access
to such goods. Rulers in city-state systems that had powerful hereditary class
systems (Valley of Mexico, Maya) seem to have intervened more directly in
the production and distribution of craft products, especially luxury goods, than
the rulers of city-state systems that lacked them (Mesopotamia, Yoruba). In
Benin, however, there was considerable royal intervention despite the absence
of hereditary classes.
In territorial states there tended to be two tiers of craft production. During
their spare time, farmers used locally available materials to produce what they
and their neighbours needed, with each household aiming at self-sufﬁciency
or producing for a local market. Mass-produced and specialized goods were
manufactured in royal workshops by artisans who worked full-time for the

Trade and Craft Specialization
369
state. Their royal employers supplied them with raw materials, and in return
they were expected to produce weapons, tools, and storage vessels for people
who performed special tasks for the state, as well as luxury goods for the
use and enjoyment of their upper-class patrons. The cost of producing luxury
goods was of less concern to elite craft workers’ patrons than the quality of
those goods. The ability of kings to display and distribute status symbols that
no one else could emulate was a major source of prestige and power. While
only a few of these coveted goods trickled down to local leaders as rewards
for their loyalty to the state, the possibility of such rewards reinforced that
loyalty.
In Egypt the most skilled craft workers (h
• mwt) worked for the king, usually
near the royal court (Andreu 1997: 58–69). Some groups of goldsmiths, sculp-
tors, painters, and elite carpenters were assigned to a wbt (pure place), which
was, or had attached to it, a workshop, for producing funerary goods. Craft
workers laboured in teams under the supervision of two ‘great controllers of
craftsmen’ (wr h˘ rp h
• mwt) and a hierarchy of overseers (Eyre 1987a: 26–27) to
decorate tombs, carve statues and stone vases, and manufacture jewellery and
ﬁne furniture for the upper classes, as well as cult objects for temples. Dwarfs
and hunchbacks were responsible for either manufacturing gold objects or
caring for them. Sometimes artisans of the royal residence were despatched
to work on the tombs of high ofﬁcials.
The most skilled craft workers were rewarded with minor part-time palace
or temple ofﬁces, land, servants, slaves, cattle, and other material goods
(Strouhal 1992: 167). While few of these craft workers were buried in tombs
as large and substantial as those of some doctors, hairdressers, and mani-
curists who personally attended the king, they were invited to participate in
upper-class banquets and hunts. Some artists were permitted to portray and
name themselves among an ofﬁcial’s valued retainers when they decorated
his tomb (165–66). In better-documented examples from the New Kingdom,
royal tomb-builders and the sculptors who carved colossal royal statues re-
ceived state housing, substantial salaries, living expenses, and servants to ﬁsh,
grow crops, and grind grain for them and their families. They were also al-
lowed to work for private clients in their spare time (Eyre 1987b: 168–83). In
the Old Kingdom the monarch was able to reward high ofﬁcials with luxuri-
ous presents produced by elite craft workers: stone cofﬁns, statues, inscribed
doorways, and other ﬁttings for their tombs, as well as personal jewellery and
high-quality furniture (Eyre 1987a: 21–22). The consistently high quality of the
art and jewellery produced by royal craft workers during the Old and Middle
Kingdoms testiﬁes to the sustained achievements of these royal artisans and
of the institutions in which they worked.

370
Economy
Also labouring for the government in provincial administrative centres as
well as at the royal court were the full-time craft workers who manufactured
utilitarian goods for the state. They included coppersmiths, who cast chisels,
knives, and other metal tools for government craftsmen; carpenters, boat-
builders, tanners, and leather-workers; and potters and bricklayers (both des-
ignated qdw) (Strouhal 1992: 141). The boat-builders constructed large royal
ships and seagoing vessels as well as the barges used to haul government
grain from one part of Egypt to another. In the Middle Kingdom, govern-
ment boat-building near This, in Upper Egypt, was closely supervised by the
vizier who resided in far-off Memphis (Kemp 1989: 130). Craft workers of this
sort were also attached to private estates, temples, and pyramid towns, where
they worked part-time as priests of the local royal mortuary cult and supported
themselves as coppersmiths, carpenters, and other craft workers or by farming
(David 1986: 165–70).
The most esteemed luxury goods in the Inka kingdom were produced by
full-time specialists (kamayoq), the most skilled of whom lived and worked
near Cuzco. Most of them were bound to the service of institutions and high-
ranking individuals. When the Inka conquered the north-coast state of Chimor,
which was noted for the excellence of its metallurgy, its most celebrated
metalworkers were resettled near Cuzco and ordered to produce goods in the
Inka style. The output of elite gold- and silversmiths included statues of kings
and gods and life-sized replicas of llamas and plants that were placed in temple
and palace ‘gardens’ as fertility symbols. Skilled metallurgists also produced
gold and silver cups, tableware, and jewellery, which the Inka king distributed
as royal gifts to members of the nobility and occasionally to commoners who
served the state well. Even small gold or silver bangles and pins used to fasten
garments (tupu) were treasured indications of royal favour (Earle 1987: 73;
von Hagen 1959: 214). A royal monopoly of gold bullion facilitated concentrat-
ing the working of this precious and symbolically charged metal in the Cuzco
area, while silver was worked at Cuzco and other centres such as Hatunxauxa
(Earle 1987: 73–74; Kendall 1973: 171–72; Murra 1980: 157; von Hagen 1959:
107). The main Inka potteries at Sanyo, near Cuzco, turned out handmade pol-
ished cups, plates, and bottles decorated with repetitive geometrical patterns
and stylized animals. This pottery was a highly valued though less prestigious
substitute for metal vessels (Kendall 1973: 174–77).
The decorated pottery and fancy cloth produced near Cuzco were copied at
government workshops throughout the Inka kingdom. Fancy cloth was woven
by chosen women, who resided in all the provincial administrative centres,
and by yanakuna, who served government ofﬁcials. Male and female dwarfs,
hunchbacks, and cripples, who were unsuited for agricultural labour, were also

Trade and Craft Specialization
371
set to work as full-time weavers. Standard Inka-style pottery was produced at
provincial centres and elsewhere both by specialists and by corv´ee labour-
ers (Costin and Hagstrum 1995). Yanakuna likewise manufactured bronze
tools and weapons at Cuzco and in provincial centres (von Hagen 1959: 157).
Throughout the kingdom craft workers alloyed bronze according to a standard
formula (Earle 1987: 74).
State-directed craft production was assigned to specialist communities of
artisans as well as to yanakuna. Specialist communities, while continuing to
be organized as ayllus and feeding themselves, were exempted from the agri-
cultural labour tax and other forms of corv´ee. They were also fed from state
supplies for as long as they worked on government projects. At Millerea, on
the north shore of Lake Titicaca, one thousand Aymara weavers wove cloth
for the Inka army (Earle 1987: 72). These production enclaves permitted the
government to control the design and quality of goods, which were intended to
be copies of what was being produced under high-level supervision at Cuzco.
These arrangements ensured that state ofﬁcials controlled the production
and distribution of all luxury goods, as well as of specialized weapons and
tools, while the king personally controlled the distribution of the most val-
ued prestige objects. While local rulers had weavers and smiths attached to
their households, they depended on the king and on provincial governors to
provide them with more highly valued luxury goods. At the village level, part-
time craftsmen specialized in producing different types of goods which were
exchanged among nearby households or at local markets. Because of govern-
ment curbs on interregional trade, the raw materials used by local craft workers
must have been of local origin.
Most of what is known about the organization of craft production in Shang
China comes from only a few archaeological sites and relates to the production
of luxury goods. Bronze vessels, which were used to offer sacriﬁces to ancestors,
were among the most treasured possessions of the upper classes; less privileged
families had to make do with ceramic or wooden vessels. Bronze-workers, like
other producers of luxury goods, lived in their own small communities, each of
which was probably inhabited by a single patrilineage and its retainers. Com-
munities of this sort were located near the royal administrative compounds
at Zhengzhou and Anyang. The bronze-workers lived in comfortable houses
built, like upper-class ones, on stamped-earth platforms. They appear to have
been divided into master craftsmen, assistants, and apprentices and were prob-
ably assisted in menial tasks by humbler retainers and slaves. Many different
skills were required to produce high-quality bronze objects: processing ores,
creating and decorating sectional moulds, assembling the moulds, casting the
vessels, and ﬁnishing them. Carrying out such projects required numerous

372
Economy
specialists to work in teams and therefore a high level of economic support.
It is estimated that about three hundred people had to cooperate to cast an
eighty-seven-kilogram ritual vessel (Franklin 1990: 20–24; Hsu and Linduff
1988: 18–19; Treistman 1972: 85–92).
The demand for bronze weapons and ritual vessels among the upper classes
was constant. Groups of bronze vessels hidden in times of crisis suggest that
family shrines contained a current set of ceremonial vessels, together with
some earlier vessels that were especially esteemed. Less valuable earlier sets
and single vessels that had particular personal signiﬁcance for the deceased
were buried with the dead, presumably so that they could use them to continue
sacriﬁcing to their ancestors. Vessels interred with women of high status were
generally less elaborate than those buried with men (Rawson 1993).
Bronze-casting appears to have been carried out across northern and central
China in Shang times. It is widely assumed that the best-quality bronze vessels
were made in one or a few royal centres. Some modern experts claim to
be able to distinguish vessels produced at Anyang from contemporary but
clumsier and more old-fashioned ones made in less important centres (Kane
1974–75: 80). Robert Bagley (1980: 98) states that, while Zhengzhou-period
vessels were uniform in style and therefore perhaps were produced at only
a few royal workshops, those dating from the later Anyang period that are
found in outlying regions differ in type, style, and motifs from those produced
at Anyang. Robert Thorp (1985: 54–55) cautions, however, that few stylistic
differences are exhibited by vessels produced within the known borders of
the Shang state and therefore presumably by specialists working for different
lineages of the Shang ruling class. Gina Barnes (1993: 124) suggests that only a
small number of Anyang-style bronzes were produced at Shang royal capitals
and the rest were local copies. It is possible that craft workers trained at Anyang
were sent to work for various regional ofﬁcials.
In the Late Shang period, the Zhou rulers produced bronze vessels that
initially copied Shang prototypes. Soon, however, their vessels acquired their
own distinctive style (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 41–42). To date, the early Zhou
capitals are the only places except Anyang where abundant traces of writing
have been recovered. These Zhou texts date from the Late Shang period.
While the Shang writing system was used in both societies, surviving examples
of Zhou writing are distinguished by the smaller size of the characters and by
different calendrics (46–49). Thus both writing and bronze-working exhibit
a rapid divergence from Shang prototypes. By contrast, the relative stylistic
unity of bronze vessels within the core of the Shang kingdom seems to reﬂect
political control similar to that which the Inka central government exerted over
the production of luxury pottery and cloth.

Trade and Craft Specialization
373
Pottery was also produced in specialized communities near the great admin-
istrative compound at Zhengzhou and probably near provincial administrative
centres throughout northern China. Much of the Zhengzhou pottery consisted
of high-quality utilitarian wares, fashioned with only limited use of the potter’s
wheel but ﬁred using elaborate kilns in which the furnace was separated from
the baking oven. A small amount of the pottery produced at Zhengzhou con-
stituted luxury wares, including heavily decorated ritual vessels made of white
clay and water-resistant stoneware vessels covered with a glaze that had to be
ﬁred at a minimum temperature of twelve hundred degrees C (Chˆeng 1960:
137–55). Still other communities of craft workers around Zhengzhou consisted
of stone- and shell-carvers, stoneworkers, and carpenters. The stonework-
ers not only manufactured jade and marble luxury products but also mass-
produced stone arrowheads for the army and stone knives and sickles for state
labourers.
An important craft that could have been practised only with upper-class pa-
tronage was the production of chariots, which began in the thirteenth century
b.c. Sophisticated carpentry was needed to produce eighteen-spoke wheels
that were 125 to 140 centimetres in diameter and therefore considerably larger
than those made in the Middle East in the Late Bronze Age. Zhou rulers are
recorded as presenting elaborately decorated chariots as gifts to regional ofﬁ-
cials (Lu 1993). The large numbers in use suggest that they must have been
manufactured in regional centres as well as at the royal court.
The artisans who worked for the royal court were supervised by a large
number of full-time artisan ofﬁcials (gong), who also performed court rituals
and accompanied military expeditions, perhaps to oversee the maintenance
of equipment. It is unknown to what extent these artisan ofﬁcials coordinated
specialized production throughout the kingdom and whether similar adminis-
trators worked for regional and local ofﬁcials (Keightley 1969: 8–65). What is
known about the Shang court suggests that it managed elite production much
as it was managed in Egypt and Inka Peru.
specialization in city- and territorial states
In territorial states the goods used by the upper classes and the government
tended to be made by full-time and elite craft workers employed by the state.
These goods circulated separately from goods made and used by commoners.
In this manner, the central government created a monopoly of high-quality
goods that reinforced its political control. The most luxurious goods were
produced, often from exotic raw materials, at or near the royal court, and
distributing them was a prerogative of the king. Less valuable luxury goods

374
Economy
and utilitarian items required by the state were produced both around the
royal court and in provincial administrative centres. Farmers generally had to
rely on goods manufactured from local raw materials by part-time rural craft
workers.
In city-state systems only the rulers of hegemonic states possessed economic
resources that approximated those that were regularly available to the rulers
of territorial states, and their power ﬂuctuated and was often short-lived. Full-
time craft workers tended to sell most of their products publicly, and exotic
raw materials were available to artisans from long-distance traders and at local
markets. This meant that better-quality goods of all kinds were available to
anyone who could afford them. If the quality of the luxury goods produced in
city-state systems rarely matched the best that was created in territorial states,
the overall quality of goods available to everyone was higher. In city-states that
were divided along hereditary class lines and in some other hegemonic city-
states,theupperclassesattempted,byenactingsumptuarylawsandcontrolling
long-distance trade, to regulate the distribution of goods in ways analogous to
those found in territorial states, where goods circulated at the commoner and
the upper-class levels but only rarely passed from one level to the other. Among
the Classic Maya, upper-class control of interstate trade may have constituted
a mechanism of political control that resembled those found in territorial
and some hegemonic states, but exotic goods such as obsidian were widely
distributed in Maya society.

17 Appropriation of Wealth
A
deﬁning feature of all early civilizations was the institutionalized appro-
priation by a small ruling group of most of the wealth produced by the
lower classes. Economists commonly deﬁne wealth as the stock of goods and
claims that individuals or corporate groups can give away or use to purchase
goods and services. In modern industrial societies, where almost everything
can be bought and sold, any sort of asset constitutes wealth (Polanyi 1944). In
early civilizations, however, some types of goods did not circulate freely. Com-
munal land, which could be inherited but not alienated, was clearly a source
of wealth that economically advantaged its owners by comparison with groups
that were landless. Agricultural workers who lacked their own land had to pay
to use other people’s, usually by surrendering a substantial portion of their
production to its owners. Yet, while inalienable communal land constituted
a source of wealth, it was not a form of wealth. In Peru the king gave gold
objects to individuals as testimonials of his esteem for them or as rewards for
service. Although these objects could be inherited, they could not be bought
or sold. Thus, while they were valuable social assets, they too were not com-
modities, and hence did not constitute wealth. Palaces, temples, and tombs,
which expressed the power of the upper classes, also fell into this category.
In some early civilizations, such as Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Valley of
Mexico, metal bullion and cloth were commodities that were easily stored for
long periods and facilitated exchange; hence they constituted important forms
of wealth, as did many exotic raw materials. Nevertheless, the most common
and economically important forms of wealth in early civilizations were agricul-
tural surpluses.
Farmers and artisans did not accumulate large amounts of wealth, although
they created virtually all the wealth that existed in these societies. Most of
them lived only slightly above the subsistence level and had to depend on their
own sustained labour to support themselves. Food is reported to have become
375

376
Economy
scarceinthemonthpriortotheannualmaizeharvestamongmanyofthepoorer
families living in the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan (Clendinnen 1991: 66). Some
merchants accumulated great riches as a result of their trading activities, but
theygenerallylackedpoliticalpowerandthereforehadtocultivatethegoodwill
and protection of rulers and ofﬁcials. Most of the wealth produced in early
civilizations was controlled by powerful individuals, families, and institutions.
Producers, as far as they could, sought to beneﬁt by personally disposing of
their surplus production. Some ancient Egyptian farmers habitually tried to
conceal part of their harvest to avoid having that portion taxed by government
ofﬁcials. Tax collectors, for their part, sought to stop such evasion by calculating
harvest yields as accurately as possible and forcing farmers who claimed to have
produced less to reveal their hiding places (Lichtheim 1976: 170–71). Farmers
must have disliked having to produce more surplus grain than they and their
families required only to have most of it appropriated by landowners and
government ofﬁcials. At the same time, the upper classes and the government
would have liked production to increase so that they might have still greater
wealth at their disposal.
Members of the upper classes competed among themselves for the control
of surplus wealth, and this competition gave rise to many different types of
appropriation. One of the main forms of obligatory wealth transfers in early
civilizations was taxes, which had to be paid to the state. Surplus wealth was
transferred to individual members of the upper classes as rents paid to owners
for the use of land and as fees and bribes offered for various services, such as
rendering legal decisions. Corv´ee, indentured, and slave labour were yet other
means by which the state or upper-class individuals could enrich themselves
at the expense of the less powerful. Other important wealth transfers in early
civilizations took the form of payments that rulers of weaker states were com-
pelled to make to rulers of more powerful ones. Many scholars, when dealing
with early civilizations, use the terms ‘taxes’ and ‘tribute’ interchangeably or
refer to the obligatory transfer of wealth both within and between states as
‘tribute’. The latter usage is exempliﬁed by expressions such as ‘tributary mode
of production’ (Amin 1976). The unjustiﬁed implication of this usage is that
in early civilizations both forms constituted a surrender of wealth by subjects
to rulers that was fundamentally different from the payment of taxes in mod-
ern societies. I will use the term ‘tax’ in the conventional manner to refer to
obligatory wealth transfers from individuals or groups to states and ‘tribute’ to
designate wealth transfers between states. While the two were not necessarily
terminologically differentiated in all early civilizations, Egyptian ofﬁcials of
the New Kingdom distinguished between the tribute (ınw) paid to them by
conquered Syrian and Canaanite principalities and the taxes (b3kw) collected

Appropriation of Wealth
377
within Egypt and Nubia, which was by then an extension of the Egyptian state
(Priese 1974). Whether or not it had an emic referent in each early civilization,
the distinction between taxes and tribute is a heuristically useful one.
taxes, corv ´ees, and rents
It used to be argued that the appropriation of foodstuffs in early civilizations
was achieved as a result of the control that the upper classes exercised over
arable land. Some scholars surmised that farmers were bound to the land
much as peasants were in medieval Europe. Others believed that, by owning
all the agricultural land, the upper classes forced peasants either to rent it from
them or to enter into sharecropping relations, thus ensuring that they would
receive most of the surplus (Weber 1976 [1896]). The alternative concept of the
Asiatic society postulated that members of egalitarian farming communities
owned the land collectively and the upper classes used the threat of force to
extract surplus production from them in the form of taxes or tribute (Isaac
1993). It is now clear, however, that land ownership in early civilizations was
considerably more complex than either of these models and that, when it
came to transfers of wealth, it was economically less important than the right
to appropriate agricultural production and the surplus labour of the lower
classes.
The ways of appropriating food surpluses were varied. Taxes might be paid
to the state by farmers who collectively owned and worked the land or by
institutional or private landowners. They could be levied in kind on all types
of agricultural produce or only on grains and other easily stored crops. They
might be paid entirely or in part with something of equivalent value such
as metal bullion or cowrie shells. A ﬁxed amount of tax might be collected
annually for a particular amount of arable land, a different rate might be set
annually depending on varying crop yields, or a ﬁxed percentage of the total
yield might be levied. Privately or institutionally owned land was taxed in some
early civilizations but exempt from taxation in others.
Privately, institutionally, and even collectively owned land might be worked
by slaves or by farmers who were bound to the soil in return for their subsis-
tence. It might also be cultivated by landless labourers for a ﬁxed daily wage
(often paid in foodstuffs), rented to landless farmers for a ﬁxed amount, or
sharecropped with tenant farmers. Each of these arrangements resulted in
the return of a substantial share of the crop to the landowners.
Commoners could also be required, as a form of labour tax, to work plots
of land that were assigned to local ofﬁcials, temples, or the state and to pro-
vide corv´ee labour for government mining operations, build temples, palaces,

378
Economy
and royal tombs, clean and maintain public thoroughfares, provide domestic
service for kings and lords, and participate in military operations. Taxes were
frequently collected on handicraft production, market sales, and goods being
transported from one place to another. Sales taxes could either be collected
in addition to or substituted for direct levies on production. Taxes of all sorts
were paid to various levels of government and sometimes by the same people
to more than one level.
In Shang China, if later traditions are correct, rural lineages handed over
approximately one-ninth of their agricultural production to the upper classes
by cultivating ﬁelds to produce harvests that were assigned either to the king or
to regional governors, local leaders, and various stipendiaries who worked for
these ofﬁcials (Vandermeersch 1980: 215–17). After the annual harvest, they
may also have had to perform a month of non-agricultural corv`ee labour for
their lord (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 349). Oracle-bone texts reveal that kings and
perhaps other high-ranking lords mobilized ordinary people to perform various
forms of corv´ee labour for themselves or the state: preparing agricultural land,
planting and harvesting millet on special estates, building fortiﬁcations and
palaces, assisting at hunts, performing military service, and helping the army
to transport supplies. These were the same forms of public works that were
performed by landless labourers who worked full-time for the king. Both types
of labourers served under ofﬁcers with ‘military’ titles, which suggests that no
distinction was drawn between military service and other forms of corv´ee
labour. All the food produced by these workers would have belonged to the
king or high-ranking lords (Keightley 1969: 66–144; 1999b: 281, 284). Thus
Shang commoners appear to have paid taxes mostly in the form of labour. There
is no evidence, however, that payment in kind was ruled out or regarded as
inappropriate.
Subjects of the Inka ruler were unique in our sample in that they paid all
taxes in the form of labour rather than goods. In addition to cultivating their
own ﬁelds and ones that supported the corporate activities of their ayllu and
its leader, farm families had to work separate plots of land that belonged to
the Inka state and to religious cults sponsored by the Inka government. The
seeds and tubers sown in these ﬁelds and perhaps the tools that were used
were supplied by the institutions to which the harvest belonged. Working this
land was justiﬁed as reciprocity for the king’s permitting ayllus to keep most of
their land following their incorporation into the Inka kingdom (Kendall 1973:
145–46; Murra 1980: 31–33). Despite the integral involvement of women in
agriculture, the Inka state also represented agriculture as a form of permanent
bride service owed to the Inka ruler, who claimed control over all women. A
similar logic was applied to ﬁsh and other natural resources by claiming that

Appropriation of Wealth
379
they belonged to the king, who granted ordinary people the right to use them
provided that they supplied these items to government ofﬁcials whenever they
were asked to do so (Gose 2000: 85). By accumulating resources only through
the appropriation of labour, the Inka monarch avoided having anything given
to him by his subjects, which would have implied that he was inferior to the
givers. Farmers had to transport the produce of the state and temple lands
they cultivated to government and temple granaries located as far away as their
provincial administrative centre. Ayllu, state, and temple land constituted the
basis of three separate systems of production, each of which depended on the
same people’s labour. All the food produced on government land belonged to
the state, while all the food grown on temple lands was devoted to the service
of the gods (LeVine 1992).
Farmers also had to provide the corv´ee (mit’a) labour required to tend state
and temple herds of llamas and alpacas, construct and repair government
roads, mine and reﬁne metals, erect buildings, manufacture various sorts of
goods, and perform military duties. Hereditary lords and governors had a
right to the labour of one person from every hundred families under their
control, this labour being provided by each family in turn. A governor could
summon four hundred workers from all parts of his province to labour at the
administrative centre; a hunu kuraka (head of ten thousand families) could call
on one hundred of his subjects to perform domestic and agricultural tasks, a
waranka kuraka (head of one thousand families) on ten subjects, and a pachaca
kuraka (head of one hundred households) on one subject (Julien 1988; LeVine
1987). Rotating corv´ee labour produced grain on large state farms to support
the army and the upper classes. Far more grain was produced for the upper
classes on these farms than on an equivalent amount of farm land worked by
members of ayllus for themselves, the government, and temples (S. Moore
1958: 49–53, 61–67). Married women each year had to spin and weave ﬁxed
amounts of raw materials supplied by the state.
While no goods were actually transferred from farming communities to the
state, farmers produced large amounts of surplus food that, along with corv´ee
labour, belonged to the government, state-sponsored religious cults, and the
upperclasses.Ofﬁcialsreciprocatedwithhospitalityintheformofcookedfood,
maize beer, and entertainment and, if the workers were away from home for a
long time, clothing. These exchanges were modelled on the traditional usages
of Andean agriculture. Farmers regularly called upon neighbours, relatives,
and friends to help them accomplish major tasks on the understanding that
they would reciprocate whenever the latter needed help, and the women of the
group for whom the work was being done supplied all the workers with food,
drink, and entertainment for the duration of their toil (Murra 1980: 90–91).

380
Economy
Corv´ee labour done for the state and for state-sponsored temples differed from
local reciprocity mainly in the highly asymmetrical nature of the exchange and
the emphasis laid on the special obligations that subjects owed the king. Much
more labour was supplied by commoners to the state than went into providing
them with food and entertainment. Moreover, all the food, drink, and clothing
that were distributed to labourers had been produced for the state by unpaid
male and female workers. Token reciprocity facilitated the production of large
amounts of goods for the use of the upper classes (Morris and Thompson
1985).
Inka ofﬁcials’ appropriation of a small number of girls and boys from each
ayllu was yet another form of tax. The king eventually made some of the
young women who were not used as human sacriﬁces his secondary wives
and concubines and bestowed other women as extra wives on nobles and
commoners who had served him or the state well. The majority of these women
spent the rest of their lives secluded in the houses for chosen women, where
they assisted in religious rituals, wove fancy cloth, and cooked and brewed
for the state. The food they prepared was not only offered to the gods and
distributed to participants in religious festivals but also supplied to corv´ee
labourers working for the state or travelling from one part of the kingdom to
another (Kendall 1973: 192–93; Zuidema 1990: 58–59). The boys who were not
sacriﬁced were bound hereditarily to the king and other ofﬁcials as household
servants, craft workers, specialized retainers, and farm labourers. Their ranks
were swelled by whole groups of conquered peoples subjected to this form of
service. They had to turn over all their produce to the ofﬁcial for whom they
worked and by whom they and their families were fed, clothed, and housed.
While some came to enjoy positions of trust, they kept a much smaller portion
of the food they produced than did members of ayllus. Estates constituted
a small enough portion of all agricultural land that the government did not
have to tax their production to protect its own ﬁscal structure (Murra 1980:
168–75). This resulted in higher returns for individual members of the Inka
nobility who had been granted such lands. Estates and their bonded labourers
greatly enhanced the revenues of the king, of royal descent groups, and of
other individuals on whom they were bestowed.
In Egypt many individual farmers or farm communities paid a portion of
their crops as rents to men and women who owned estates or had been granted
the use of them by the government. Estate-holders included government ofﬁ-
cials, funerary cults, nobles, temples, the king, and the central government. In
dealing with their landlords, villagers were represented by their headmen. Un-
less estates belonged to the king or the state or had been declared tax-free by
the king, their owners or managers had to pay taxes to the central government.

Appropriation of Wealth
381
Farm villages that were not attached to estates seem to have paid taxes directly
to the government (Andreu 1997: 109).
During the Old Kingdom, a nationwide biennial cattle count provided the
basis for the government to levy a tax in kind on living animals and the hides
of dead animals belonging to individuals, communities, and institutions (Kees
1961: 87–90). Systematic records were also kept of what land was held by dif-
ferent institutions and individuals and who was responsible for paying the taxes
on the crops that each plot of land produced (Kemp 1983: 82). To assess the
productivity of land, the presence of ponds, canals, wells, trees, and swamps,
and anything else that might enhance or reduce its value was recorded (Eyre
1987a: 6). Already in the Old Kingdom, the amount of the grain tax appears to
have been determined in some general fashion by the level of the Nile ﬂood,
which was carefully recorded each year. If the ﬂood rose too high and destroyed
irrigation works or was too low for crops to be grown on higher ground, the
tax rate was reduced (Andreu 1997: 106–8; Eyre 1999: 45). The produce of
trees was also taxed (Kees 1961: 80). In addition, the government sought to
collect a tax on goods produced by part-time craft workers and by the wives
of commoners, of which cloth was probably the most important item. This tax
may have consisted of one of every ten items produced (Kees 1961: 53; Kemp
1983: 82–83).
Government ofﬁcials collected grain, dates, domestic animals, and man-
ufactured goods as taxes in the countryside and conveyed them to provin-
cial administrative centers, where they were placed under the control of the
local overseer of the granaries (ımy-r ˇsnwt) and the overseer of the treasury
(ımy-r pr h
• d). Much of what was collected remained stored at the provincial
administrative centres and was used to pay resident ofﬁcials and their assis-
tants, sustain government-employed craft workers, support local government
projects, feed corv´ee labourers in transit from one part of the country to an-
other, and provision royal visits. Other goods were forwarded as needed to
the national capital (Hassan 1993: 564–68; Strudwick 1985: 276–99). Temple
estates were usually located near the cult centre to which they belonged,
but those of an important one might be scattered throughout Egypt, as were
those assigned to royal funerary cults. Kings derived revenues from personal
estates, state-owned land, and taxes. Goods passed as rents from farmers to
estate-holders and as taxes from landowning farmers and estate-holders to the
government.
Egyptian farmers were also required to perform corv´ee labour. Tasks in-
cluded constructing and maintaining irrigation systems, erecting buildings
(including royal tombs), quarrying and mining, transporting goods, and par-
ticipating in military expeditions. Some of this work was done near where

382
Economy
farmers lived; other corv´ees were performed away from home, often near
the royal capital and sometimes outside the Nile Valley. Military and mining
expeditions and pyramid-building might require groups of men to be away
from their villages for three months or more at a time. Corv´ee workers were
organized into units of one hundred men, divided into groups of ten, each
with its own leader. Expeditions, some composed of over seventeen thousand
men, were sent into the Eastern Desert to quarry stone under the leadership
of expedition commanders (ımy-r mˇs) or royal (literally ‘divine’) treasurers
(sd3wty ntr). In addition to corv´ee labourers, state craftsmen (h
• mwt pr 3),
millers, and brewers accompanied such expeditions. Still larger groups of
labourers were assembled to help construct royal pyramid complexes (Andreu
1997: 29–36; Eyre 1987a: 10–20; Kemp 1989: 129). Corv´ee labourers were
fed, housed, and clothed when they were away from their homes for long pe-
riods. The selection of individuals for successive tours of duty must have been
worked out between low-level government scribes and village leaders. Severe
punishments were inﬂicted on people who attempted to evade corv´ee duty or
deserted their work parties. In the Middle Kingdom, they and their families
were conﬁned to government prisons (h˘ nrt) and might be condemned to per-
petual slave labour on government estates or those belonging to government
ofﬁcials (Andreu 1997: 27–28; Kemp 1983: 83–84).
Aztec calpolli members had to cultivate land specially designated for the
support of calpolli ofﬁcials, temples, schools, and regiments. Urban calpollis, in
particular, tended to be larger and less egalitarian than were Peruvian ayllus.
Their leading families and most successful warriors were usually members
of the nobility; hence collective labour helped to support the upper classes
within calpollis as well as those organizations’ corporate activities. Members of
calpollis also had to provide corv´ee labour for the state, helping to construct
public buildings and to clean and repair streets and public places as well
as serving as soldiers. It has been suggested that calpollis were required to
surrender one-third of their harvest to the state (L´opez Austin 1988, 1: 75), but
it is unclear whether this was a direct tax or included all the food resources that
calpollis expended training their regiments, supporting military campaigns,
and performing other state duties. Nor is it even certain that a harvest tax
was levied (van Zantwijk 1985: 283). Public institutions, the king, nobles, and
successful warriors were granted land worked by landless farmers who were
allowed to keep only enough of the food they produced to feed themselves
and their families. No tax appears to have been paid on these lands or their
produce. Goods sold in public markets were subject to a tax that may have
amounted to 20 percent of the value of what was sold and could be paid either
in kind or with cloth or cacao beans. Because of the high volume of market

Appropriation of Wealth
383
exchange, this tax greatly enriched the palace and enhanced the power of the
king (Berdan 1982: 42).
In Mesopotamia much institutionally and privately owned land was rented,
sharecropped, or worked by wage labourers, and all these arrangements en-
sured that most of the food produced belonged to the land’s owners or des-
ignated beneﬁciaries. Kings controlled the revenues from palace lands and
taxed cultivated ﬁelds, crops, and herds belonging to individuals, kin groups,
and sometimes temples. Various kings attempted to increase their control over
temples and temple revenues, but some of these attempts were unsuccessful
(Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90; Postgate 1992: 185–87, 300).
In addition, kings and possibly city councils imposed various taxes on the
sale and movement of goods; the city administrators may, however, have been
acting only as agents for the king. There are references to taxes on goods
leaving and entering cities (which were collected at the city gates), taxes on
land, an annual tax that in Old Babylonian times was paid in silver by well-
to-do people, including merchants, priests, and ofﬁcials, and an annual tax
collected in kind on grain and animals from ofﬁcials, merchants, shepherds,
soldiers, scribes, tavern keepers, and cookshop operators (R. Harris 1975: 40–
45). Taxes were also levied on burials and divorces. These taxes were collected
by a wide variety of ofﬁcials, including gatekeepers, city administrators, and
judges, in return for a commission. The right to collect taxes, rents, and dues
was also sold to entrepreneurs in return for a portion of their value, usually
paid to the government in silver. These same entrepreneurs often made loans
at a high rate of interest to farmers and others who were experiencing short-
term ﬁnancial difﬁculties and had problems meeting tax payments. The king
also had the right to call on all free men to perform corv´ee labour. In later
times, corv´ees, including military service, appear to have been commutable by
payments in silver or grain (Diakonoff 1969b: 189–90; R. Harris 1975: 40–45;
Van De Mieroop 1999: 203–6).
Kings, temples, and landowners accumulated substantial wealth as the result
of their ability to appropriate crop surpluses. Although kings had to bear most
of the costs of managing the state, their large landholdings and their ability
to collect a wide range of taxes made them the wealthiest and most powerful
individuals in each city-state.
The Yoruba acknowledged that they owed taxes and corv´ee labour to com-
munity leaders and kings but viewed them as payments for the services, both
natural and supernatural, that leaders provided for their community. A lineage
that refused to pay such taxes would have been expelled from a community
(Lloyd 1962: 63). Relatively little food was collected as a direct tax on land
or produce. Each household presented a few yams as token offerings to local

384
Economy
ofﬁcials and the king at the beginning of the annual harvest (Law 1977: 229;
Lloyd 1962: 128). It is possible that no greater effort was made to collect har-
vest taxes because yams and other Yoruba crops could not be stored for as long
as the grain crops of other early civilizations (Bradbury 1957: 23). Large areas
were brought under cultivation using hereditary slaves, prisoners of war, and
debtors, all of whom laboured in return for basic necessities while the kings
and wealthy men and women who controlled their labour lived in luxury and
supported numerous armed retainers. In addition to offering token gifts of
food to the king, Yoruba men were required to perform corv´ee labour, which
was deployed to build and repair the royal palace and city walls, to tend sacred
groves, and sometimes to work palace farms. Such labourers expected to be
provided with food and drink by the ofﬁcials responsible for these corv´ees
(Ajisafe 1924: 25; Ojo 1966b: 63–66).
Most taxes were probably collected on market sales (Hodder and Ukwu
1969: 108). Taxes were also levied on craft production and on the movement of
goodsbetweenonestateandanotherandinandoutofcities.Thetollsthatwere
collected on food being brought into cities (Bascom 1969: 37) constituted a
more important source of revenue than did the agricultural produce presented
as gifts to the king at harvest time. These taxes were paid either in goods or
in cowrie shells to gatekeepers who kept a portion of what they collected as
payment for their work. The rest was shared by the king and a small number
of leading non-royal ofﬁcials such as the members of the state council in Oyo.
Each such ofﬁcial was authorized to collect taxes, together with the king’s
agents, at different city gates and along different roads. This prevented the
palace from appropriating too much wealth at the expense of those with whom
the king shared political power.
The king and a much greater number of ofﬁcials shared the many fees that
were levied for hearing legal cases and the ﬁnes that were imposed at various
levels. Ofﬁcials received presents and bribes for helping to settle disputes and
assisting petitioners in various ways. The king and the chief ofﬁcials of militar-
ily successful Yoruba states also shared a large portion of the booty, including
prisoners, captured during military campaigns. Whether these prisoners were
kept as labourers or sold as slaves, they constituted an important source of
income. The king also received fees for permitting certain rituals to be per-
formed at shrines he controlled, collected death duties on the properties of
wealthy citizens, and received payments for sanctioning the installation of ofﬁ-
cials and agreeing to bestow titles on individuals (Bascom 1969: 37; Law 1977:
229–31; Lloyd 1960: 229).
The king of Benin was supported by a more robust and centralized version
of the Yoruba tax system. The palace organization and state rituals were funded

Appropriation of Wealth
385
by presentations of palm oil, meat, and livestock twice each year by all ward
and village leaders. These contributions were assembled by local leaders from
every household in their ward or community. In addition, the king could call
on taxpayers to help repair and extend the royal palace and for extra levies
of goods when special sacriﬁces were deemed necessary for the good of the
nation. The king also derived considerable revenue in return for granting the
numerous titles that were under his exclusive control, exerted considerable
control over revenue from legal ﬁnes, and claimed ownership of all prisoners
taken in war, although he returned most of them to their captors (Bradbury
1957: 41–43).
AlmostnothingisknownabouthowtheMayaupperclassesextractedsurplus
wealth from commoners. The vastness of state projects and the opulent life
of Maya rulers suggest, however, that the Maya upper class, and kings in
particular, did it very effectively.
In all early civilizations a small privileged class appropriated, in ways that
were deemed to be socially acceptable, a disproportionate share of the avail-
able wealth. Ownership of land was not the key to this process. In most early
civilizations, agricultural produce and manufactured goods were appropriated
by the state in the form of taxes in kind, while surplus labour was appropriated
by imposing corv´ees. While the more intensive forms of appropriation asso-
ciated with institutional or private ownership of land were practised only to a
limited extent in most early civilizations, they appear to have predominated
in Mesopotamia and Egypt and to have been rapidly increasing in the Inka
kingdom and at least some of the more powerful states in the Valley of Mexico.
The amount of food available for appropriation would have varied accord-
ing to the environmental settings and the differing overall productivity of the
agricultural regimes of various early civilizations. Yet, as a result of the general
simplicity of the technology and the predominant role played by human labour
in every sector of agricultural production (except Egyptian and Mesopotamian
grain production, for which cattle traction was also used), the per capita range
of variation in intensity of food production was not great. Nevertheless, the ap-
propriation of even slightly larger amounts of food produced on institutionally
or privately owned land would have substantially increased the food resources
available to a minuscule upper class.
Substantialamountsoffoodandmanufacturedgoodswerealsoappropriated
by imposing market, sales, and transportation taxes and charging fees to use
state services such as the legal system. Such taxes and fees appear to have
been especially common in city-state systems, where trade and marketing were
important aspects of the economy. It also may have been more practical to tax
foodstuffs in this fashion in societies where food was produced continuously

386
Economy
over much of the year, as was the case with chinampas and kitchen gardens
in Mesoamerica, rather than where there was a single annual grain harvest, as
in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The Mesopotamians appear to have taxed grain
being brought into cities as well as ﬁelds and crop yields. Increasing the range
of taxable items and the diversity of ways in which revenue was collected
disguised the total amount that was being appropriated from the producer
and probably facilitated its extraction.
Some of these strategies may have been more appropriate than others in
particular ecological settings, and some combinations of strategies may have
been generally more effective than others. To the extent that resources ﬂowed
into the hands of various segments of the upper classes, the power of the
monarch was limited. The Yoruba, whose taxation arrangements ensured that
most of the resources available to the central government would be shared by
the king and a few high-ranking non-royal ofﬁcials, had a much less centralized
government than the Aztec, whose monarch controlled substantial revenues
derived from patrimonial and ofﬁce lands and market taxes. Even the king of
Benin did not succeed in controlling wealth and its distribution to the same
extent as the most powerful rulers in the Valley of Mexico. The Egyptian and
Inka bureaucracies made it possible for central governments to collect and
store goods for their own use in capitals and administrative centres in all the
regions they controlled. In China regional ofﬁcials appear to have controlled
the collection and distribution of surplus resources in regions that were under
their direct control and, like the king, probably received tax payments from
ofﬁcials who ruled smaller areas subject to their authority. Yet, because of
the delegational nature of political organization, they had to cede economic
control of various subregions to these subordinate ofﬁcials.
Because of their low per capita productivity, early civilizations did not have
the capacity to monitor and tax resources as is done today. The government
of Old Kingdom Egypt appears to have gone farthest in keeping detailed reg-
isters of land ownership and rights to beneﬁt from its produce, but there is
no evidence of detailed reckonings of the total revenue received by the cen-
tral government (Strudwick 1985: 251–300). The Inka organized taxation in
accordance with a decimal system based on multiples of one hundred nuclear
families. Among the Yoruba, assembling revenues from different social groups,
especially those living outside the capital, was a complex, decentralized opera-
tion. In the kingdom of Ife ﬁve ofﬁcials who lived in towns some distance from
the capital collected contributions from the heads of nearby settlements, which
they subsequently shared with the king (Bascom 1969: 29). The king of Benin
collected taxes through agents living in Benin City who were responsible for
dealing personally with the representatives of various communities scattered

Appropriation of Wealth
387
in different parts of the kingdom. The agents kept a share of these taxes as
a commission and forwarded the rest to the palace (Bradbury 1957: 42–43).
In Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico, different kinds of agents collected
different sorts of taxes. Although high-level ofﬁcials established targets for
tax collection, the manner in which speciﬁc sums were collected appears to
have been determined by highly speciﬁc personal and political considerations,
including bribery.
There is no evidence that even states which developed elaborate systems
of food storage, such as those of ancient Egypt and the Inka, assumed major
responsibility for public welfare in times of famine. The Egyptian government
may have lowered taxes on grain when harvests were poor, and local ofﬁcials
occasionally claimed to have shipped food from areas of plenty to nearby areas
where people were starving. There is, however, no indication that food was
stored with the speciﬁc intention of eventually using it for famine relief. Even
the biblical folktale of Joseph, often interpreted as evidence of such storage,
says that Joseph, as a royal ofﬁcial, accumulated surplus grain for seven years
so that the king might become rich by selling it to his subjects at a high price
duringatimeoffamine.LettersfromtheearlyMiddleKingdomspeak,perhaps
rhetorically, of people in one part of Egypt being driven to cannibalism while
people in other regions had sufﬁcient food to eat (James 1962: 33; Lichtheim
1973: 87). In the devastating famine of a.d. 1450–54, the Aztec king was able
to provide only minimal food relief. In order to survive, many Aztec had to sell
themselves or their children into slavery to traders bringing food from outside
the Valley of Mexico. The later expansion of wetland agriculture in the Valley
of Mexico and the subjugation of warmer, maize-producing areas outside the
valley may have been intended in part to improve the long-term food supply
and protect the Aztec against the recurrence of such famines (Davies 1980:
92–93). There is no evidence, however, that Aztec kings ever contemplated
the need for the state to stockpile food for this purpose. The main reason the
Aztec state appropriated food was to enable the king and his ofﬁcials to enjoy
a luxurious lifestyle and subsidize his efforts to enhance his power.
Sharecropping and rental rates suggest that under optimal conditions a hard-
working farm family might have been able to produce up to 50 percent more
food than was required to meet its minimum subsistence requirements. Taxes
collected directly from free farmers always seem to have been considerably
lowerthanthat,amountingtoroughlyone-tenthtoone-ﬁfthofthetotalamount
of food produced. The suggestion that an Aztec calpolli surrendered as much as
one-third of its crop yield seems unlikely and may have been invented to justify
higher exactions during the colonial period. While in some early civilizations
farmers consumed extra food of their own while performing local corv´ees, in

388
Economy
Peru corv´ee labourers were always fed by the state, and in Egypt they were
fed at least while they were away from home. Elsewhere at least some corv´ee
labourers expected food and entertainment from those who directed their
work, so even in these cases corv´ee labour was not the direct equivalent of
an additional transfer of food resources from taxpayers to the state. It would
appear that about ten farm families normally were willing to support one or
at most two non-food-producing families without subjecting the social and
political order to undue strain.
Farmers must have appreciated the protection from external attack, the
maintenance of local order, and the water-management systems that govern-
ments provided. In return, they would have been prepared to pay taxes if they
believed these taxes were not extortionate and were imposed reasonably equi-
tably. An effective ruler had to curb abuse of the tax system by his ofﬁcials and
keep his own expenses and those of the upper classes within reasonable limits.
To collect increasing amounts of taxes would have required more coercion,
which would have increased the cost of managing the state. By comparison
with some later preindustrial societies, such as the Roman Empire, early civ-
ilizations seem to have kept both taxes and expenses low. Max Weber (1976
[1896]: 63–64) observed that hereditary rulers generally preferred a ‘prudent
and durable rate of exploitation’ and security of revenues to trying to maxi-
mize capital accumulation. Other forms of economic exploitation were also
kept under control. Slaves were relatively few, and their treatment was only
rarely characterized by the brutality associated with Late Republican Roman
Italy or early modern colonial plantation economies. The most widespread
form of exploitation was that of landless farm labourers, who were generally
compelled to surrender a higher percentage of their production to landowners
than were farmers who owned their own land. The many forms of appropria-
tion that were practised simultaneously and the widespread private ownership
of land suggest that the economic exploitation of landless people may have
been harsher in Mesopotamia than in any other early civilization. Even there,
however, government interventions, in the form of periodic cancellations of
some debts, seem to have kept economic inequality and exploitation within
socially manageable limits.
That it was less important who owned land than who had a right to appro-
priate agricultural production and control surplus agricultural labour explains
why a variety of landowning and landholding practices and many different
techniques for taxing goods were able to support systems characterized by
generally similar levels of sociopolitical inequality. The material asymmetry of
thesetransfersjustiﬁesthesuggestionthatallthesesocietiesshareda‘tributary’
mode of production (Amin 1976: 9–16), so long as it is understood that the

Appropriation of Wealth
389
term ‘tributary’ refers to the payment of all forms of taxes. The key features
of this mode of production were the ability of the upper classes to extract
substantial surpluses from commoners and the signiﬁcance of the control of
surplus wealth as opposed to the ownership of property. Because most wealth
was produced by farmers, who constituted the vast majority of the popula-
tion, the amount of wealth available to the upper classes tended to be directly
proportional to the number of people they could exploit.
tribute
The upper classes in some early civilizations were further enriched by trib-
ute extracted from weaker neighbouring states. This was accomplished by
the use or threat of military force. While some of this wealth was widely
distributed within dominant states, encouraging broad support for a policy of
hegemony,itsdispersalwasdirectedbythekingorwhoevercontrolledthemili-
tary. The ability to distribute these resources increased the authority and power
of such leaders. Most of the wealth that was received as tribute was distributed
among members of the upper classes, thus increasing their power in relation to
commoners.
In territorial states most of the wealth that supported the upper classes was
producedinternally.InEgypttributeappearstohavebeenofeconomicandpo-
litical importance only in the New Kingdom. The rulers of subject city-states in
Canaan and Syria supplied the Egyptian king with slaves, manufactured goods,
olive oil, and wood without receiving payment in return. Nubia, which, unlike
Canaan and Syria, was colonized and directly administered by Egyptians, was
important economically as a place where Egyptians could mine gold and trade
for ivory, ebony, and other products coming from south of the area of Egyptian
domination (Trigger 1976a: 110–14). Shang rulers may have imposed the pay-
ment of tribute on states located beyond their borders, such as that of the Zhou
rulers, whom they forced for a time to acknowledge their dominance but were
unable to incorporate into the Shang state. The Inka do not appear to have
collected tribute from any groups living beyond the borders of their kingdom,
probably because such groups were too poor and often too mobile to be worth
trying to dominate.
In contrast, in city-states tribute played a major role. The more power-
ful militarily a ruler was and the more states he dominated, the more sur-
plus wealth he controlled. The more wealth a ruler possessed and the more
soldiers and retainers he could support, the more powerful he was. Tribute
allowed a ruler to increase his general revenues and sometimes to obtain
goods that were not available in his own kingdom. It was also a way to gain

390
Economy
control over interstate trade routes and markets and rearrange these to the eco-
nomic advantage of a hegemonic state. While dominant city-states interfered
to varying degrees in the internal government of tributary states, for the most
part weaker states were allowed to remain self-governing. This meant that, if
hegemonic power declined, a tributary system could disintegrate very quickly.
When either a hegemonic ruler’s wealth or his power started to diminish, the
feedback loop linking the two unravelled and hegemonic status was gravely
threatened.
The Aztec and their partners in the Triple Alliance controlled the largest
and best-documented tributary system in our sample. They had compelled
the whole of the Valley of Mexico and large areas of central Mexico from the
Gulf of Mexico to the Paciﬁc to pay them tribute. Different sectors of control
were assigned to each of these three city-states, with Tenochtitlan controlling
the largest and most diverse region. Beyond the Valley of Mexico, the Triple
Alliance’s power had spread along major trading routes and embraced city-
states in all ecological zones from the temperate highlands to the tropical
lowlands. They did not bother to subjugate some poorer and more isolated
states and were unable to subdue some stronger ones. The Tlaxcalans, living
to the east of the Valley of Mexico, although unconquered, were completely
encircled by the Triple Alliance, and all interstate trade with them in salt and
exotic luxury goods had been cut off (Barlow 1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hassig
1985).
Tributary states in the valley supplied the Aztec, Texcocans, and Tlacopans
with food and cloth as tribute. The nearest states also provided labour for
building projects as well as stone and gravel, which were in short supply in the
marshy setting of Tenochtitlan. States within an eighty-kilometre radius of the
valley supplied large amounts of maize, which had to be carried to Tenochtitlan
and Texcoco by human bearers. The high cost of transportation made hauling
bulky items, such as food, from farther away uneconomical (M. E. Smith
1996: 174). Beyond that radius some states did not pay regular tribute but
were required to provide military service and present Triple Alliance leaders
with gifts at irregular intervals. These states were exempt from regular tribute
either because it was hoped that they would provide defence against common
enemies located beyond the tributary system or because Triple Alliance control
was not yet strong enough to incorporate them fully into the system. Other
city-states were forced to pay tribute in amounts that varied according to their
political relations with the Triple Alliance. Weaker states located near the
centre of the tributary network tended to be taxed more heavily than stronger
or more distant ones that could rebel more easily. States that had submitted
without ﬁghting might pay only token tribute, while other states paid larger

Appropriation of Wealth
391
amounts according to how hard they had resisted the alliance or how often they
had rebelled (Barlow 1949; Berdan et al. 1996; Hassig 1988: 174–75; M. E.
Smith 1996: 175–82).
All the tribute from distant city-states consisted of valuable, low-bulk ma-
terial, much of it exotic. Raw cotton, sheets of fancy cloth, ﬁnished clothing,
elaborate suits of armour made of quilted cotton, and ornate shields were stan-
dard items of tribute. Tributary states also supplied copper and bronze objects,
pieces of gold, jade, turquoise, and ornaments made from these substances,
chocolate, rubber, incense, feathers, live birds, and exotic animals. Some of
these goods originated outside the Triple Alliance’s sphere of control, and the
states that supplied them had to obtain them by trade (M. E. Smith 1996:
178–82).
Stipulated amounts of tribute were collected by the rulers of subordinate
city-states and forwarded every eighty days to a pair of Aztec or Texcocan ﬁscal
agents stationed in each of thirty-two city-state capitals that served as centres
for tribute collection. Located between and beyond these tributary units were
twenty-three more centres for supervising relations with subordinate states
that did not pay regular tribute. In areas nearer the Valley of Mexico, ﬁscal
agents and their assistants also supervised the cultivation of ﬁelds that had
been ceded to the Triple Alliance and arranged to have the surplus produce of
these ﬁelds transported to their alliance capitals. Transport costs were borne
by subordinate states as an additional form of tribute (Hassig 1985: 105–10;
M. E. Smith 1996: 175–80). In each of the Triple Alliance capitals the tribute
became the property of the king and was stored in the royal palace. Successive
Aztec kings built new palaces, and the abandoned ones may have been used
for storage and administrative purposes.
Tributary networks gave the city-states of the Triple Alliance access to vast
amounts of raw material and manufactured goods that they otherwise would
have had to purchase or do without. The tribute collection area of Coayxt-
lahuacan, in the modern state of Oaxaca, annually forwarded to Tenochtitlan
4,000 textiles of various speciﬁed designs, 2 feathered warrior costumes,
2 strings of jade beads, 800 quetzal feathers, 40 bags of cochineal dye, 20 gourd
vessels ﬁlled with gold dust, and a royal feather headdress. Each year the Aztec
received a total of 665 warrior costumes, 147,200 pieces of cloth or items of
clothing, and 4,400 loads of raw cotton (M. E. Smith 1996: 178–81). Tribute
provided a major economic stimulus for Tenochtitlan to become the largest
city in central Mexico. This wealth economically subsidized upward social mo-
bility, provided skilled craft workers with cheaper raw materials, and directly
or indirectly beneﬁted all of Tenochtitlan’s inhabitants. It was no accident that
the Triple Alliance’s tributary network expanded along major trade routes.

392
Economy
The Aztec rulers used tribute to help provision the army, reward valiant
soldiers, pay public ofﬁcials, subsidize lavish public works, and support temples
and public rituals. Every day the king fed hundreds of lords, ofﬁcials, armed
retainers, priests, artisans, pages, servants, and visitors at the royal palace.
He paid and rewarded ofﬁcials and professional soldiers with pieces of cloth
that they could use to purchase anything they wanted at public markets. He
exchanged some of the maize and cloth that he received with the pochteca in
return for the highly esteemed luxury goods that they obtained from beyond
the farthest zone of tribute collection. He also distributed food and clothing
to ordinary people at a festival that occurred just before the annual harvest,
where commoners had to line up and wait patiently for their share of gruel and
tamales while the upper classes feasted and danced. Even this public display
of royal generosity emphasized the deference and submission that the Aztec
nobility expected from commoners (Clendinnen 1991: 66–67).
The Aztec king’s control over the distribution of tribute greatly enhanced his
power amongst his subjects. They looked to him for material rewards and social
advancement. He used his wealth to support and expand state institutions,
feed a large palace staff, and reward and win the support of ofﬁcials and
warriors (Berdan 1982: 12, 39–40). Conversely, having to pay tribute weakened
subordinate rulers. They could not reward warriors or patronize craft workers
to the same extent as they had before, and to cover the cost of paying tribute
they had either to lower their own standard of living or to increase taxes. Very
often tributary rulers had to rely on their Triple Alliance overlord to keep them
in power by quelling local opposition. Conquered states became politically
more factionalized and less able to resist foreign domination (Hodge 1984).
In Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, defeated city-states had to pay tribute or
indemnities to victorious neighbours and cede disputed border lands and wa-
ter rights to them. This resulted in the transfer of considerable agricultural
potential. Entemena, the ruler of Lagash, exacted over 10,800 metric tons of
grain from the neighbouring state of Umma as reparations for a ‘rebellion’
(R. McC. Adams 1966: 149). Booty, reparations, tribute, ransoms, and prison-
ers of war greatly increased the wealth and power of successful Early Dynastic
Mesopotamian kings, even if they shared much of this wealth with their sol-
diers and with temples, as thanks offerings for the supernatural support they
had received.
The tribute that had to be paid to Sargon of Akkad on a monthly or yearly
basis allowed a vast expansion of that hegemon’s palace staff and military forces
(R. McC. Adams 1966: 143; Jacobsen 1970: 191). Ur III rulers sought to control
and unify key sectors of the economy throughout the region they controlled.
By contrast, the Old Babylonian hegemons apparently encouraged economic

Appropriation of Wealth
393
decentralization but used many different techniques to collect revenues from
the city-states that fell brieﬂy under their control. The extraction of wealth
from subordinate city-states brought great wealth to Mesopotamia’s hege-
monic cities. Leo Oppenheim (1964: 117) stated that ‘real prosperity came
to a Mesopotamian city only when it had in its midst the palace of a victorious
king’. While ordinary cities were poor and fell prey to victorious armies, the
sanctuaries and palaces of dominant cities were sumptuously adorned, and
traders, craft workers, and retainers ﬂocked to them to serve their kings.
Tribute was delivered to Oyo, which had created the largest of the Yoruba-
speaking tributary systems, by subordinate kings and other community heads
who gathered with their followers at several tribute-collecting centres before
attending the bere festival held at Oyo each January. The tribute consisted of
bere grass (which was used to rethatch the palace), cowrie shells, live rams,
dried meat, yam ﬂour, and a ﬁxed share of taxes collected on goods passing
through the gates of tributary cities. This tribute was presented to the king
through titled ofﬁcials in Oyo city who were appointed to act as patrons (baba)
for particular groups of tribute bearers. In return for doing this, these ofﬁcials
were allowed to keep a share of these payments. Besides collecting tribute
on a regular basis from this ring of subordinate city-states, the king of Oyo
occasionally demanded and received tribute from more distant states. After
Oyo defeated Dahomey in 1730, Dahomey was required to send a portion of its
annualbooty,includingslaves,cowrieshells,andcoralbeads,totherulerofOyo
(Law 1977: 99–109; R. Smith 1969: 40–43). Within Oyo, tribute, like taxes, was
shared between the king, who supernaturally ensured military victory, and the
sevenofﬁcialswhocomposedthestatecouncilandcontrolledthearmedforces.
The king of Benin personally beneﬁted to a far greater extent from Benin’s
hegemony than the king of Oyo did from Oyo’s preeminence. He appears to
have carefully monitored the collection of taxes throughout the entire region
he or his predecessors had conquered and maintained a monopoly over the
trading and sale of ivory and certain other commodities. These monopolies
greatly augmented the wealth that was available to the king and increased his
political power.
In all city-state systems, conquests resulted in the transfer of wealth from
weaker states to dominant ones. This wealth enhanced the power of the top-
ranking ofﬁcials who received it. In the Valley of Mexico, Mesopotamia, and
at Benin, the recipient was the king. In Oyo, as in other Yoruba states, tribute,
like war booty and taxes, was shared by the king and the non-royal members
of the state council who controlled Oyo’s army. The key factor in determining
who beneﬁted most from receiving and hence controlling the distribution of
tribute appears to have been control of the army.

394
Economy
appropriation and political organization
In early civilizations the upper classes appropriated wealth from commoners
in many different ways. Invariably these appropriations involved some form
of corv´ee labour. The transfer of wealth was also accomplished by assigning
prime agricultural land to upper-class individuals or institutions, charging rents
for the use of land, sharecropping, imposing taxes on land or agricultural pro-
duce, taxing the sale or transport of goods, and levying fees for rendering legal
decisions and other services. Using various combinations of these appropria-
tions to collect revenue, the upper classes in all early civilizations succeeded
in transferring most of the surplus wealth produced by commoners to them-
selves. The differing impacts that these transfers had on social organization
were determined by the extent to which wealth was controlled by the king
or passed directly to a broader spectrum of the upper classes. In delegational
polities much wealth fell directly under the control of regional ofﬁcials, forcing
the king to rely on them for support.
Among territorial states control of wealth may have been less centralized in
Shang China, with its delegational administration, than it was in Old Kingdom
Egypt and Inka Peru, with their more bureaucratic forms of government.
Nevertheless, the Shang kings carried out vast construction projects (Keightley
1969: 126–40). Among city-states, the Yoruba king was forced to share state
revenues with the titled representatives of leading non-royal lineages, whereas
the Aztec kings derived much greater power from their ability to control the
collection and distribution to their subjects of most of the wealth derived from
taxes.Therulingclassesinpowerfulcity-statesfurtherincreasedtheirrevenues
by forcing rulers of weaker states to pay them tribute. Tribute was a transfer of
wealth from one segment of the upper class to another, and it usually resulted
in pressure on commoners in weaker states to work harder and pay more taxes.
It strengthened the control exercised by the highest-ranking military leaders
in powerful city-states, since it was they who were able to distribute it. In the
more centralized city-states the king distributed tribute among his followers;
among the heterarchical Yoruba, kings shared the right to collect tribute with
other leading ofﬁcials.

18 Economic Constants and Variables
A
general precondition for the development of early civilizations was
the upper classes’ ability to ensure that farmers produced substan-
tial agricultural surpluses and that most of these surpluses be at the disposal
of a small ruling group. Because agricultural surpluses constituted the main
form of wealth in early civilizations, this control resulted in marked economic
inequality.
The early civilizations were all low-energy societies, human labour being the
principal and often the only source of energy for agricultural production. Fur-
ther, while the Yoruba employed a wide range of iron agricultural implements
and the Mesopotamians increasingly used copper and bronze ones, farmers
in the other early civilizations made all their agricultural implements of stone,
bone, and wood. The complexity of tool technology was not correlated with the
intensity of food production or with the densities of population supported in
the various early civilizations. The main factors determining intensity of food
production were the farming techniques employed and the amount of labour
invested in producing crops. The general simplicity of agricultural technol-
ogy meant that early civilizations were conﬁned to areas that had light, easily
worked soils.
Unexpected variation has been found amongst these societies, however, in
environmental settings, population density, intensity of agriculture, and the
geographical mobility of people. Some, such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, de-
veloped in river valleys located in zones of low rainfall, where all but the sim-
plest agriculture depended on some form of irrigation. They also developed
in temperate river valleys such as that of the Yellow River in northern China,
in mountainous areas such as the Valley of Mexico and the Andean highlands,
and in tropical forests and savannas, as did the Yoruba and the lowland Maya.
All except the Yoruba used hydrological works to some extent, but the archae-
ological record disproves the claim that early civilizations invariably began in
395

396
Economy
arid regions where agriculture relied wholly on irrigation and only secondary
civilizations developed in other ecological zones (Sanders and Price 1968;
Wittfogel 1957). There were, however, important differences in the nature of
hydrological works even in environments that were generally similar in type.
Most early civilizations developed in regions that remained warm to tem-
perate throughout the year. Such climates did not require a heavy investment
in providing substantial shelter, heating, and warm clothing for the entire
population, and this greatly reduced the ecological cost of supporting early
civilizations. Nevertheless, northern China has cold winters, and living in the
Andean highlands requires warm clothes and substantial housing. Thus, while
the higher costs involved in sustaining human beings in colder climates may
have inhibited the development of early civilizations, they did not conﬁne them
to tropical and subtropical regions.
The many different environmental settings in which early civilizations devel-
oped imposed speciﬁc requirements and limitations on subsistence patterns.
An important example of such limitations was the absence of any large domes-
ticable species of animals in Mesoamerica. Most of the domestic plants and
animals that early civilizations relied on and most agricultural practices were
continuations of what had been present in each region at an earlier stage of cul-
tural development. Cross-cultural parallels in subsistence patterns reﬂected
general biological similarities in the kinds of plants and animals that were suit-
able for domestication and how they were handled. The numerous speciﬁc
differences in agricultural practices from one early civilization to another in-
dicate that practical and locally adaptive knowledge concerning agriculture,
often acquired long before the development of civilization in a region, re-
mained important despite signiﬁcant sociopolitical change. Regionally speciﬁc
agricultural knowledge was among the most valuable forms of cultural capital
that early civilizations inherited from the smaller-scale societies out of which
they developed. Because this knowledge had been developed to cope with
speciﬁc local conditions, it was effective and therefore resistant to change un-
less crops or technologies that turned out to be locally more productive were
introduced from elsewhere (Boyd and Richerson 1985).
intensity of production
Average population densities in our sample ranged from perhaps sixty per-
sons per square kilometre among the Yoruba to ﬁve hundred persons per
square kilometre in the southern part of the Valley of Mexico. There appears
to have been a close correlation between population density and the intensity
of agriculture, as measured by the elimination of fallowing and the increasing

Economic Constants and Variables
397
number of crops grown on the same plot of land each year (Boserup 1965), but
the causal direction and precise nature of this correlation have not yet been
determined.
It is frequently assumed that farming groups in preindustrial societies were
characterized by a high rate of population increase because a sedentary lifestyle
facilitated women’s becoming pregnant at short intervals and farmers wel-
comed children as a source of labour (Lee 1972). Yet data on nursing in ﬁve
early civilizations in our sample suggest that the rate of population increase in
early civilizations was not as high as often has been assumed. In all of them
children were nursed two to three years or longer and in some women avoided
sexual intercourse to ensure that they did not become pregnant while they
were nursing. This reproductive restraint may have conﬂicted with the desire
of rulers for population growth among the lower classes to expand the tax base
and increase the supply of soldiers and corv´ee labourers. Because they had
multiple wives and concubines, many upper-class men had numerous chil-
dren (Betzig 1986), but upper-class women do not seem to have had more
children than lower-class ones.
Natural population growth was not, however, the only source of increasing
density. In the southern and politically most dynamic part of the Valley of
Mexico, a rapidly growing population partly fueled by immigration from other
parts of Mexico encouraged increasingly intensive agriculture that culminated
in the chinampa development of the ﬁfteenth century. Feeding the expanding
city of Tenochtitlan encouraged more intensive agriculture in order to reduce
the cost of transporting large amounts of food to that megacity. Yet, despite
claims to the contrary (Netting 1969), there is no obvious correlation between
the development of large urban centres and generally higher population
density.
Intensiﬁcation could occur quickly if additional labour was available and
there was a growing demand for food. While governments played a leading
role in developments such as the multistate dyke-building projects to control
water levels and concentrate fresh water in the southern lakes of the Valley
of Mexico, productivity ultimately depended on the knowledge, labour, and
skills of individual farmers. Their thorough familiarity with locally effective
agricultural techniques and the local environment allowed these farmers to
increase productivity fairly easily when social conditions required them to
do so or rewarded their efforts. Traditional agricultural knowledge provided
a basis for its own elaboration and development. Still more radical changes
may have been accomplished by rulers’ importing farmers or agricultural ex-
perts who brought new farming techniques with them. Gravity-ﬂow irriga-
tion, for example, may have been introduced to the Fayum in Egypt during

398
Economy
the Middle Kingdom by settlers from the Middle East (Butzer 1976: 36–37,
47, 51).
There is no evidence that speciﬁc types of environment alone determined
population densities or the intensity of agricultural production in early civiliza-
tions. Although the Classic Maya and the Yoruba both lived in tropical forest
and savanna, the Maya had high overall population density and intensive agri-
culture and the Yoruba had low population density and swidden agriculture.
Also, the Yoruba developed cities and kingdoms while their Ibo neighbours,
with much higher population density, did not (Bascom 1955: 452).
There was also no clear tendency for naturally circumscribed early civiliza-
tions to have higher population densities as Carneiro (1970b) once suggested.
Agricultural land was circumscribed by barren terrain in Mesopotamia, Egypt,
individual valleys in highland Peru, and the Valley of Mexico, but there were no
obvious ecological barriers circumscribing the Maya, Yoruba, or early north-
ern Chinese civilizations. The lowland Maya, who could have expanded into
adjacent areas of Central America, had a higher population density than did
the naturally circumscribed ancient Egyptians.
Beyond this, circumscription is a political phenomenon as well as an ecolog-
ical one. Egyptian rulers built walls and massive fortresses along their frontiers
and sometimes dispersed or deported neighbouring peoples in order to create
uninhabited wastelands, the better to control the trade in exotic goods and cage
their subjects (Hoffman 1979). The Shang and Zhou states, lacking natural
frontiers, gradually conquered neighbouring chiefdoms and settled them with
loyal populations who ensured that they were controlled and eventually assim-
ilated. Inka kings resettled subject populations on a large scale and controlled
trade and human movement across their well-marked borders. In general, it
appears that the need to control internal populations and foreign trade led
the rulers of territorial states to establish boundaries whether or not these
states were ecologically circumscribed. In city-states there appears to have
been little effective government control over movements across state bound-
aries in peacetime, and the possibility of refugees’ being offered a friendly
reception by nearby city-states made it harder for rulers to suppress dissent.
While in each early civilization, ecological conditions provided a context for
political manipulation, the speciﬁc ways in which borders were deﬁned and
populations controlled cannot be understood without taking account of polit-
ical factors. Because both the ecological and the political factors were highly
variable, there is no simple cross-cultural correlation between circumscription
and territorial or city-states. The relation between culture and environment is
better comprehended by a possibilist approach than by an ecologically deter-
ministic one.

Economic Constants and Variables
399
There may, however, have been a correlation between the political decen-
tralization of Yoruba and Mesopotamian city-state systems and the fact that
arable land (apart from that planted in oil or date palms) was not an endur-
ing asset in those societies (Stone 1997). In such situations control of land
was perhaps less important than control of labour, and this may have made it
harder for rulers to coerce landowners. Powerful Mesopotamian rulers sought
to settle nomadic groups on newly irrigated land and to compel them to pay
taxes, perform corv´ee labour, and provide military service, but farmers could
avoid royal exactions by moving away. Yoruba extended families were able
to relocate, often over long distances, because population density was low.
Had it increased signiﬁcantly, they would have had to develop more intensive
forms of agriculture, and this would have made speciﬁc plots of land more
valuable and reduced their owners’ mobility.
The problems of Mesopotamian agriculture probably encouraged the de-
velopment of large-scale land management in order to cope more easily with
the effects of salinization. This favoured the growth of major landowning in-
stitutions, although it does not explain why privately owned land also replaced
collective ownership by patrilineages. The higher population densities among
the Classic Maya and in the Valley of Mexico may have facilitated greater cen-
tralized control in these civilizations, but, as already noted, it is not clear why
the Maya did not expand territorially more than they did. In each case both
political and ecological factors seem to have been involved.
appropriation
Collective ownership of land by farming families predominated in the Valley of
Mexico, highland Peru, and among the Yoruba, but governments were able to
appropriate substantial surpluses from these groups. In all early civilizations,
alongside collectively owned land, there was land owned by institutions – the
king, the state, or religious cults. In Mesopotamia and Egypt institutional land
was of great economic and political importance, and it was rapidly becoming
more common in the Valley of Mexico and the Inka kingdom. In Mesopotamia
collectively owned land was transformed into institutional and privately owned
land to a greater extent than in any other early civilization. The division of
institutional land between temples and palaces reﬂected and reinforced the
heterarchical nature of power. In Egypt, Inka Peru, and the Valley of Mexico
all such land was managed by state ofﬁcials, including land that was devoted
to supporting cults. That arrangement reﬂected the greater centralization of
political power in those early civilizations. For the upper classes the great
advantage of institutional or privately owned land was that it facilitated the

400
Economy
appropriation of a much larger share of the crops than could be extracted from
equivalent amounts of collectively owned land.
No unilinear evolutionary sequence in which collectively owned land was
gradually replaced by institutional and then by private holdings can be iden-
tiﬁed. It is impossible to demonstrate that all land in early civilizations was
originally owned collectively. Moreover, the ability of wealthy and powerful
Yoruba to use the labour of privately owned slaves and debtors to derive
large agricultural surpluses from land collectively owned by their lineages
demonstrates that changes in the nature of land ownership were not the
only or even necessarily the most effective way for individuals to appropri-
ate larger shares of agricultural production. The long-term survival of col-
lective land alongside institutional land and, in the few examples where it
actually developed, private land indicates the lasting utility of the ﬁrst two
types.
There was no obvious correlation between types of landholding and territo-
rial or city-states. Among city-state civilizations, Mesopotamia had the largest
amount of private and institutional land and the Yoruba the least. In the Valley
of Mexico most land was collectively owned. Among territorial states, collec-
tive ownership predominated in Inka Peru and perhaps in China but appears
to have been superseded to a signiﬁcant degree by institutional and private
ownership in Egypt.
There also appears to have been no correlation between types of land own-
ership and population density. Collective ownership was a prominent feature
of the most (Valley of Mexico) and least (Yoruba) densely populated societies
in our sample. The survival of collective ownership may be associated with the
presence of lineages or endogamous collectivities in some societies, but it is
not clear what caused such forms of social organization to persist or diminish.
Forms of social organization may to some extent have been random inheri-
tances from the past that persisted as long as they were not incompatible with
changing social needs. While endogamous groups seem to have ﬂourished
in both rural areas and urban centres in the Valley of Mexico and the Inka
kingdom, patrilineal extended families appear to have diminished in size and
importance in the urban centres of Mesopotamia.
Taxes were not the only, or the most effective, way to extract agricultural
surpluses from farmers. Rents and sharecropping substantially increased the
amount of food surpluses that individual landowners or the state could collect
from landless farmers. The use of slaves, serfs, debtors, and hired labourers
to work the land resulted in entire crops’ being handed over to landowners,
who could treat as proﬁt everything but what was needed to feed the workers
and pay estate managers. Yet, because it was hard to control and motivate such

Economic Constants and Variables
401
workers, these more exploitative forms of cultivation also remained the most
restricted types in early civilizations.
Some states imposed taxes on the transport or sale of foodstuffs. Yoruba
kings and high ofﬁcials derived more revenue from taxing the movement of
food into cities and its sale at urban markets than they did from taxing land
or agricultural production, which amounted to no more than levies voluntarily
paid on the production of food.
Another source of revenue for the state was taxes levied on craft production
and on the movement and sale of such goods. The greater role played by market
exchange in city-states encouraged more taxing of the movement and sale of
goods, while in territorial states the main emphasis was on taxing agricultural
production.
In territorial states most tax revenues remained within provincial jurisdic-
tions. Some goods were transmitted to the capitals of territorial states for use
by the king and the royal court. In most city-states, the revenues that the state
derived as taxes belonged to kings and reinforced their authority. In heter-
archical Yoruba polities, revenues were divided among the king and major
ofﬁce-holders. Yoruba ofﬁcials also collected substantial fees for hearing legal
cases as well as the ﬁnes that were imposed as forms of punishment. In other
early civilizations reparations to injured parties tended to be more common
than ﬁnes.
manufacturing
The growth of early civilizations expanded the market for manufactured goods,
which in turn facilitated craft specialization and the production of higher-
quality merchandise. There was also a growing demand for luxury goods to
denote upper-class status. Luxury goods were often made from rare and ex-
pensive raw materials that could be obtained locally only with great effort or
had to be imported from abroad. These goods were manufactured by highly
skilled workers who often laboured in teams to produce small numbers of
exquisitely crafted objects. So much care and effort had to be invested in fab-
ricating these goods that less lavishly supported artisans could not produce
them.
Thus hierarchies of craft workers evolved in early civilizations. The least
specialized were men and women who produced goods within a household for
thathousehold’sownuse.Nextwerepart-timecraftworkerswhomanufactured
aparticularsortorrangeofgoodswhentheywerenotengagedinfarming.They
or other members of their families exchanged these goods at local markets.
Still more specialized were full-time craft workers who employed a particular

402
Economy
technology to produce goods for everyone in a community. A single bronze-
worker, for example, might manufacture everything from sickles to jewellery,
depending on what his clients wished to purchase. At the top of the hierarchy
were elite craft workers who produced luxury goods exclusively for the upper
classes and the state.
Interpretations of the economies of early civilizations were long distorted
by Karl Polanyi’s claim that in these societies trade and production were com-
pletely ‘embedded’ in political organization. According to Polanyi and his fol-
lowers, governments played the key role in securing exotic raw materials,
organizing production, and seeing that each individual received what he or
she required. Prices were controlled by the government, and land and many
other necessities were not regarded as commodities. Polanyi contrasted such
an administered economy with those of modern industrial societies, where al-
most anything can be bought and sold (Polanyi, Arensberg, and Pearson 1957).
Polanyi’s views and still earlier ones inﬂuenced by European corporatist think-
ing exerted an especially strong inﬂuence on the interpretation of ancient
Mesopotamian civilization. Palace and temple estates were viewed as control-
ling all aspects of trade and production, and every individual was imagined to
have been employed by these institutions (Falkenstein 1974 [1954]).
Polanyi was correct to the extent that in all early civilizations most land was
owned collectively or institutionally rather than privately and therefore could
not be freely bought and sold. Nevertheless, as the result of a more realistic
appreciation of the problems involved in processing information, it has be-
come impossible to imagine any early civilization as possessing the resources
needed to administer an entire economy or any ruler as wishing to do so.
The highly complex government administrative records of the Ur III period
in Mesopotamia or of state-directed boat-building in Middle Kingdom Egypt
were focused on particular aspects of the economy that were of special in-
terest to governments. Most of the everyday economic activities that kept
people alive appear to have gone on independently of the state. There is
growing appreciation of the considerable variety of ways by which goods were
produced and distributed in early civilizations. Many of the most important
differences appear to correspond with the distinction between city-states and
territorial states.
In Mesopotamia and the Valley of Mexico as well as among the Yoruba (the
three well-documented city-state systems in our sample) long-distance ex-
change was managed by professional merchants who traded goods with their
counterparts in nearby city-states and with far-off regions. Traders obtained
exotic raw materials from abroad and transported raw materials and manu-
factured goods from one city-state and one region to another. They had close

Economic Constants and Variables
403
relations with kings, major institutions, prosperous landowners, and craft work-
ers in their own city-states but operated largely independently of these individ-
uals and institutions. It has been argued that Akkadian and Ur III rulers tried to
develop state-controlled trade alongside or in addition to that of independent
traders, but it is uncertain how far this process was carried.
Craft workers produced goods both in urban centres and in the surrounding
countryside, purchasing exotic raw materials from long-distance traders and
selling what they manufactured at urban markets. In the Valley of Mexico the
purchase but not the sale of certain types of goods was limited by sumptuary
laws. Renowned Yoruba artists were invited to carry out commissions for kings
and sometimes worked at the royal palace. In Benin elite bronze-casters were
forbidden to produce certain ritual objects for anyone but the king and were
lavishly rewarded for their work. In the Valley of Mexico, expert stone sculptors
and mural painters may have worked exclusively for rulers. Yet it does not
appear that in these societies full-time craft workers were mainly employees
or servants of kings. In Mesopotamia some specialists may have worked full-
time for temples or palaces, but many of these were probably ordinary craft
workers who manufactured goods that institutions required in large quantities.
Some more highly skilled artisans may have manufactured goods, such as
military chariots, for which there was no demand except from the king. Yet
metallurgists, potters, and stone carvers lived and worked in various city wards
and sold at least some of their products to ordinary people, including temple
and palace employees. This suggests that these institutions did not allocate
to their employees the manufactured goods that these employees needed, as
Polanyi imagined. Urban craft workers probably sold their goods to individual
purchasers as well as to temples and palaces.
This sort of economy accords with the crucial role played by markets in
facilitating exchange in city-states. The presence of many farmers in or near
urban centres created a demand for goods, and the craft specialization that this
encouraged made higher-quality manufactured goods available to all. The vast
majority of full-time craft workers produced goods for the entire population
rather than only for the government and the upper classes. Wealthy hege-
monic rulers alone had the resources to employ considerable numbers of elite
specialists to produce goods of superlative quality. The distinction between
ordinary full-time craft workers and elite specialists tended to be a ﬂuid one.
In territorial states farmers manufactured goods from local raw materials in
their spare time and exchanged these goods within villages or at local markets.
Royal and government workshops employed groups of full-time specialists
to manufacture tools, weapons, and other items used by workers performing
special tasks for the state and elite specialists to produce numerous luxury

404
Economy
goods. Many worked under close surveillance by government ofﬁcials. The
craft workers who manufactured luxury and display goods for the use of the
upper classes were lavishly supported by the government. Control of exotic
raw materials, elite craft workers, and the luxury goods they manufactured
constituted a major source of power for kings and ofﬁcials.
This system created a two-tier economy in territorial states, with the upper
classes receiving luxury goods as gifts from the king and farmers fabricating
what they needed in their spare time. Part-time craft workers lacked both
access to exotic raw materials and the time, training, and incentives to produce
high-quality products. Elite craft workers were more lavishly subsidized and
better provided with exotic raw materials than were the vast majority of full-
time craft workers in city-states and therefore could produce extremely high-
quality luxury goods. The only important economic link between the realm of
production and consumption of farmers and that of the upper classes was the
appropriation of food surpluses by the state and by landlords.
It has been suggested that Classic Maya kings or upper classes may have
controlled interstate trade and markets may not have played a signiﬁcant role in
the Maya economy. Yet exotic goods, such as obsidian, were widely distributed
within Maya city-states. This suggests that the Maya upper class may have had
more control of external trade than was the case in other city-state systems
without the emergence of a two-tier economy.
Rulers of hegemonic city-states extracted tribute and reparations from
weaker neighbours and used their political control to reroute long-distance
trade and alter marketing patterns to the advantage of their own polities.
These city-states grew large and prosperous by comparison with militarily less
powerful neighbouring states. Skilled artisans were attracted to them by the
low cost of materials and increasing local demand for their products. Elite craft
workers developed in them. Military leaders, who controlled the distribution
of tribute, found their authority greatly enhanced. In most city-states the main
political beneﬁciary of hegemony was the king, although among the Yoruba
the non-royal title-bearers who commanded the army controlled much of the
tribute. Thus, while tribute did not inevitably increase the authority of the
monarch, it did enhance the power of those who controlled the state. Tribute
played the same role in increasing the power of rulers in hegemonic states as
royal control of exotic raw materials and elite craft workers in territorial states.
production and consumption
Systems of agricultural production, land ownership, and the techniques by
which surplus production and lower-class labour were appropriated by the

Economic Constants and Variables
405
upper classes varied signiﬁcantly from one early civilization to another. At
least some of these differences contrast with the more limited variation ex-
hibited in sociopolitical organization. The environmental settings of early civi-
lizations and their technologies were especially variable. Forms of production
and distribution of goods differed radically between city-states and territorial
states, although there may have been more variation within each of these two
types than has so far been delineated. Nevertheless, the variation between city-
and territorial states indicates that the development of early civilizations was
shaped to a signiﬁcant degree by sociopolitical factors. Subsistence economies
were largely a heritage from earlier stages of development in various regions,
but as population densities increased, regionally and locally, food production
intensiﬁed. The development of craft production was inﬂuenced to a large
degree by the various political frameworks in which it occurred.
A question rarely asked in studies of early civilizations is why the acquisition
of greater political power was always accompanied by the appropriation of a
disproportionate share of surplus wealth by the upper classes. It can be argued
from a functionalist viewpoint that effective decision-making in early civiliza-
tions required that a small number of leaders possess sufﬁcient political power
to ensure that the orders that were necessary to regulate large-scale societies
were carried out. To do this, leaders needed to control a disproportionate share
of resources to be able to pay for police and military backing and reward loyal
supporters with generous gifts and hospitality.
This answer, however, does not account for the lavish lifestyle of the upper
classes. In complex societies, conspicuous consumption is indeed universally
understood and admired, if not always morally approved. It is recognized as
a deliberate violation of the principles of least effort and the conservation
of energy which shaped human relations with the natural environment in
all low-energy societies and were therefore implicitly familiar to everyone
living in early civilizations (Trigger 1990a; Zipf 1949). These principles could
be deliberately ignored only by individuals who controlled a disproportionate
shareofnaturalandhumanresources.Theconspicuouswasteofsuchresources
served not only to manifest power but also to reinforce it. In complex societies
political power is accompanied by a humble lifestyle (usually a conspicuously
humble one) only in very exceptional circumstances often religious in nature.
In small-scale societies, where people know one another, gossip, ridicule,
and fear of being accused of witchcraft compel hard-working and capable in-
dividuals to behave in a manner that is simultaneously generous and humble,
even though their personalities might incline them to act differently. Only in
response to such socially sensitive conduct are they accorded de facto leader-
ship roles (Lee 1990; Trigger 1990b). Once those who make decisions in larger

406
Economy
societies are able to exert political power and control communication networks,
they can disable the traditional mechanisms that maintain social and economic
equality. The neutralizing of such mechanisms invariably leads powerful indi-
viduals to assign to their own use much of the wealth produced by the lower
classes instead of continuing to share the products of their own labour with
others. Ostentation and conspicuous consumption replace personal restraint,
generosity, and humility. The rich use their political power and administrative
control to silence the protests of those who object to these changes. The fear of
witchcraft ceases to be a device for encouraging social and economic equality
and becomes a technique of intimidation exercised by the wealthy and pow-
erful against politically weaker individuals. These developments raise many
questions about human nature and the role it may have played in shaping early
civilizations.

Cognitive and Symbolic
Aspects

19 Conceptions of the Supernatural
T
he Egyptians had no word for ‘religion’. Religion was inseparable from
daily life. They did, however, have a rich vocabulary referring to priests,
deities, and worship. All aspects of state activity, everyday life, and material
culture in ancient Egypt were coloured by religious beliefs and symbolism.
Drama was religious in nature, tombs and temples were viewed as microcosms
of a supernaturally animated universe and decorated accordingly, and mun-
dane activities such as the netting of birds and the hunting of hippopotamuses
symbolized the curbing of supernatural forces that threatened the cosmic or-
der (Lustig 1997b). Analogous religious symbolism permeated the other early
civilizations.
Marshall Sahlins (1976: 211–12) has argued that each stage in the develop-
ment of society has a dominant source of symbolic production that supplies
the major idioms that permit social relations to be understood and publicly dis-
cussed. He maintains that in early civilizations religion was this source. Once
societies grew too large for kinship and other personal relations to provide the
basic metaphors that guided thinking about social relations, religion supplied
the concepts that were needed to consider and shape the moral order. Only
much later, in increasingly commercial and industrial societies, did political
and economic concepts supplant religious ones in this key role.
Clifford Geertz (1973: 90) has described religion as a symbolic system that
establishes powerful, pervasive motivations by formulating a general order of
existence and a model for perceiving the world. This useful characterization
reﬂects his more general view that human behaviour is governed by ‘systems
of signiﬁcant symbols’ (1965: 112). He does not explain, however, why forms
of religious thought are a feature of all cultures. Conceding universality to
religion comes oddly from an anthropologist who maintains that variability is
the essence of human behaviour and that universals are classiﬁcatory ‘fakes’
(1965: 101).
409

410
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
In recent decades, the term ‘ideology’ has often been treated as synonymous
withconceptssuchasreligion,worldview,beliefsystem,andcosmology.Robert
McC. Adams (1992: 208–9) has correctly observed that ideology is analytically
of no signiﬁcance if employed in this diffuse manner. It more usefully desig-
nates a set of beliefs or propositions that are consciously or unconsciously used
to promote social cohesion and unity by masking the inequality and exploita-
tion that are present in a particular society. Ideology seeks to represent the
self-interested behaviour of politically active groups within a society as being
altruistic. In this manner, it not only sustains but helps to increase the power
and privileges of ruling classes. Such a program is most successful when the
aggregate of beliefs and images being conveyed deﬁnes and appears to satisfy
the collective aspirations, objectives, and ideals of whole societies (Giddens
1979: 193–96).
In early civilizations much if not all ideology was religious in nature because
political thought tended to be religious. Stephen Houston and David Stuart
(1996: 289) observe that the rulers in early civilizations sought to link them-
selves to an immutable divine order so that the power and mystery of divinity
might sanction and reinforce their worldly authority. Religiously grounded
ideology was used to justify and promote the activities of the upper classes.
In the sphere of law, supposedly innate differences between various social
groups were used to justify inﬂicting less severe penalties on upper-class indi-
viduals than on lower-class ones who had committed the same crimes. Wars,
from which the upper classes were most likely to proﬁt, might be validated by
claiming that they were necessary to safeguard society as a whole or to preserve
the cosmic order. Most studies tend to concentrate on ideology as a political
practice and therefore focus on its functional and pragmatic aspects. This ap-
proach fails to explain how particular ideologies became ‘the driving force
behind expansionist states’ (Fash 1991: 75). To do that for early civilizations,
it is necessary to understand their religious beliefs.
religion in early civilizations
One of the greatest obstacles to understanding the religions of early civiliza-
tions has been a tendency to impose on them beliefs associated with later
transcendental religions. Christianity, Judaism, and Islam all assume the exis-
tence of a single, all-powerful, universal, and moral god who does not depend
in any way on his creation but upon whom the entire universe depends for its
being and preservation. It is often accepted that the religious beliefs of early
civilizations were similar to those of later transcendental religions except that
the idea of a single deity had not yet been developed. Instead, early civilizations

