Law
223
In the Valley of Mexico and among the Yoruba, traders were assigned respon-
sibility for policing urban markets. Among the Aztec, representatives of the
pochteca were empowered to arrest, sentence, and punish petty criminals,
dishonest traders, and tax evaders operating in marketplaces. In addition, the
leaders of the pochteca could try and sentence members of their associations
both in their native cities and on the road (Offner 1983: 156). By encouraging
such groups to resolve problems, the upper classes spared themselves numer-
ous difﬁculties and administrative costs and could devote more of the surpluses
they controlled to conspicuous consumption. The state intervened only when
lower-level controls failed to function or the interests of the upper classes were
at risk.
Nevertheless, kings sought to give substance to their claim to be the
supreme earthly legal authorities. They insisted on their right to hear appeals
and to review the sentences of lower-level courts, in particular death sentences.
In compact city-states, all capital cases were normally tried by palace ofﬁcials
or by the ruler himself; in city-states where there were substantial outlying
settlements, the king or his ofﬁcials tried all high-ranking people in urban law
courts and reviewed sentences passed by community leaders on commoners
in smaller settlements. Among the Yoruba, all public death sentences had to
be approved by the king (Bascom 1969: 38–39), but the Egungun and Oro
societies often secretly killed suspected witches on their own recognizance
(40). The Yoruba kings also claimed the right to pardon or release any prisoner
(Ajisafe 1924: 22). The Aztec king and other rulers in the Valley of Mexico
reviewed most death sentences before they were carried out. Among the
Aztec but not in Texcoco, the pochteca were granted the right to execute their
own members without royal approval (Offner 1983: 156). In Mesopotamia
there appear to have been legal limitations on the power of rulers to pardon
capital offences; the king could spare the life of a male adulterer only if the
husband of the woman involved decided not to kill her (Pritchard 1955: 171,
law 129).
In territorial states problems of communication often resulted in regional
ofﬁcials’ reviewing sentences in the king’s name. In the Inka kingdom all re-
gional ofﬁcials below the rank of provincial governor had to obtain a governor’s
approval before a death sentence was carried out. Ofﬁcials who failed to do so
were subject to rigorous corporal punishment. The Inka ruler apparently had
to approve all death sentences involving members of the nobility (Rowe 1944:
271–72). There were prisons throughout the Inka realm where individuals
were held for interrogation and pending trial and the conﬁrmation of their sen-
tences. Incarceration was not, however, a form of punishment (MacCormack
1991: 157). In the early Zhou Dynasty, family or clan leaders had the authority

224
Sociopolitical Organization
to sentence their relatives to death. It is not known whether such sentences
had to be approved by regional leaders before they were carried out (Creel
1937: 353).
legal systems
All early civilizations had a hierarchy of courts in which legal cases were heard
and judgements rendered. Some of these were specially constituted bodies
staffed by full-time or part-time judges; in other cases administrative assem-
blies or government ofﬁcials performed legal duties as required. The lowest-
level courts were associated with extended families, villages, or urban neigh-
bourhoods. More important courts existed in city-states at the ward, city, and
royal levels, although the last two were not always distinguished. In territorial
states there were courts at various regional levels, the highest-ranking one in-
variably being at the royal court. Judgements at lower levels were usually made
by the same authorities who coordinated other affairs at these levels. Low-level
judges were usually commoners, while more powerful ones came from the up-
per classes. In the Valley of Mexico close relatives of kings served on the
highest-level tribunals. Thus at the highest level both commoners and mem-
bers of the upper classes were judged by representatives of the upper class.
By contrast, upper-class individuals were never judged by tribunals presided
over by commoners.
Yoruba extended households were self-governing in legal as well as in politi-
cal matters, especially in the north, where single households often had several
hundred members. The bale and other elders and titled male members judged
cases that involved only members of the extended family. The bale had the
power to ﬁne, ﬂog, or imprison family members for short periods and to sell
them as slaves for various offences (Ajisafe 1924: 3). Cases were referred to
ward and town leaders only if they could not be dealt with satisfactorily by the
extended family (Bascom 1969: 44).
The lowest-level Mesopotamian courts mentioned in written records were
councils made up of men from villages or town quarters, presided over by their
mayor. The central government held the members of these local administrative
bodies jointly responsible for unsolved robberies and the misconduct of those
living in their area. The councillors collected information about local crimes,
heard divorce cases, and cautioned owners to tether dangerous animals. It also
appears that they adjudicated disputes and crimes within the group, but their
decisions could be appealed to the next highest level if any of the litigants was
not satisﬁed by a decision or the judges could not agree among themselves
(Postgate 1992: 275–77).

Law
225
ThegoverningbodiesofhighlandMexicancalpollisandPeruvianaylluswere
likewise responsible for resolving internal quarrels and punishing crimes. In
Chinalineageheadsappeartohaveplayedanimportantroleinsettlingdisputes
among family members (Creel 1937: 353). In Egypt, village councils (d3d3t,
later qnbt) arbitrated disputes about property, sanctioned divorces, and tried
to resolve internal conﬂicts. At least some of these councils were assisted by a
scribe connected with the central bureaucracy, who offered legal advice and
recorded the proceedings (Allam 1991; Eyre 1984: 100; 1991).
At this lowest level of legal deliberation there were no professional judges,
and public opinion was generally relied on to enforce decisions. Nevertheless,
a large Yoruba compound might contain a small prison, and both Yoruba and
Chinese lineage leaders could impose severe punishments on family members.
Decisions were based on a conventional rather than a specialized understand-
ing of the law. In most cases, a litigant who was not satisﬁed could challenge a
decision to a higher authority. In Egyptian local courts, disputes about prop-
erty sometimes continued for decades and even generations (Bierbrier 1982:
103–4; Eyre 1984: 102–3). Because the legal authorities at higher levels were
supported by increasing amounts of coercion, they did not have to rely on pub-
lic opinion to enforce their decisions. Therefore cases could be decided more
quickly and more arbitrarily than at the family or local level. Punishments also
tended to be more severe in higher-level courts. Those who acted as judges
generally possessed more detailed knowledge of laws as they were codiﬁed or
understood at the royal court.
Yoruba disputes that could not be settled within extended families or that
involved neighbouring families were taken to ward leaders, who were advised
by the heads of the compounds within their district. If their judgement was
not accepted, the case was referred to the ruler’s court, composed of palace
ofﬁcials who met outside the royal palace daily and jointly with town ofﬁ-
cials every fourth day. Their decision was then communicated to the king for
his approval. If no decision could be reached, the case was often referred to
the Ogboni society, whose membership included other town and palace of-
ﬁcials. Members of this highly secretive association used their supernatural
powers to collect unpaid debts and resolve acts of violence. As judges, they
specialized in cases involving murder. Their decisions too were referred to
the king for his approval. Heads of outlying villages heard civil cases but re-
ferred ones involving capital punishment to the capital (Bascom 1969: 38–40).
Members of the Oro society arrested criminals and brought them to court, as
well as taking immediate action to halt violent quarrels (Ajisafe 1924: 92). All
Yoruba ofﬁcials who could render judgements had prisons or dungeons (gbere)
where they could conﬁne dangerous persons or condemned criminals for up

226
Sociopolitical Organization
to six months. After that time individuals had to be either freed or executed
(Bascom 1969: 36–37).
The Yoruba king’s bodyguard (ogungbe) acted as a police force and as exe-
cutioners for the highest court. Another of their duties was to secure human
sacriﬁces, many of them condemned criminals. Junior palace ofﬁcials (emese)
summoned people to the court, and the royal bodyguard arrested those who
refused to present themselves willingly. Authorities from the ward level up, as
well as the king, collected signiﬁcant fees for hearing cases from both accusers
and defendants (Bascom 1969: 35–36).
In Mesopotamia, cases that could not be resolved at the ward level were
tried by members of the urban council of each city-state. A group of up to
seven councillors acted as judges for each case, which was heard either in the
council’s assembly rooms or in a temple. At least by the Old Babylonian period,
some judges were appointed by the king. Generally, the ruler of each city-state
represented the ultimate level of appeal within the judicial system; however,
during episodes of hegemony such as the Akkadian and Old Babylonian peri-
ods, the dominant ruler constituted a still higher level. Cases involving capital
offences and other important ones which lower-level courts could not resolve
satisfactorily eventually reached the highest level (Postgate 1992: 275–78).
Among the Aztec, above the level of calpolli tribunals there were separate
courts for judging or reviewing cases that involved only commoners and for
judging all cases in which nobles were involved. These courts were called
teccalco and tlacxitlan respectively. The lowest courts of both sorts occurred at
the district, quarter, or small-town level. The judges in these and higher courts
were invariably members of the nobility. All criminal cases and unresolved civil
cases were referred to the palace, where a high court consisting of thirteen
judges, presided over by the cihuacoatl, met every ten to twelve days. It appears
that death sentences passed against commoners at a lower level were simply
reported to this court for approval, while nobles facing the death penalty or who
protested judgements made against them at a lower level regularly appeared
in person before it. All death sentences also had to be approved by the king
(Berdan 1982: 104).
The state of Texcoco had constructed its legal hierarchy differently. Above
the calpolli level, the Texcocan king established law courts in wards and set-
tlements in which commoners were tried, sentenced, and punished, although
capital punishment may have required royal approval. Depending on their
nature, cases involving nobles were referred to one of the four advisory coun-
cils by which the affairs of Texcoco and nearby allied states were regulated.
These councils met in the royal palace of Texcoco. As part of its business, the
war council considered cases of treason, as well as offences and legal matters

Law
227
relating to the army, the ﬁnance council judged ﬁscal misdemeanours, and the
religious council dealt with cases involving witchcraft, supernaturally mediated
crimes, and offences committed on the open road. The legal council consid-
ered murder, assault, sexual transgressions, theft, drunkenness, sumptuary
offences, and issues relating to slaves. Commoners as well as nobles served as
judges on these councils, which were, however, presided over by close relatives
of the monarch. Decisions and appeals from this level were transmitted to a
supreme legal council, which met every ten to twelve days and reviewed the
most difﬁcult cases every eighty days. It was composed exclusively of high-
ranking nobles, including the heads of the four advisory councils. The decisions
of the supreme legal council were reviewed by two higher judges and then by
the king, who, often after being advised by the rulers from allied cities, passed
ﬁnal judgement. All nobles from Texcoco and allied states were executed in
Texcoco in a public ceremony that followed the royal review (Offner 1983:
147–55).
There is no evidence of special legal tribunals in Shang or early Zhou China.
In the Western Zhou period local and regional ofﬁcials appear to have per-
formed legal functions as one of their regular duties, usually on their own but
sometimes in conjunction with royal representatives. The presence of royal
ofﬁcials presumably allowed the king to punish disloyalty in regions that were
remote from the royal court with the help of loyal provincial ofﬁcials. Regional
and local rulers generally had sufﬁcient military force at their disposal to en-
sure that their decisions were carried out. At least in theory, a few types of
offences, such as drunkenness among the Zhou nobility, were reserved for
royal punishment (Creel 1970: 170, 192). Yet it appears that individuals were
usually subject to the judgement and sentencing of their immediate superiors,
with little if any effective right of appeal or requirement for royal approval
even with regard to the imposition of the death penalty. When persons of high
rank were executed, their extended families might also be killed or enslaved
to prevent them from seeking blood revenge.
It appears that between men of unequal status, the more powerful was
invariably deemed to be in the right, and therefore litigation could occur
only between equals (Creel 1937: 352–55). Disputes between high-ranking
ofﬁcials about land and commercial transactions were mediated by their
immediate common superior or by the king, who tried to guide them towards
a mutually agreeable solution. There was no enforceable penalty for failure
to carry out bargains. Theft was normally compensated by no more than
a twofold repayment (Creel 1970: 188–89). The idea that just behaviour
accorded with the cosmic order was already present at least by the early
Zhou period, and the king’s main jural role was to provide a model for proper

228
Sociopolitical Organization
conduct at all levels of society (Creel 1970: 163–64). The early Chinese
legal system already seems to have anticipated the later distinction between
punishment (xing), which was used to control the lower classes, and etiquette
(li), which regulated relations among the gentry (Creel 1970: 331–36; Lewis
1990: 196).
At least some Egyptian villagers had their cases heard by government ofﬁ-
cials at the provincial level. State intervention of some sort was inevitable if
written records that were kept in government archives had to be consulted,
and may have been mandatory for cases to which the death penalty applied.
Provincial ofﬁcials seem to have had the power of life and death over ordinary
people; only the wealthy and powerful would have been able to appeal their
sentences to the central administration in Memphis.
During the Old Kingdom the Six Great Mansions (h
• wt wrt 6) appears to
have been an entirely judiciary institution of the central government. It was
concerned mainly with regulating the ownership and transfer of property.
Many sorts of ofﬁcials may have made judicial decisions (Kemp 1983: 83–84).
Kings appointed high ofﬁcials, including the vizier, to conduct special, often
secret inquiries into crimes that seriously called royal authority into question –
conspiracies against the king, royal tomb robberies, misconduct by women
of the royal household, and thefts from temples. The commissions granted
to these ofﬁcials included the plenipotentiary right to try and punish those
involved in such activities (Robins 1993: 137).
In the Andean highlands the non-Inka nobles were held responsible for
maintaining order and curbing rebellion in their own territories. Ethnic of-
ﬁcials, including ayllu heads, were permitted to impose minor penalties on
those they governed. It is not known to what extent commoners or the non-
Inka nobility could appeal from one level of the Inka administrative hierarchy
to another. Inka ofﬁcials acted in the king’s name to enforce laws and apply
them to the higher ranks of the nobility. Judges were not differentiated from
general administrative ofﬁcials.
legal procedures
Legal hearings in early civilizations were conducted by judges, who heard
testimony, weighed the issues, rendered a decision, and proposed a settlement
or punishment. Especially at the upper levels, cases might be adjudicated by
a single authority, but in other instances decisions were reached by a panel
of judges working together. In the course of a trial, evidence was examined
in detail: testimony was heard from opposing parties, witnesses were called,
and, where applicable, documents relevant to the case were studied. Those

Law
229
presenting evidence were questioned by the judges, and litigants might be
allowed to contest each other’s statements. This was followed by a judgement,
sentencing, and implementation of the sentence (Postgate 1992: 279). Upper-
level courts were supplied with bailiffs and police and sometimes also with
jailers and executioners (Berdan 1982: 104). The basic techniques for hearing
cases and rendering verdicts were already present in prestate societies (Pospisil
1958, 1971), but in early civilizations they were adapted to the altered needs,
values, and administrative practices of hierarchical societies, and, at least at
the top end of the legal hierarchy, verdicts were enforced by the state rather
than by public opinion.
Not only in societies such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, which had writing
systems capable of recording speech, but also among the highland Mexicans,
with their pictographic mnemonic devices, scribes were present to explain
recorded evidence, cite relevant legislation, and record decisions (Postgate
1992: 281). In the early Zhou Dynasty litigants were occasionally represented
by spokesmen, although they may have been simply individuals standing in for
litigants who were unable or unwilling to attend a hearing (Creel 1970: 178).
Friends or relatives might advise someone appearing before a court, but there
is no evidence of professional lawyers.
Witnesses and litigants were often made to swear oaths, especially if the
evidence was unclear or conﬂicting. Yoruba courts at all levels could administer
a kola oath, which asked the ancestors to kill the person who swore it if he or
she gave false evidence to the court. In higher-level Yoruba courts, witnesses
could be asked to swear a still more powerful oath by the god Ogun while
an iron object signifying the presence of the god was placed on their tongues
(Bascom 1969: 40, 44). In Mesopotamia witnesses swore to be truthful on the
symbol of a deity that was brought to the court from the god’s shrine specially
for that purpose. At various periods they might be asked to swear an additional
oath in the name of the king. These oaths invoked divine (or royal) punishment
if one lied (Postgate 1992: 287).
When the evidence was inconclusive, judges also had recourse to ordeals
and oracles. Yoruba judges might ask accused persons to drink a toxic sass-
wood brew in order to determine if they were witches (Bascom 1969: 40).
In Mesopotamia ordeals were employed to discover the truth about sorcery,
adultery, and homicide. Those accused of sorcery proved their innocence by
staying aﬂoat when they were thrown into the river. In Akkadian times ordeals
were also used to resolve serious disputes regarding debts and ownership of
property (Postgate 1992: 281). Finally, oracles were utilized to decide legal
cases. In Egyptian villages councillors would consult the statue of the prin-
cipal local deity to establish the guilt or innocence of a litigant, the answer

230
Sociopolitical Organization
being given by the god’s statue’s weighing more heavily on one side or the
other of the frame on which it was being carried (O’Connor 1990: 16). These
methods were based on the belief that supernatural powers might choose to
reveal the truth to human petitioners. In Mesopotamia ordeals relating to
economic issues gradually became obsolete as a consequence of the increas-
ing use of written records to record business transactions. Eventually written
records took precedence over any other form of evidence (Postgate 1992:
281–85).
Punishments for particular crimes differed in nature and severity from one
early civilization to another. As in virtually all less complex societies, crimes
such as treason, murder, and witchcraft tended to be punished more severely
than theft or wounding. Yet in some early civilizations growing concern to pro-
tect property resulted in increasingly severe penalties for theft. The Yoruba
punished witchcraft, poisoning, and violent murder with death; treason with
death, exile, or loss of property; theft with death, amputation of hands, forced
labour, enslavement, or wounding; highway robbery with death; repeated in-
cest with castration or enslavement; assault with ﬂogging; and manslaughter,
rape, seduction, and adultery with ﬁnes (Ajisafe 1924: 29; Bascom 1969: 40).
It was, however, possible for wealthy Yoruba criminals to escape execution by
lavish gift-giving or providing a substitute human victim (Ajisafe 1924: 38).
The Aztec punished treason or failing to report treason, adultery, kidnapping
a child to sell as a slave, moving boundary markers, and disobedience to com-
mands in battle with death and murder or theft with death or enslavement
(Berdan 1982: 97–98). The Mesopotamians punished the murder of a free
man, the kidnapping of another man’s son, the harbouring of an escaped slave,
and the purchase of stolen goods with death. Robbery was punished by multi-
ple restitution or death, incest by death or exile, and wounding by retributive
wounding or a ﬁne (Pritchard 1955: 163–80). The Inka held witchcraft, trea-
son, and various crimes against state property to be capital offences, while they
punished adultery by death or ﬂogging and all other crimes with various forms
of execution and ﬂogging or sent convicted persons to be labourers on royal
cocoa plantations in the lowlands, where highlanders tended to die quickly
from the hot climate and local diseases. They did not use ﬁnes, imprisonment,
or enslavement as legal punishments (S. Moore 1958: 74–82). Punishments
in ancient China included death (sometimes in cruel and exotic ways such as
being boiled alive), the amputation of ﬁngers, toes, feet, and noses, conﬁne-
ment in portable stocks, and ﬁnes (Creel 1937: 353–54). Surviving Egyptian
records do not indicate standardized punishments for crimes such as murder
and wounding, but individuals were beheaded, impaled, drowned, mutilated,
exiled, and subjected to forced labour. Being burned alive was prescribed as a

Law
231
punishment for various forms of sacrilege (O’Connor 1990: 28; Robins 1993:
137–38; Strouhal 1992: 199).
All societies have rules for dealing with crimes such as treason, murder,
injury, theft, and sexual misconduct. In early civilizations the lowest-level tri-
bunals dealt with these offences by employing a mixture of customary local
laws and the judges’ awareness of how authorities at higher levels had modiﬁed
such laws. There was also, however, an elaboration of laws, either by prece-
dent or by legislation, to deal with problems speciﬁc to more complex societies.
Their subject matter tended to vary from one early civilization to another.
The Mesopotamians developed especially elaborate rules relating to ques-
tions of property ownership, business transactions, and the conduct of busi-
ness (Postgate 1992: 282–87). The Aztec had complex laws regulating the
lifestyles of nobles and commoners, distinguishing the sorts of clothing and
materials that people of different ranks and statuses could wear, the types
of houses they could live in, and the conduct that was expected of them
(Clendinnen 1991: 120; Dur´an 1964: 131–32). Inka law and Egyptian law,
as far as it has been preserved, elaborated detailed regulations dealing with
infractions, especially of a ﬁscal nature, against the state (Kemp 1983: 84). Inka
law also included sumptuary regulations, which sought to limit the accumula-
tion of wealth by lower-class families, as well as regulations that required each
ethnic group to wear a distinctive costume (Kendall 1973: 33, 59). The Yoruba
evolved elaborate legislation relating to debts and the use of royal or ofﬁcial
regalia by ordinary people and ﬁned people for ritual offences against the king
such as bringing a corpse too near the royal palace (Ajisafe 1924: 22). Old laws
could be altered and new ones introduced only after they had been discussed
by members of the Ogboni society and approved by the king (Bascom
1969: 40).
legal codes
There were signiﬁcant variations in the degree to which laws were codiﬁed
and publicly promulgated in early civilizations. What are called ‘law codes’
began to appear in Mesopotamia in the Ur III period. The most completely
preserved Mesopotamian law code is that of King Hammurabi, dating from
about 1700 b.c. A prologue proclaiming that it was written to ‘cause justice
to prevail’ and ensure that ‘the strong might not oppress the weak’ (Pritchard
1955: 164) was followed by 282 laws dealing with prices, trade, and commerce,
marriage and divorce, criminal offences, and civil law, including slavery and
debt. The laws took two forms: ‘If crime x has been committed, the appropriate
punishment is y’ and ‘If person N does x, person O must do y in return’. The

232
Sociopolitical Organization
code ended with an exhortation to all people to obey these laws and a curse
upon future kings who ignored them.
Hammurabi’s code treated manslaughter and accidental injury very differ-
ently from earlier codes. Following ‘desert law’, Hammurabi applied the prin-
ciple of ‘an eye for an eye’ to such offences, while Ur III law had subjected them
to ﬁnes. Jean Bott´ero (1992: 161–64) suggests that these codes were not com-
prehensive sets of laws meant to be applied literally but generalized verdicts
that provided models of sound legal judgement and represented Hammurabi
and other kings as just rulers. Hence the spirit of these laws was more impor-
tant than the letter. This might explain why the laws in the Hammurabi code
are not always mutually consistent. Pritchard (1955: 166 n. 45) had earlier sug-
gested that these inconsistencies reﬂected different stages in the development
of Babylonian law.
Tenochtitlan, Texcoco, and perhaps other large states in the Valley of Mexico
elaborated legal codes that, like the Mesopotamian ones, prescribed speciﬁc
penalties for a vast number of offences. These codes had to be preserved by
memory, although they may also have been recorded in mnemonic form in
codices. The formulation of the ﬁrst systematic legal code in Tenochtitlan was
later described as part of King Mochtezuma I’s (a.d. 1440–68) far-reaching
reformulation of his state’s legal system. This code probably incorporated cus-
tomary laws but was mainly concerned with elaborating sumptuary regulations,
distinguishing the rights of nobles from those of commoners, and compelling
commoners to display more respect for the king and the nobility. In both
Tenochtitlan and Texcoco, successive kings altered old laws and decreed new
ones to take account of changing social conditions (Offner 1983: 81–85; Dur´an
1964: 131–33). The Yoruba distinguished between customary usage (asa) and
formulated, or statute, law (oﬁn). Both types varied from one city-state to
another (Lloyd 1962: 15, 26).
It has often been suggested that laws tended to be codiﬁed in a compre-
hensive fashion in multiethnic states such as those found in Mesopotamia and
the Valley of Mexico in an effort to reduce friction among resident ethnic
groups each of which had its own traditional laws (Offner 1983: 82). Yet sim-
ilarly detailed law codes were not formulated for the Inka state, despite its
extraordinary multiethnic composition, nor do legal codes appear to have been
developed in Mesopotamia prior to the Ur III period. It seems instead that
these codes were formulated in hegemonic city-states so that subject peoples
would know what laws would be applied if they became involved in legal cases
that would be judged by the hegemon or his courts (Postgate 1992: 289–91).
This would have been necessary if laws varied signiﬁcantly from one city-state
or one hegemonic regime to another.

Law
233
In other early civilizations, legal codes appear to have been less systemati-
cally elaborated and less publicly proclaimed by rulers. In Egypt, for example,
it is unclear whether there was any central body of written laws to guide the
actions of government ofﬁcials. The term hp meant both ‘law’ and ‘custom’,
and, while occasional references to a ‘hp of the king’ were probably to laws, they
did not necessarily refer to written ones (Bontty 1997). Village courts were able
to take account of local customs and precedents, which would be drawn to the
attention of ofﬁcials if cases were referred to higher courts (McDowell 1999:
167, 188). C. J. Eyre (1984: 92) asserts that there is no direct evidence of cod-
iﬁed law until after the New Kingdom. Nevertheless, a late Middle Kingdom
papyrus detailing what to do with people who attempted to evade corv´ee
duties cites precise variations of offences, and this suggests the possible exis-
tence of a legal code relating speciﬁcally to corv´ee that has not survived (Kemp
1983: 84).
The Inka formulated numerous laws dealing with the way in which ethnic
nobles and commoners were to be treated by the state, perhaps to provide guid-
ance to provincial ofﬁcials (S. Moore 1958: 74–85). While the early Zhou kings
are said to have greatly admired the legal practices of their Shang predecessors
and to have promulgated their own distinctive laws, there is no clear evidence
of general law codes in China at this period (Creel 1970: 165–66, 192). Royal
judgements appear to have been viewed as providing general principles rather
than speciﬁc prescriptions for punishing misdeeds and resolving disputes. The
absence of speciﬁc legal codes accords with the later Chinese view that precise
laws encourage rather than prevent wrongdoing (Creel 1937: 350–51). It thus
appears that, in general, there was less concern for promulgating explicit legal
codes in territorial states than there was in hegemonic or rapidly changing
city-states.
law and social hierarchy
Hammurabi’s code proclaimed that one of its chief goals was to defend the
weak against the strong. Yet in early civilizations there was no concept of
equality before the law. On the contrary, social inequality was expressed and
defended in many ways by legal systems.
Law that was administered by the state generally punished crimes com-
mitted against kings, government institutions, deities, and temples more
severely than crimes committed against other individuals. Hammurabi’s laws
sentenced to death even upper-class persons for theft from the king or from
temples. The theft of livestock, which was treated separately, from king or tem-
ples required a thirtyfold restitution, with death as punishment if the ﬁne could

234
Sociopolitical Organization
not be paid, whereas a similar crime committed against a private person called
for a ﬁne or a tenfold repayment (Pritchard 1955: 166, laws 6–8). Texcocan
law punished crimes committed within the royal palace more severely than
crimes committed elsewhere (Offner 1983: 159). Among the Inka, theft from
individuals or ayllus was punished at worst by ﬂogging, but anyone who stole
from government ﬁelds or storehouses or from temples or refused to perform
labour service was executed. Death was also the punishment for breaking into
houses where chosen women lived, setting ﬁre to suspension bridges, and (for
commoners) attempting to seduce upper-class Inka women. Inka law stressed
the sacred status of the Inka royal family and permitted the king to execute
subjects and conﬁscate their property more or less as he wished (S. Moore
1958: 74, 81–85). In Egypt the law sentenced people who robbed government
institutions and temples either to be killed or to be mutilated and condemned
to lifelong slave labour. The same sentences were imposed on individuals who
evaded paying taxes or performing corv´ee labour and on ofﬁcials convicted of
having been corrupted by bribes (O’Connor 1990: 28–29). In cases of theft
from individuals, in contrast, injured parties received only two- or threefold
compensation for their losses and even this limited compensation was often
hard to collect (Eyre 1984: 93; O’Connor 1990: 29).
Crimes committed against upper-class people also tended to be punished
more severely than crimes against commoners. Hammurabi decreed that, if
someone belonging to the upper-class was found guilty of having knocked out
an upper-class person’s eye or tooth or broken a bone, the same should be
done to him. If he had injured a commoner in the same ways, he had only to
pay ﬁnancial compensation. If an upper-class man assaulted a woman of his
own class who was pregnant and caused her to miscarry, he had to pay three
times more damages than for injuring a commoner in the same manner. Even
within the upper class, a man who struck someone superior in rank to himself
was given sixty lashes in the presence of the city council, while for striking an
equal he would have merely had to pay a ﬁne (Pritchard 1955: 175, laws 202,
203).
S. F. Moore (1958: 79) maintains that the Inka punished most crimes differ-
ently according to rank; nobles received light sentences for crimes for which
commoners were executed. Such treatment was justiﬁed by claiming that pub-
lic ridicule or loss of ofﬁce was as harsh a punishment for members of the nobil-
ityascorporalpunishment,exiletothetropics,orexecutionwasforcommoners
(75). Whatever a man’s class, the punishment for committing adultery with a
noble woman was death, while committing it with a commoner was punished
relatively lightly (Rowe 1944: 271). The Inka also had two classes of prisons
where individuals were interrogated, held for trial, or punished – ordinary

Law
235
prisons for commoners and more spacious and comfortable ones for nobles.
Yet, regardless of class, traitors, witches, those who stole state property, and
people who insulted the king were killed by being incarcerated in royal dun-
geons ﬁlled with snakes and wild felines (Kendall 1973: 133; Rowe 1944: 471).
In the Valley of Mexico the legal punishment of different classes was more
complex. The law discriminated against commoners in the sense that adultery
by male nobles with commoner women was punished less severely than com-
moners’ adultery with noble women. Texcocan law punished theft with stran-
gulation or enslavement, the severity of the penalty depending on the value
of what had been stolen, where the crime had been committed, the thief’s
previous criminal record, and the damage caused. Yet the ability to avoid such
penalties by making restitution payments greatly advantaged wealthier, upper-
class offenders (Offner 1983: 278–79). Aztec law, however, punished drunk-
enness in members of the upper classes more harshly than it did drunkenness
in commoners. Male nobles were strangled for severe public intoxication and
forfeited their titles and positions even for a minor offence (Berdan 1982: 97).
Commoners had their hair cut off and their houses levelled for a ﬁrst offence
and were executed after a second conviction. The reason for this was the belief
that nobles, as descendants of the god Quetzalcoatl, possessed stronger spiri-
tual powers that gave them a natural right to dominate and lead commoners,
but these same powers made it easier for them to resist temptation. Upper-
class drunkenness represented a failure to live up to claims that justiﬁed the
privileged position that nobles enjoyed and dissipated the special powers they
possessed.
Priests and young commoners undergoing military training were also exe-
cuted for single acts of drunkenness. Many priests were nobles, but those who
were not and young commoners training to be soldiers were subject to special
discipline because their service to the gods and to the state necessitated their
conserving as much supernatural power as possible. Priests were executed if
they were discovered breaking their obligation to be celibate (Berdan 1982:
97, 131–33; Offner 1983: 268–69). A similar attitude appears to have existed
in early Zhou China, where death was prescribed for ofﬁcials who participated
in alcoholic drinking bouts or sought to alter prescribed ways of doing things
(Creel 1970: 190). The Zhou (and perhaps the Shang) nobles, like those living
in the Valley of Mexico, believed that they were set apart from commoners by
a superior nature that endowed them with greater vitality and power (Lewis
1990: 32–33).
The state sought to reinforce parental authority and hence the context in
which habits of obedience to all levels of authority were learned. Texcocan law
executed individuals who injured or attacked their parents (Offner 1983: 204),

236
Sociopolitical Organization
while the Hammurabi code stipulated that a son who struck his father should
have his hand amputated. If the adopted son of a married Babylonian priestess
(who was not permitted to bear children of her own) denied his obligations to
his adoptive parents, he could be sentenced either to have his tongue cut out
or to be blinded (Pritchard 1955: 175, laws 192, 193, 195).
The ambivalent attitude towards slaves in early civilizations is reﬂected in
legislation concerning them. In Mesopotamia killing someone else’s slave was
a much less serious offence than harming any free person. It was compensated
by replacing the slave or paying a stipulated fee to the slave’s owner. At the
same time, a free person of whatever rank who concealed a runaway slave
or helped such a slave to escape from the city was executed (Pritchard 1955:
166–67, laws 15, 16, 19). Yoruba law permitted owners of slaves to execute
them or offer them as human sacriﬁces. Presumably such powers of life and
death were used mainly to intimidate and control slaves soon after they had
been captured in battle. Killing another’s slave required twofold restitution
(Ajisafe 1924: 28, 65). In Middle Kingdom Egypt royal slaves, many of whom
were prisoners of war, could be condemned to death if they misbehaved but
only after a hearing by a royal tribunal (Loprieno 1997: 200).
Most early civilizations, including the Yoruba, had laws protecting house-
hold and debt slaves and allowing them to be emancipated and even adopted
or married into their former owners’ families. In the Valley of Mexico laws
protected obedient and well-behaved slaves against being executed, used as
human sacriﬁces, or sold against their will (Offner 1983: 141). Both Aztec and
Yoruba slaves who took refuge in the royal palace were freed by the king. It
was illegal for anyone except their owner and his family to try to impede their
ﬂight (Ajisafe 1924: 22; Offner 1983: 140). In their mixture of harshness and
leniency, laws relating to slaves reﬂected both the need felt in early civiliza-
tions to maintain control over this tiny, oppressed minority and a willingness
to absorb them over time into the free labouring classes.
Among other classes, inequality was reinforced by the practice of justice as
well as by the nature of the laws. In the middle and upper tiers of the judicial
system all decisions were made or controlled by authorities who were members
of the upper classes. Despite formal orders that they should dispense justice
impartially and the severe punishments that were prescribed for failing to
do so, upper-class judges tended to favour members of their own class in
disputes with commoners. The upper classes also had more wealth and wider
social connections, which allowed them to bribe judges more effectively than
lower-class litigants (W. Clarke 1972: 253). Since in many law courts litigants
were expected to pay judges for hearing their cases, the distinction between
fees and bribery was often far from clear. The Hammurabi code ordered that

Law
237
a judge who altered a decision in someone’s favour should be ﬁned twelve
times the amount that was involved and permanently lose his right to hear
cases (Pritchard 1955: 166, law 5). That such severe penalties were thought
appropriate suggests that the corruption of justice was widely perceived to be
a serious problem. Given the close ties uniting the upper classes, this does not
mean that such penalties eliminated the problem or were very often imposed.
The control of the justice system by the upper classes also meant that lower-
class litigants were more likely to be subjected to painful and dangerous ordeals
in the course of a trial. They were not only more likely to lose lawsuits but also,
because of the nature of the laws, faced harsher penalties: ﬂogging, torture,
mutilation, forced labour, being sold as slaves, and painful forms of execution.
While a person of any status who incurred the Inka king’s anger risked being
penned up with his lethal menagerie, lower-class people ran far greater risks
of being severely punished by the law than did members of the Inka nobility.
Finally, extremely unpleasant penalties were often inﬂicted on the families of
individuals convicted of serious crimes, and these too were most likely to be
applied to members of the lower classes. Among the Aztec, all the members of
a traitor’s household were enslaved for four generations (Offner 1983: 225). In
Egypt the wives and children of men evading corv´ee duty could be enslaved
(Robins 1993: 137), as could the families of Yoruba men convicted of certain
kinds of theft (Bascom 1969: 40). The Inka exterminated entire families of
persons found guilty of witchcraft, probably because it was feared that other
members of such families might also be witches (Rowe 1944: 314).
Thus, while Aztec commoners were reported to have litigated among them-
selves like quarrelling turkeys (Offner 1983: 135, 259), most lower-class in-
dividuals avoided taking their social superiors to court. On the contrary, the
threat of litigation was a way to intimidate commoners and reinforce the power
of the upper classes. Law courts were used to collect debts from people who
were equal or inferior in status to their creditors; defendants were most often
poor men and women accused of theft and not paying their debts (Robins
1993: 137). The Middle Kingdom ‘Tale of the Eloquent Peasant’, which de-
scribes how the king, after a long delay, vindicated a poor farmer who protested
after being robbed and beaten by a powerful ofﬁcial, is overtly about justice
being done to an ordinary person. Yet justice was ﬁnally rendered in this case
only because the verbatim recordings of the farmer’s verbose pleas for justice
had entertained the king (Lichtheim 1973: 169–84). Eyre (1984: 104) observes
that, because of their power to bribe, socially manipulate judges and witnesses,
and ignore public opinion, powerful Egyptians had no fear of the courts. Under
these circumstances, the principal goal of the weaker party was to pacify and
win the favour of his superiors, not to oppose them. A powerful husband

238
Sociopolitical Organization
might seek justice against a socially inferior adulterer, but a lower-class hus-
band would not accuse a powerful ofﬁcial of seducing or raping his wife. H. G.
Creel (1937: 354; 1970: 190–91) observes that in early Zhou China members
of the nobility were punished far less often than commoners. It was not easy
for the king or regional leaders to impose severe penalties on individuals who
were supported by powerful kinsmen and many armed retainers.
Far from being a means of securing justice for the weak, the upper levels of
the legal system were a powerful instrument of intimidation and control in the
hands of the upper classes. The courts provided a way to coerce less powerful
individuals and reinforce the power and privileges of the upper classes and of
majorinstitutions.Thisuseofthelegalsystemisarchetypallyrepresentedinthe
biblical account of how the Israelite Queen Jezebel obtained royal possession
of a vineyard that its owner, Naboth, did not wish to sell to the king; she had
Naboth condemned to death on a false charge of blasphemy and his vineyard
conﬁscated by the crown (I Kings 21). This account of the use of legal systems
conforms to Aztec descriptions of the law as a wild beast, a trap, or a snare, an
overpowering force to be feared because people could be punished by it for
crimes they did not commit (Offner 1983: 243–44).
Even the use of the legal system for litigation among the upper classes
was discouraged. The Hammurabi code stipulated that, if an upper-class man
brought charges of murder or witchcraft against another upper-class man and
failed to prove them or was found guilty of giving false testimony in a case
involving a capital offence, he could be executed (Pritchard 1955: 166, laws
1–3). Such laws not only discouraged illegal behaviour but indicated that con-
siderable risks were involved in undertaking even legitimate legal actions of
these sorts.
These arrangements suggest that in early civilizations governments were not
anxious to expend time and resources regulating aspects of human relations
that could be controlled in a less formal manner. This in turn implies that
an important function of the legal system was to reinforce the power and
privileges of the state and the upper classes. While the legal system had to be
protected from being totally discredited as a result of too obvious corruption
and oppression, it functioned, behind claims of impartiality, as a not very subtle
means by which powerful individuals could coerce less powerful ones.
law and social order
The legal systems of early civilizations appear to have grown out of the seem-
ingly universal legal practices of smaller, more egalitarian societies. These
practices involved the recognition of local authorities as having the right to

Law
239
hear disputes and render verdicts in accordance with generally accepted prin-
ciples, which in turn were enforced by public opinion (Pospisil 1971: 39–96).
With the development of early civilizations, these arrangements were trans-
formed into multitiered, hierarchical legal systems staffed at the higher levels
by upper-class judges whose decisions were enforced by the power of the
state. The king was universally acknowledged to be the supreme legal author-
ity, and the laws upheld by the state were often treated as royal or divine
pronouncements.
There was, however, considerable variation from one early civilization to
another in the extent to which legal authorities and ofﬁces were differenti-
ated from general administrative ones. There were also marked differences in
the degree to which laws were codiﬁed and those relating to different gen-
eral categories, such as commerce, administration, and class privileges, were
elaborated. In general, variations in such categories reﬂected the different
preoccupations of the upper classes in particular early civilizations.
In most early civilizations law was described as a powerful force maintaining
order in an equitable, if unequal, fashion in the social realm. Yet, because at all
but the lowest levels of the legal system laws were made, cases were decided,
and punishments were determined by the upper classes, the legal system was
a potent instrument for intimidating individuals of lower status. Chinese law
appears to have differed from that of other early civilizations only in that, in
theory as well as in practice, litigation was possible only between equals. No
efforts were made to idealize the legal system as a means by which justice was
provided for all. Early Chinese realism with respect to law appears to have had
long-term consequences for the development of Chinese civilization, which
never evolved a strong sense of either private property or individual legal
rights. Elsewhere, in due course some people were inspired to try to realize
the ideals embedded in representations of their legal system as an instrument
of social justice as well as social order.

12 Military Organization
M
ilitary force played three important roles in early civilizations. It
secured and defended the frontiers of states; it enriched powerful
rulers by enabling them to exploit peripheral areas that contained valuable
natural resources, control lucrative trade routes, and impose tribute on con-
quered peoples; and it maintained internal order – suppressing rebellions,
ensuring the collection of taxes, maintaining social peace, and protecting the
power and privileges of the upper classes. No clear distinction was drawn be-
tween military and police forces. Because order and prosperity were important
for everyone, military strength was endowed with great political and religious
signiﬁcance.
Armed conﬂict was invariably destructive of human life and property, but
wherever it occurred in early civilizations it was preferable to belong to a
strong and disciplined polity than to a weak one. Military success offered
opportunities for personal enrichment and prestige to kings and commoners
alike. Warfare was surrounded by elaborate rules of conduct which sought
to limit unforeseen consequences, but these rules were often disregarded in
extreme situations or when ﬁghting enemies who did not understand them.
The Aztec and Inka both requested the target of a planned attack to submit
peacefully. Aztec ambassadors invited rulers to become friends of the Aztec
king, allow trade, and pay nominal tribute. If this offer was not accepted, a short
time later their Texcocan allies would threaten the targeted state with severe
punishment if it did not submit. Finally, the Tlacopans, the third members of
the Triple Alliance, would call upon the warriors of the threatened state to
surrender and save lives. These preliminary encounters were believed to be
essential to justify a military campaign (Berdan 1982: 106).
Rituals linked warfare to the cosmic order. Offerings were made to super-
natural beings to win their favour or induce them not to assist the enemy. The
Inka rulers consulted oracles before starting a war, sought to win the favour
240

Military Organization
241
of the enemy’s deities or to weaken them, and dedicated a portion of any ter-
ritory they captured to the service of the gods (Kendall 1973: 99–108). The
Shang kings sanctiﬁed war as a hunt for human prey to be sacriﬁced to their
ancestors and the gods. Major Chinese military campaigns began at the earth
altar and ancestral temple of the king or of a major provincial lord, where
the war was announced to the ancestors and their help requested. Tablets
inscribed with the names of these ancestors were carried into battle. After
a successful campaign, prisoners were sacriﬁced or severed enemy ears and
heads were brought from the battleﬁeld and presented at the ancestral temple
(Lewis 1990: 23–25). Before a military campaign, Aztec soldiers gathered at
temples to offer their own blood to the gods and receive weapons. Armed
priests carried images of the gods into battle (Hassig 1988: 9). The Aztec justi-
ﬁed war as an opportunity to collect prisoners who were sacriﬁced so that their
blood and ﬂesh could nourish the gods. Mesopotamians believed that wars
were fought at the command of the patron deities of city-states, whose will a
king was supposed to be able to interpret (Mikhaeli 1969: 78). At the start of
a military campaign, Yoruba soldiers offered sacriﬁces to their war standards
and covered themselves with charms that they believed would protect them
in battle (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 29).
Ultimately, it was kings who were held ritually and operationally responsible
for warfare. Peter Gose (1996b) has observed that among the Inka war was
the key to royal power. Kings normally led armies in person or delegated
command of them to close relatives or high ofﬁcials. Inka kings also initiated
wars, although only after consulting with high-ranking military and civilian
administrators. At an early period, to begin a war Mesopotamian leaders might
have needed the consent of a council of leading citizens and an assembly of
men of ﬁghting age (Postgate 1992: 81). The Aztec ruler sought the support of a
councilofhigh-rankingveteransoldiers(Hassig1988:47–48)andofthecalpolli
leaders who had to call up and provision most of the troops. Neither Yoruba
kings nor any member of Yoruba royal patrilineages normally led armies, and in
some states, such as Oyo, kings were forbidden to do so. Just as did rulers who
actually led or commissioned armies, however, Yoruba kings bore the ultimate
responsibility for victory or defeat because of the supernatural powers that
they commanded (R. Smith 1973: 227). They also proﬁted economically from
war as did kings in other early civilizations; in some cases receiving one-third
of the slaves and other booty (Peel 1983: 45).
Kings often began their reigns with shows of military force. Aztec rulers
needed to capture the large number of prisoners that had to be sacriﬁced
to complete their enthronement rituals. King Tizoc, who ruled from 1481
to 1486, may have been poisoned when he failed to do this (Hassig 1988:

242
Sociopolitical Organization
198). The Maya similarly appear to have treated warfare as an integral part
of royal succession ceremonies; heir designates were required to capture one
or more enemy soldiers of high rank for human sacriﬁce (Schele and Miller
1986: 116–17). New Egyptian kings could demonstrate their prowess in many
different ways, including big-game hunting and erecting large buildings, but
many of them led military expeditions (Hornung 1997: 306–8). Shang kings
were active as both soldiers and hunters, moving about their kingdom to
join regional ofﬁcials in attacks against rebels or foreign enemies (Keightley
1979–80).
Given its importance, documentation of warfare is surprisingly limited, spo-
radic, and equivocal for most early civilizations. Archaeological evidence of
warfare sometimes occurs in the form of city walls or frontier fortiﬁcations,
but city walls were not just for protection against foreign attack. Moreover,
while fortiﬁcations were not common in the Valley of Mexico or among the
Maya,literarysourcesrevealthatwarfarewasprevalentinbothregions.Among
the Shang Chinese and the Inka, warfare did not receive explicit iconographic
attention. Egyptian generals regularly depicted themselves as ofﬁcials wear-
ing civilian dress rather than military uniform. In works of art, New Kingdom
Egyptian rulers and Mesopotamian kings were represented on a much larger
scale than the armed forces they led, while the Old and Middle Kingdom
Egyptians, Maya, and Aztec often depicted military action in the form of the
king alone smiting one or more enemies. Yet we know from reliable literary
sources that the Egyptians and Aztec ﬁelded large armies. This discrepancy
suggests that the general lack of representation of large armies in Classic Maya
art does not signify that large armies were never assembled. What it does indi-
cate is that the discussion of warfare in early civilizations requires documents
as well as iconographic evidence.
mass armies
In most early civilizations wars against neighbouring city-states and foreign
peoples were waged mainly by conscript armies composed of farmers and
craftsmen led by ofﬁcers who belonged to the upper classes and the bureau-
cracy. The rest of the time many of these ofﬁcers were engaged in various
forms of civilian administration. Military campaigns usually began after the
main harvest had been collected. This period also frequently corresponded
with the dry season, in which travel was easier. Militias were trained to vary-
ing degrees and fought either with weapons that ordinary people used for
hunting and defence against wild animals or with more specialized weapons
provided by the state. In some civilizations conscripts were fed and clothed by

Military Organization
243
the government while they were on campaigns; in others they were expected
to provision themselves.
The Aztec and their allies waged war to control trade routes and collect trib-
ute from city-states they had subdued over much of central Mexico. Through-
out the Valley of Mexico, warfare was valued as a source of individual social
mobility and an activity that was essential to maintain the cosmic order. While
the Aztec idealized warfare even more than most of their neighbours, their
views about it were based on concepts that were shared by all the peoples of
the region.
At birth every Aztec male child was formally dedicated to the military, in
token of which a warrior undertook to bury the child’s umbilical cord on a
ﬁeld of battle during the next military campaign. The Aztec took more care
to educate young men to be citizen-soldiers than any other early civilization.
Every calpolli had a telpochcalli (school) in which young commoners were
taught to be warriors by members who had been elevated to noble status as a
reward for multiple acts of valour in warfare. Graduates of these schools were
incorporated into their calpolli regiment, which fought alongside others in
military campaigns. Normally each calpolli supplied four hundred soldiers
under the command of its own ofﬁcers (Townsend 1992: 197).
Boys began to attend such schools at puberty. Younger boys were under the
control of older trainees who had already participated in military campaigns.
All of them continued to eat at home but were required to sleep in the school
buildings and to avoid drunkenness and sexual licence. They grew food on
ﬁelds that belonged collectively to the calpolli and performed corv´ee labour –
dredging canals, repairing streets, and cleaning public places under the di-
rection of calpolli elders. They were also instructed in the special lore and
traditions of their calpolli. Together with the young women of their calpolli,
they attended sessions in the cuicacalli (houses of song), where they learned
the songs and dances they would perform as adults at major religious festivals
(Clendinnen 1991: 112–18; Hassig 1988: 30–34).
Yet the young men’s training was principally as soldiers. About the age of
twenty they ﬁrst accompanied older warriors to battle as shield-bearers and
observers. In the next campaign they were allowed to ﬁght in small groups
under the supervision of seasoned veterans and began to rise in the warrior
hierarchy by capturing enemy soldiers for human sacriﬁce. Those who failed,
even as part of a group, to capture a prisoner were not allowed to cut off
a youthful lock of hair, which remained a lifelong source of humiliation for
them. Whether or not they were militarily successful, men were allowed to
marry and withdraw from the telpochcalli by their mid-twenties (Hassig 1988:
36–40).

244
Sociopolitical Organization
Sons of nobles received a more intensive administrative and religious edu-
cation in special schools (calmecacs) that were attached to temples. They too
began to receive rigorous military training when they were about ﬁfteen years
old. A young noble’s reputation and chances of being appointed to a major state
ofﬁce could be ruined by his inability to succeed as a warrior (Clendinnen 1991:
121–22).
The Aztec fought with clubs, atlatls (throwing sticks) and darts, and slings,
but their principal weapons were swords and spears. While Aztec soldiers were
trained and drilled with wooden weapons, they fought with swords edged along
twosideswithobsidianbladesandwithobsidian-tippeddartsandspears.These
weapons, which had great cutting power, were distributed to ordinary soldiers
in wartime and stored between campaigns in armouries near the temples at the
centre of the city and perhaps also in or near calpolli temples (Hassig 1988:
61, 75–94). Leading soldiers wore heavily quilted cotton armour. Tribute-
paying city-states along the routes armies travelled were required to supply
the soldiers with food as they passed by. Between harvest time and the start
of spring planting, the Aztec calendar was ﬁlled with rituals relating to war
(Clendinnen 1991: 295–97).
In addition to wars of conquest, highland Mexican city-states engaged
in xochiyaoyotl (ﬂowery wars), which consisted of carefully prearranged,
‘friendly’ battles between rival states. Soldiers were killed in these battles and
prisoners taken, but military action was restricted to the battleﬁeld and the
overt political status of the participants was not altered, at least in the short
run, by the outcome. The rationale for these contests was to capture prison-
ers for sacriﬁce to the gods. Flowery wars were said to be waged when not
enough wars of conquest were occurring. In addition to training soldiers and
permitting individuals to win military honours, these contests served to deﬂect
formidable nearby rivals while states were expanding elsewhere and to reduce
the strength of rival states too powerful to be conquered in a single campaign.
The Triple Alliance repeatedly challenged the Tlaxcalans, east of the Valley of
Mexico, to ﬂowery wars in an effort to weaken them, but they were unable to
incorporate them into their tributary system (Hassig 1988: 129–30, 172; M. E.
Smith 1996: 184–85).
Mesopotamian city-states fought over water rights, agricultural land, and
trade routes. Wars were a source of wealth for rulers in the form of tribute and
female slaves, who could be employed as weavers. Military action was also nec-
essary to defend Mesopotamian states against incursions by Semitic-speaking
pastoralists from the northwest and the peoples of the Zagros Mountains to
the east, who appear to have grown increasingly dangerous in the course of
the third millennium b.c. The Ur III ruler, Shu-Sin, built a wall where the

Military Organization
245
Tigris and Euphrates Rivers came closest together to hinder the southward
movements of Amorite bands (Crawford 1991: 27).
Glyptic representations of battles and bound prisoners occur as early as the
Uruk period (Collon 1987: 162), but for Early Dynastic I times there is still
no clear evidence of standing armies. Kings or prominent citizens appointed
by city-state councils may have led armies raised from among the free men
of the community. Such levies continued in wartime long after kings assumed
permanentcontrolofmilitaryaffairs.Conscriptsoldierswerearmedwithmetal
axes, spears, incurved swords or daggers, and stone-headed maces that were
either owned by them or produced and stored at palaces or temples and issued
to them in wartime. These arms were heavy and specialized compared with
those used in neighbouring Egypt at the same period. There is no evidence in
the Early Dynastic period of archers or lightly armed ﬁghters. The bow and
arrow were introduced in Akkadian times (Huot 1989: 225; Jacobsen 1943).
It is not known how or by whom soldiers were trained. In Sumerian, erin
meant both a dependent labourer and a soldier, which suggests that many
soldiers were recruited from the paid labour forces of temple estates. The term
nubanda, which later became a military rank, was originally the title of a temple
administrator. Military service must also have been required of those who
owned or rented land. In all cases, it would have been perceived as a form of
corv´ee labour. Defeated cities frequently had their walls breached or levelled,
and their temples were sometimes plundered, although this was believed to
provoke the anger of the gods and draw divine retribution upon kings who
allowed such an offence to occur (Gelb 1973; Mikhaeli 1969; Postgate 1992:
241–56).
Egyptian kings fought wars to defend their borders, control foreign trade
routes, and obtain prisoners to augment agricultural production. Commoners
were recruited for military service as one of many forms of corv´ee labour that
did not require specialized skills. Soldiers were referred to generically as d3mw
(recruits) or nfrw (young men), and in the Middle Kingdom the term nh˘ n nıwt
(community dweller) in practice meant a soldier (Eyre 1999: 38). The term mˇs
was applied equally to an army and a mining crew. In the Sixth Dynasty, the
courtier and high ofﬁcial Weni led ﬁve consecutive armies, composed of men
conscripted from all over Egypt, into Canaan (Grimal 1992: 82–85). Like other
corv´ee labourers, soldiers were fed and cared for by the state while they were
away from home. Farmers fought with bows and arrows, clubs, and spears,
presumably the same weapons they used for hunting and defence against
wild animals in their home villages. Workers attached to speciﬁc temples and
mortuary cults were granted permanent immunity from all forms of corv´ee,
including military service (Andreu 1997: 21–23).

246
Sociopolitical Organization
12.1. Inka battle scene depicting the storming of an Andean fortress (pukara), from the lavishly
illustrated manuscript El primer nueva cr´onica y buen gobierno (New Chronicle and Good
Government of Peru), written by the Andean provincial noble, Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala,
probably ﬁnished in 1713 or 1715. Source: after F. Guaman Poma de Ayalla, Nueva Cr´onica y
Bien Gobierno (Paris: Mus´eum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Travaux et M´emoires de l’Institut
d’Ethnologie, 23, 1989), 63.
The Inka state resorted to large-scale warfare to extend its control over the
peoples of the Central Andes (Fig. 12.1). Later expansion appears to have
aimed mainly at gaining control of more remote areas that were rich in natural
resources, especially metals, and at securing defensible boundaries. Inka of-
ﬁcials used corv´ee labour as a source of soldiers, every male between the ages
of twenty-ﬁve and ﬁfty being liable for military service. In each settlement or
ayllu, instructors were responsible for teaching teenage males how to ﬁght.
Military contests involving young men from neighbouring communities were
among the activities encouraged by the Inka state. Members of the Inka no-
bility were educated at special schools in Cuzco where, in addition to being

Military Organization
247
taught how to be administrators, they received a rigorous military education
and were encouraged to ﬁght enthusiastically for the Inka king. The individual
strength and military skills of young Inka nobles were tested in the course of
an elaborate set of coming-of-age ceremonies in which their ears were pierced
and the king presented them with insignia of noble status. These ceremonies
included races and individual and group combat in the course of which some
contestants were killed (Bram 1941; Grou 1989).
Ordinary Inka conscripts were organized in groups of ten, one of their
number being responsible for seeing that the rest were armed, fed, and had
the necessary supplies (Kendall 1973: 98). These in turn were incorporated
into groups of ﬁfty, one hundred, ﬁve hundred, and one thousand (Hyslop
1990: 147). If conscripts were away from an ayllu during the growing season,
its remaining members had to plant and harvest their ﬁelds for them. Some
soldiers may have been accompanied by their wives, who helped to cook and
carry equipment. Food and clothing were provided by the state from depots
located at provincial administrative centres and government rest places located
along the main roads. Small units might pass the nights in large public halls at
such places, but large armies lived mainly in tents provided by the state (Murra
1980: 99). Inka soldiers did not wear uniforms, and most fought with the slings,
bolas, bows and arrows, spears, and clubs that they had been trained to use
in their home villages (Hyslop 1990: 147). In the celebrations and rituals that
followed a conquest, defeated soldiers were made to wear women’s clothes as
a sign of submission, and the Inka king walked over the prostrate living bodies
of his enemies (Classen 1993: 56–57).
The Yoruba waged war to control trade routes and obtain slaves. Military
service was obligatory for all free and able-bodied Yoruba men. If a person re-
fused to ﬁght, his crops might be plundered and he himself be severely beaten.
The heads of extended families were required to train and arm their follow-
ers and organize them into a ﬁghting force that could join their city-state’s
army when required. Extended-family units were aggregated under ward and
quarter leaders. The principal weapons were iron spears, double-edged (ida)
and single-edged (adedengbe) slashing swords, daggers for stabbing, and bows
and arrows. Extended families supplied both food and arms for military cam-
paigns, although once out of their own territory armies tended to live off the
land (Ajayi and Smith 1971).
The available data on Maya warfare deal almost entirely with the behaviour
of kings and high-ranking ofﬁcials, and it is unknown to what extent commoners
were summoned for military service during wartime. Maya epigraphic and
pictorial evidence documents numerous episodes of the capture and eventual
sacriﬁce of the kings and nobles of one city-state by the rulers of another, and

248
Sociopolitical Organization
the capture of large images of deities that accompanied military expeditions
was one of the most celebrated accomplishments of Maya kings (Harrison
1999: 155–56). This and the absence of fortiﬁcations have led some Mayanists
to conclude that Maya warfare involved small bands of upper-class warriors
engaging in heavily ritualized and perhaps prearranged conﬂicts on the bor-
ders of their respective states. Such battles, it is argued, established the relative
prestige of individual rulers and members of the upper classes and provided
upper-class victims for a sacriﬁcial cult (Schele and Miller 1986: 209–40).
Other Mayanists have suggested that some wars were fought to create re-
gional superstates (Demarest 1978; Webster 1993: 429–30). Still others deny
that territorial gain was a signiﬁcant motive for Maya warfare; they main-
tain that warfare among city-states was concerned mainly with establishing
tributary networks and controlling trade routes (Culbert 1991b: 336; Freidel
1986; Houston 1993: 137–38). Competition of this sort involved the efforts
of major kingdoms, such as Calakmul, to form alliances with far-off states
that would encircle mutual rivals or threats such as Tikal and, by gradu-
ally severing their trading networks, weaken them economically prior to a
major military confrontation (Drew 1999; Martin and Grube 2000; Sharer
1996).
In fact, warfare was directed not only against the borders or outlying admin-
istrative centres of city-states but also against their capitals. The defacement
and smashing of stelae in the centres of major cities such as Tikal suggest
that enemy armies penetrated them. In its ﬁnal phase an attempt appears
to have been made to fortify the centre of Dos Pilos against such an attack
by erecting palisades and fortiﬁcations built of stone blocks wrenched from
existing buildings. Similar emergency fortiﬁcations have been identiﬁed in
some other urban centres (Houston 1993: 46). Yet, while victorious rulers
no doubt sought to humiliate defeated cities, imposed tribute on them, and
sometimes installed individuals of their own choosing as their kings, there is
no evidence that efforts were made to incorporate one large city-state into
another. Nevertheless, known patterns of warfare would have required large
military forces, even though such forces are not documented in Maya art and
inscriptions. The general lack of specialized weapons and military technology
suggests that most soldiers were farmers or craftsmen conscripted for short
military campaigns. Most battles probably dissolved into individual combats,
and kings and high-ranking ofﬁcials were no doubt special targets for attack
and capture. There is no proof, however, that Maya kings deliberately exposed
themselves to capture in battle or that kings taken prisoner were necessar-
ily captured in hand-to-hand combat by other rulers. They may simply have
taken personal credit for every ruler and many nobles captured by their armies.

Military Organization
249
Inferential evidence suggests that the lower classes did participate in military
campaigns, but it is not known how they were trained, called up for military
service, or commanded.
The numerous references to warfare in Shang divination texts suggest that
warfare was of great importance to the Shang kings (Keightley 1979–80). War-
fare appears to have been much concerned with occupying and settling pe-
ripheral lands, with protecting Shang settlements against attacks by pastoral
peoples living to the north and west, and with maintaining the unity of the
state. Shang oracle bones refer to the king’s levying farmers and state labour-
ers for military campaigns, the farmers in units of one thousand and the
labourers usually in multiples of one hundred. It is not clear what role these
conscripts played in military campaigns or to what extent they constituted
the bulk of a military force (Keightley 1969: 66–144). In Shang and Western
Zhou times continuous liability to military service may have been limited to
the retainers of nobles who lived near the capital or alongside regional of-
ﬁcials in their fortiﬁed administrative centres (Lewis 1990: 53–64). Some of
these retainers may have farmed the surrounding countryside but been avail-
able for military campaigns whenever they were needed. Most royal armies
must have been composed of local rulers and their retainers assembled by
regional ofﬁcials and by the king, who had their own larger forces. It ap-
pears that at each level ofﬁcials were responsible for arming and training
their own followers. If soldiers had to abandon their crops to accompany
their lords on military campaigns, other workers must have been available
to cultivate their ﬁelds. These may have been full-time farmers, who were
not normally called upon to ﬁght but may have been requisitioned as porters
in wartime to assist armies that passed through the regions where they lived
(Lewis 1990: 55).
While conscript armies could be used to defend a state or wage war against
others, they were not a source of internal power for kings or members of the
upper classes. It has been suggested that the rulers of territorial states, espe-
cially multiethnic ones, could have used conscripts to suppress uprisings in
remote parts of their kingdoms or played rivalrous neighbouring groups off
against one another. The Inka rulers may have been pursuing this sort of pol-
icy when they moved portions of recently conquered ethnic groups nearer the
centre of their kingdom and replaced them with settlers drawn from peoples
who had long demonstrated their loyalty or when they encouraged ritualized
competition among neighbouring groups. These arrangements did not, how-
ever, supply rulers with a reliable source of physical coercion. The injudicious
application of such a policy might have created anarchy rather than increased
the power of the state.

250
Sociopolitical Organization
officers and professional soldiers
Arguingthatconscriptarmiesweretheonlymilitaryforceavailabletotherulers
of early civilizations, Elman Service (1975) concluded that these were not true
states in the sense that the legitimate deployment of physical force played a
signiﬁcant role in ensuring their viability. Rather, he suggested, extending the
now-discredited view that chiefdoms were held together only by supernatural
sanctions, early civilizations were large, chiefdom-like theocracies in which
authority was sacerdotal and all sanctions were supernatural (91 n. 9). Without
addressing in detail the nature of armies in early civilizations, Maurice Godelier
(1986:31–32)alsomaintainedthatinsuchsocietiesthepowerofrulersresulted
from the belief on the part of most of their lower-class subjects that powerful
supernatural forces supported them. Godelier argued that, because the people
in the Andean region thought that the Inka monarch was divine and kept
the universe functioning, they believed that they owed their lives to him and
accepted that this gave him the right to dominate and exploit them – that
if they did not obey him supernatural powers would punish them and the
well-being of the cosmos would be endangered (159–61).
Godelier was correct that Inka monarchs, like other Andean rulers and rulers
in most other early civilizations, promoted a belief in their own divinity. Yet
numerous subject peoples had only recently been incorporated into the Inka
state, and many people who belonged to these societies would have remem-
bered that, before they were ruled by the Inka king, their world had functioned
perfectly well without him. Moreover, there is no evidence that subject groups
anywhere accept theocratic claims easily or uncritically and much evidence
that they generate their own counterideologies to oppose those of their rulers.
If fear of divine sanctions alone were an effective control, why did all an-
cient states have to guard temples, palaces, and government storehouses from
thieves and threaten robbers with drastic physical punishments? Why were
Egyptian and Inka divine monarchs assassinated as a result of court intrigues?
Why was the threat of violence needed to collect taxes in ancient Egypt and
other early civilizations? Why did protests occur when, as happened in New
Kingdom Egypt, governments could not pay their employees’ wages? Why
were there peasant revolts? Morton Fried (1967) strongly disagreed with
Service’s views and argued that physical force played an important role in
managing early civilizations.
Service and Godelier were correct only to the extent that force alone is never
sufﬁcient to make a society work. Farmers in early civilizations depended on
governments for defence from external attack and the maintenance of internal
order and were prepared to tolerate and at least minimally support any regime

Military Organization
251
that could do this. Capable rulers took care not to alienate most of the popula-
tion by allowing rapacious ofﬁcials to overtax and abuse them and won support
by functioning as a source of prestige, status, and material rewards. Neverthe-
less, the rulers of early civilizations needed trustworthy and capable soldiers to
guard them and their families, nobles and government ofﬁcials, government
storehouses, and tax collectors. They also frequently needed soldiers to gar-
rison control points and frontiers and to wage wars that took men away from
their homes for months or even years at a time. Some of this work could have
been done by military corv´ees, but many tasks were better entrusted to profes-
sional soldiers, whose loyalty was reinforced by their socially and economically
privileged status. As more complex forms of weapons and more sophisticated
techniques of ﬁghting developed, the need for more specialized training also
encouraged the professionalization of the armed forces. These factors suggest
that, contrary to Service, conscript armies were rarely if ever adequate for all
the military and policing tasks that had to be performed in early civilizations.
The Inka, long considered to have had no career soldiers, are now acknowl-
edged to have been in the process of building large professional armies (Grou
1989; Murra 1986). Rotating corv´ees of farmers called up for short periods of
military service produced large armies that could overwhelm adjacent territo-
ries or intimidate the rulers of small polities into submitting to Inka rule. Yet
armies of this sort were inadequate for wars that continued for years such as
those that the Inka king Wayna Qhapaq was waging in Ecuador early in the
sixteenth century. Inka rulers discovered that career soldiers could be more
highly trained and better armed and hence produced more effective ﬁghting
forces. Well-trained and loyal soldiers were also needed to garrison adminis-
trative centres and protect Inka governors. Large numbers of full-time soldiers
were settled near Cuzco both to protect and maintain order in the capital re-
gion and to be ready to move in any direction to suppress rebellions in the
provinces (Hyslop 1990: 318). Prudence dictated that armies of conscripted
subject peoples not be assembled within striking distance of Cuzco (Kendall
1973: 99). As the Inka state reached its ecologically sustainable boundaries,
there was also a growing need for soldiers to defend its borders against in-
cursions by tribal peoples living to the north, east, and south. This required
establishing fortiﬁed garrisons that did not have ethnic afﬁnities to local groups
living on either side of the border they were guarding.
Full-time soldiers to perform these special tasks were recruited from sub-
jugated ethnic groups that were noted for their martial skills. These groups,
which were otherwise a potential threat to Inka control, were transformed into
supporters of the Inka state by assigning them a privileged position within the
kingdom’ssocialandeconomichierarchy.Individualfarmerswhodistinguished

252
Sociopolitical Organization
themselves in battle while performing military corv´ees were also recruited as
full-time soldiers, while instructors who trained young commoners to ﬁght
may also have channelled the strongest, bravest, and most skillful into military
careers. Inkas-by-privilege may have been selected on the basis of their per-
sonal performance to become middle-level ofﬁcers, commanding units of one
hundred, ﬁve hundred, or one thousand soldiers (Grou 1989).
These recruits were specially trained and armed with shields, helmets, and
round metal plates to protect their bodies, and they fought with metal axes,
metal-tipped spears, and heavy stone maces. They and their families were
exempt from any form of taxation. Career soldiers were frequently granted
land owned by the king for their support. It is unclear if the garrisons of
frontier forts took turns working this land and guarding forts or if the land
was worked for them by local populations as part of their labour tax (Hyslop
1990: 148–72). Extensive government farms were created to feed the royal
armies. The Cochabamba Valley in Bolivia was a particularly important centre
of maize production that freed the full-time soldiers stationed near Cuzco
and elsewhere from having to grow food to feed themselves and their families
(La Lone and La Lone 1987; Wachtel 1982). The loyalty of seasoned regiments
of full-time soldiers and their commanders, who had served Wayna Qhapaq
in Ecuador, assured his son Atawalpa of victory over the larger armies, made
up mainly of peasant conscripts, that fought for his half-brother Waskar when
the two princes struggled to succeed their dead father.
The Inka king was surrounded by a palace guard of two thousand soldiers
and a personal bodyguard of one hundred high-ranking ofﬁcers. These units
were composed of nobles and men recruited from special ethnic groups such
as the Ca˜naris, who were renowned for their military ability. The Ca˜naris and
their families had been resettled in the Yucay Valley, near Cuzco, where they
had been granted tax-free land. The king’s guard, Inka nobles, and full-time
soldiers formed the core of any major Inka army. Such armies were ofﬁcered
at the highest levels by Inka nobles, who commanded units of twenty-ﬁve
hundred and ﬁve thousand soldiers. An entire army made up of a number of
such units was led either by the king or by a close royal relative who served as
its commander in chief (Kendall 1973: 98). Some of these ofﬁcers performed
military duties only as one of a number of high-level administrative functions.
Others, however, spent their careers leading armies (Grou 1989).
When the Egyptian kings abandoned their early policy of depopulating ad-
jacent regions (Hoffman 1979) for one of constructing forts along their fron-
tiers to control the movement of people and goods, these forts were probably
manned by full-time soldiers. Middle Kingdom forts in Nubia were garrisoned
by rotating military units until the end of the Twelfth Dynasty, when these

Military Organization
253
garrisons were replaced by settlers from Egypt. At least during the Twelfth
Dynasty, grain was sent in bulk from Egypt to the Nubian forts rather than
grown locally in that infertile region. The garrisons were also supplied with
standard military equipment, such as hide shields and stone-tipped spears,
some of which may have been manufactured at the large Egyptian forts in
Lower Nubia (S. Smith 1995; Vila 1970). Royal palaces, provincial adminis-
trative centres, and government warehouses were probably also guarded by
full-time soldiers. Beginning in the First Intermediate Period, companies of
forty lightly clad archers or spearmen were depicted in the service of regional
ofﬁcials. Similar squads of soldiers were associated with provincial governors
in the early Middle Kingdom (Andreu 1997: 19–21). These were probably the
same sort of full-time soldiers or police that had been employed by the central
government in the Old Kingdom. Beginning at that time, large numbers of
Medjay pastoralists from the Eastern Desert, as well as Nubians and Libyans,
were recruited as soldiers and settled in Egypt with their families. One of their
tasks was to assist government ofﬁcials to collect the grain tax from recalcitrant
Egyptian farmers, whom the soldiers would arrest, ﬂog, and imprison until
they delivered what bureaucrats had estimated was the government’s share
of the harvest. In the Sixth Dynasty, companies of these foreign recruits, as
well as conscripted commoners, were led by high-ranking ofﬁcials on military
expeditions against Canaan (Strouhal 1992: 202–3; Trigger 1976a: 54–63).
Senwosret III boasted that increasing royal revenues during the Middle
Kingdom permitted him to expand the number of soldiers in his service and
increase their remuneration (Lichtheim 1973: 199). It is uncertain whether
such soldiers performed their military duties full-time. They may have been
given land to work themselves or have worked for them by tenant farmers.
There is no evidence of specialized weaponry, apart from large shields and
battleaxes, prior to the introduction of chariots, compound bows, and new
and more effective types of bronze swords and daggers from southwestern
Asia during the Second Intermediate Period. Nevertheless, professional sol-
diers appear to have been specially trained to move in formation and ﬁght
as units (Andreu 1997: 23–25). They may also have played a leading role in
the attacks on fortiﬁed Canaanite towns that are depicted in tombs of the
Fifth and Sixth Dynasties. These assaults involved the undermining of town
walls and the use of wheeled siege ladders by soldiers armed with axes. Large
armies are recorded as being led by government ofﬁcials during the Old King-
dom and by kings’ sons, who were sometimes junior co-rulers, in the Middle
Kingdom (Andreu 1997: 21–23). There is no evidence that these leaders, who
were titled ımy-r mˇs (overseer of an expedition) or tsw (commander), were
full-time military personnel. If there were full-time ofﬁcers, it was probably

254
Sociopolitical Organization
at a lower rank than is documented in tombs and funerary texts. Professional
soldiers increased in numbers and were far more complexly organized in the
New Kingdom (Schulman 1964).
Because of the crucial importance of warfare in Shang and Western Zhou
China, military organization appears to have been professionalized to a consid-
erable degree. Among those employed full-time may have been some military
ofﬁcers, troops who were trained to handle special equipment such as chariots,
and numerous soldiers who protected the upper classes and helped to enforce
their authority. Many different types of army-related ofﬁces are mentioned in
Shang texts. General categories include ya and shi (ofﬁcers, commanders), ma
(chariot ofﬁcers), she (archery ofﬁcers), chuan (dog ofﬁcers), and shu (garrison
commanders). Dogs may have been used in military and police actions, as well
as for hunting, which was viewed as a form of military training (Chao 1972: 14–
15, 74–86; Chou 1968: 276–320; Vandermeersch 1980: 66–68). Each of these
categories was subdivided into various ranks. While some ofﬁces may have
been entirely military, others seem to have been of a mixed nature. Chariot
and dog ofﬁcers may have been responsible for breeding horses and dogs as
well as for their military training and use. Yang (sheep ofﬁcers) appear to have
been agricultural ofﬁcials who were involved with military campaigns on which
animals were likely to be captured as booty (Keightley 1969: 88). Kung (artisan
ofﬁcers), whose concerns were not primarily military in nature, perhaps accom-
panied military expeditions to attend to the provisioning and repair of military
equipment (24–27). The distinction between military and non-military ofﬁces
does not appear to have been closely drawn, and it may not be correct to speak
of a speciﬁcally military as distinguished from a civil administration. There also
appears to have been much overlap in function among the holders of different
military titles.
Next to ritual vessels, elite weapons such as dagger-axes, knives, and arrow
and spear points, along with helmets, shield bosses, and chariot ﬁttings, were
the most important products of the Shang bronze industry (Chˆeng 1960:
156–76). Horse-drawn chariots were costly to manufacture and use but were
produced in large numbers, which suggests that they were manned by com-
moners as well as by aristocratic army leaders. This impression is reinforced by
the large numbers of chariots, together with their horses and personnel, that
were buried in ritual contexts at Anyang and elsewhere (Lu 1993). Chinese
tradition maintains that chariot drivers were menials until the Spring and
Autumn period (722–481 b.c.) (Creel 1970: 276–80). Chariots appear to have
been used not only as mobile raised platforms for directing battles but also
to break the ranks of enemy foot-soldiers. Since considerable experience was
needed to drive and ﬁght from a chariot, only well-trained, probably career

Military Organization
255
soldiers could have used them. Each chariot carried a driver, a dagger-axe
man, and an archer. Chariot burials suggest that there were two crews for each
chariot and that every chariot was accompanied by about one hundred foot-
soldiers.Chariotsweredeployedinbasicunitsofﬁveandlargerunitsoftwenty-
ﬁve. Two of these larger units would have been made up of three hundred men
(Chao 1972: 79–81). The infantry was organized in squads of ten men, each
under the command of a better-armed leader. Ten of these squads formed a
company and three companies a combat unit. Archers were also organized in
units of three hundred men (Chou 1968: 279–84; Hsu and Linduff 1988: 27).
The Shang king appears to have been able to mobilize many soldiers, whom
he sometimes led himself. Otherwise, he appointed generals, who were often
princes and in two recorded cases women (fu) of the royal household. Princes
had their own ofﬁcers and soldiers under their command. Individual royal
armies appear to have numbered from three thousand to ﬁve thousand soldiers
organized into right, centre, and left divisions. The king sometimes sent royal
forces to help provincial administrators suppress rebellious local ofﬁcials, carry
out punitive raids against foreign enemies, and annex new territory and to man
border garrisons and facilitate the settlement of new areas (Keightley 1979–80;
Vandermeersch 1980).
The entire Western Zhou male ruling class was trained as warriors (Lewis
1990: 243). Zhou kings were personally protected by their ‘tiger guards’ (hu
chen) and had a large standing army six divisions of which were located near
their old capital in the Wei Valley and eight more around the eastern admin-
istrative centre they established at Chengzhou (Chˆeng 1963: 294; Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 241–45). Each of these fourteen armies was divided into a right
and a left half. Regional and local ofﬁcials in charge of fortiﬁed strongholds or
walled administrative centres had their own smaller armies or armed retain-
ers. These forces guarded against enemy attack and controlled the surrounding
countryside. Weapons were stored when not in use in or near the leader’s an-
cestral temple (Hsu and Linduff 1988: 268–69; Lewis 1990: 23, 260). Regional
and local ofﬁcials led their soldiers to join the royal army when ordered to do
so (Lewis 1990: 261).
The divisions of the royal standing army are said to have been self-supporting
(Keightley 1969: 267–78). Hence some or all of these soldiers and their families
mayhavegrowncropsaroundthecentreswheretheywerebased.Alternatively,
full-time farmers may have been assigned to produce food for these regiments.
If such soldiers were engaged in warfare during the growing season or had to
accompany the king on lengthy military campaigns, they and their families
must have depended on surplus food produced by others (Lewis 1990: 261–
69). The relative proportion of military as opposed to other forms of labour

256
Sociopolitical Organization
appears to have increased from conscripted soldiers through armed supporters
of provincial rulers and the standing armies of the king to full-time armed
guards, charioteers, and military ofﬁcers.
The later development, during the Warring States period (481–221 b.c.),
of mass conscript armies composed not only of retainers (guoren) living in
and around administrative centres, but also of country people (yeren) was
accompanied by the symbolic division of the year into seasons of growth (spring
and summer) and seasons of death (autumn and winter), the latter being the
time for interstate wars. Mark Lewis (1990: 65) suggests that before that time
the elite and their retainers hunted and waged war in every season. It was also
not until late Zhou times that armies were legally and ritually distinguished
from the state and it became possible for generals to commend, reward, and
punish soldiers independently of rulers (Lewis 1990: 126–27; Maisels 1999:
309–11).
The Aztec and other polities in the Valley of Mexico linked male political
and administrative careers to military service as well as to status at birth. All
military achievement was individual and calculated according to how many
enemy warriors a soldier had captured alive in battle. Combat was therefore
primarily a personal enterprise. Every prisoner captured entitled a soldier to
be promoted to a higher rank in the warrior hierarchy. Each rank was as-
sociated with a different costume, insignia, and privileges. The king publicly
conferredthesedistinctionsonsoldiersatannualreligiouscelebrations.Nobles
who had captured four prisoners would join the eagle (caucuauhtin) or ocelot
(ocelomeh) orders, which had their meeting places in the royal palace (Hassig
1988: 45). Membership in these orders was a prerequisite for holding any
signiﬁcant military or civil administrative position. The capture of more pris-
oners led to membership in still higher military orders, the otontin (Otomies)
and cuahchicqueh (shorn ones), which qualiﬁed a noble to hold the highest
military positions (Hassig 1988: 45–46). The two principal army leaders, the
tlacateccatl (he who commands warriors) and the tlacochcalcatl (the man of
the place where weapons are stored) were close relatives of the king, and one
of them usually was chosen as his successor. The king, as supreme head of the
army, bore the title tlacatecuhtli (lord of warriors) (Soustelle 1961: 44).
Warfare opened a narrow path for commoners into the nobility (Clendinnen
1991: 120). As we have seen, commoners who had captured four prisoners
were made eagle nobles. Such men were granted either the produce of a plot
of land in some conquered city-state or a supply of maize from the palace,
the two being effectively the same in that palace ofﬁcials oversaw the growing
of corn in tributary states and its transportation to Tenochtitlan. This would
also explain why it was said that, while eagle nobles were granted land, unlike

Military Organization
257
hereditary nobles they were not also granted bound labourers (mayeque) to
cultivate it (Hassig 1988: 29). Nevertheless, such revenues made eagle nobles,
like hereditary ones, independent of their calpollis (Hassig 1988: 145–46). An
eagle noble no longer had to earn a living with his hands or perform corv´ee.
Eagle nobles who captured many enemy soldiers could join the higher military
orders, but their lack of hereditary nobility and of an upper-class education
debarred them from holding major administrative ofﬁces (Berdan 1982: 103).
Ennobled commoners trained young men to ﬁght in calpolli schools, spent
part of each year guarding the royal palace, and arrested and executed peo-
ple on the orders of the king and of palace judges and administrators. They
watched over the central armouries where lethal weapons were kept out of
the hands of commoners during peacetime. They also provided experienced
middle-level leadership and highly skilled ﬁghters for military campaigns. In
this way the Aztec state recruited career soldiers who lacked the administra-
tive training a hereditary noble would have had to provide leadership for the
army as well as a police force which ensured that the decisions of the king and
palace administrators were carried out. Eagle nobles and hereditary nobles
who commanded the army constituted a substantial body of full-time soldiers
at the disposal of the state (Berdan 1982: 64–65).
In Mesopotamia the key responsibility of the Early Dynastic kings was to
protect their city-states from attack by neighbouring states or nomadic groups.
Armed attendants were killed and buried with rulers at Ur (Postgate 1992:
241), and there are depictions of uniformed soldiers wearing metal or leather
helmets, leather armour, and cloaks, carrying shields, and armed with bronze
spears, maces, daggers, sickle-shaped swords, adzes, and blades mounted on
wooden handles. Soldiers of this sort were trained to ﬁght in phalanx-like
formations that would have allowed them to cut through the ranks of less well-
organized adversaries (Fig. 12.2). The infantry was accompanied by a primitive
‘chariot’ force using heavy wooden carts with four solid wheels, each pulled by
four onagers. These carts transported two ﬁghters armed with spears, javelins,
and axes. As in China, such vehicles were used as observation platforms to
direct a battle. On level terrain they were also employed as assault vehicles
(Mikhaeli 1969; Postgate 1992: 245–50). Thus there appears to have been in
each Mesopotamian city-state a core of full-time or nearly full-time soldiers,
employed, trained, and equipped by the king. One of their roles may have
been to curb pastoral intruders at times of the year when most people were
engaged in farming and city-states would normally have been at peace with
each other. In return for their military service, these soldiers were assigned
the use of land that belonged to the palace. In many cases the use of such land
was inherited from one generation to the next, along with the military duties

258
Sociopolitical Organization
a
b
12.2. Mesopotamian battle scenes: (a) one side of the so-called Royal Standard of Ur, a box-like
object from royal tomb PG 779 in the Royal Cemetery at Ur – from bottom to top, it portrays
a chariot charge cutting down the enemy, followed by infantry, the taking of prisoners, and
presenting these prisoners to the king. The ‘standard’ is a mosaic of lapis lazuli and other stones,
shell, and ivory set in wood. Early Dynastic period, ca. 2700 b.c., height 20.2 cm; (b) the Stela
of the Vultures, carved in limestone, commemorates a victory of King Eannatum of Lagash over
the neighbouring city of Umma. This panel portrays enemy corpses being trampled under foot
by heavily armed infantry ﬁghting in a phalanx formation, from Telloh (Girsu), Early Dynastic
III, ca. 2450 b.c., height of panel ca. 85 cm. Sources: (a) after C. L. Woolley, The Sumerians
(Oxford 1928), 51; (b) J. Oates, Babylon (London, 1979), 27.

Military Organization
259
associated with it. Mesopotamian career soldiers were bound to kings who
were not only their military superiors but also their landlords. Other palace
land produced surplus grain that supported economic activities related to the
army. Metal was obtained from long-distance traders in return for grain or
cloth produced by palace dependents, and some of this metal was turned into
weapons perhaps in palace workshops or, alternatively, by artisans working for
the palace in their own homes (R. McC. Adams 1966: 143).
Career soldiers were trained and ofﬁcered by high-ranking palace ofﬁcials.
In peacetime these soldiers guarded the palace and royal properties and en-
sured that the king’s orders were carried out. Control of a standing army was a
signiﬁcant source of political power in a city-state, where even a small amount
of force could alter the internal balance of power and hence the pattern of
government signiﬁcantly. Thus the inﬂuence of kings tended to increase at the
expense of temples and rich landowners. In wartime, career soldiers provided
a trained core for an army still made up largely of conscripts (Postgate 1992:
241–42).
Mesopotamian kings generally appear to have had palace staffs of about
ﬁve hundred people, many of whom were probably soldiers. Sargon of Akkad
claimed that over ten times that number ate bread in his palace daily, and his
total standing army must have been considerably larger. Shulgi, a hegemon of
the Ur III dynasty, recruited a regiment of spearmen among the citizens of his
capital (Postgate 1992: 242; Van De Mieroop 1999: 34). Prisoners captured
in battle were held for ransom, killed, or put to work as labourers for palaces
and temples. In Hammurabi’s time, soldiers were generally ransomed by their
families (Postgate 1992: 254–56). If their families lacked the resources to pay
for this, ransoms were sought (as loans?) from temples and, as a last resort,
from the king (Pritchard 1955: 167, law 32). Hegemonic rulers used their
military power to try to subdue resource-rich areas to the northwest and east
of Mesopotamia and south along the Persian Gulf. Control over these areas
appears invariably to have been fragile and transitory.
A Yoruba state had no single standing army, but that did not mean that
there were no full-time soldiers. Kings had armed attendants who not only
protected them and their palaces but also arrested people, brought them to
court, and executed criminals. The kings of Benin recruited and armed a large
number of young men who acted as their bodyguards, policed the palace,
conveyed messages, and enforced their wishes throughout the state. For as
long as they served the king, these young men were forbidden either to wear
any clothes or to marry, observances which betokened their childlike devotion
to the monarch. When they left his service, the king clothed them and gave
them valuable presents (Bradbury 1973: 61; H. Roth 1903: 24).

260
Sociopolitical Organization
Titled members of the main extended patrilineages in Yoruba capitals and
smaller towns, in addition to having numerous male kin who followed them into
battle, were attended by a permanent entourage composed of as many as 150
well-armed kinsmen, mercenaries, and slaves. Supporting these retainers, who
were full-time soldiers, consumed a major portion of these leaders’ resources.
These soldiers did not wear uniforms but were supplied with padded jackets,
as well as single- and double-edged swords, spears, lances, and javelins made
of iron. Unlike conscripted soldiers, they did not ﬁght with clubs and slings.
In the northern and central woodland-savanna region, most full-time soldiers
were horsemen armed with thrusting spears, while infantry, equipped with
leaf-shaped swords that were better suited for close ﬁghting, predominated
in the forested south. Maintaining horses was difﬁcult even in the northern
Yoruba regions and added greatly to the cost of outﬁtting retainers. It also made
the distinction between full-time and part-time soldiers much more important
in the north than it was in the south, where armies were composed almost
entirely of infantry and only major leaders rode horses. Rulers of powerful
northern states such as Oyo, who were precluded from leading soldiers into
battle, invested in horses which they supplied to lineage leaders in return for
a larger share of the booty from military campaigns (R. Smith 1973).
By owning large numbers of slaves, leading Yoruba could produce enough
food to support many full-time soldiers. Promising slaves were also recruited
as full-time soldiers (R. Smith 1969: 119). In peacetime these supporters con-
stituted an armed guard and were a major source of political power for their
patrons. They also enabled the Yoruba leadership to keep the lower classes
under control. In wartime they formed the well-trained and equipped nuclei
of the larger units that came together to form a city-state army. The full-time
soldiers who were members and followers of each extended family rallied to
that family’s ward and quarter leaders.
In Oyo the state army was led by the seven Oyo Mesi, who constituted
the state council that governed the kingdom in collaboration with the king.
Each of them led the forces from his section of the city as well as the armed
ﬁghters sent by his dependents in the countryside. The army as a whole was
commandedbythebasorun.Specialmilitarytitleswerebestowedonimportant
ofﬁce-holders, cavalry leaders, and leaders of the vanguard, which was made
up of young ﬁghters. In addition, there was an elite group of seventy mounted
warriors called eso who ranked militarily immediately below the Oyo Mesi
and served as subordinate commanders under them. The Oyo Mesi conferred
this title on individuals with the approval of the king. All but one of these
warriors lived with their followers in a special section of the capital called Oke
Eso. The one exception, the are ona kakamfo, had a military base near the

Military Organization
261
border and was usually not allowed to visit the capital because the Oyo Mesi
feared that he might conspire with the king against them. An unsuccessful
campaign by the rural military force he commanded was customarily cause
for his execution. The Oyo army was divided into a centre and two wings and
engaged in skirmishes, raids, set battles, and sieges but rarely attempted to
take a town by direct assault (Ajayi and Smith 1971: 13–55; Law 1977: 74–75;
R. Smith 1969: 120–29; 1973).
In Benin, despite the greater power of the king, the army was usually led
by the ezomo, a hereditary ofﬁcial whose position corresponded to that of the
basoruninOyo.HeandhisfellowcouncillorslackedthepoweroftheOyoMesi,
however, and he was clearly subordinate to the king. Alternatively, the king
could appoint as army commander the iyase, who was the chief town ofﬁcial
of Benin city and the oba’s main rival for power. After he had commanded
an army, the iyase was required to leave Benin and settle in a town or village
outside the capital and a new iyase was appointed; thus by conferring army
leadership on an iyase the king could eliminate a dangerous rival (Bradbury
1957: 36, 43–44). Presumably, the wealth that could be acquired from leading
a successful military campaign was the main reason that an iyase would accept
such a command.
Among the Maya, even if armies were mainly conscripts, kings and no-
bles would at the very least also have had guards and armed retainers. A few
representations suggest that some kings had armed retainers, perhaps of
foreign origin, supplied with specialized weapons, such as obsidian-tipped
spears. (Henderson 1981: 137). The upper classes and their retainers would
have provided leadership for Maya armies.
career soldiers and civil authorities
In early civilizations, armies did not develop, as they did in the Roman Empire
and some other later preindustrial states, into separate institutions whose com-
manders possessed power independent of the state and were therefore able
to challenge or dominate civil authorities. The highest-ranking leadership of
military forces was always drawn from the upper echelons of the general power
hierarchy. Yet in all six well-documented early civilizations some soldiers were
better trained and armed than the farmer and artisan conscripts who might
periodically be assembled to attack neighbouring states or defend their own,
and the poorly documented Maya do not appear to have been an exception to
this pattern.
Some of these more specialized soldiers appear to have been engaged in
military activities full-time. Others combined farming and soldiery but were

262
Sociopolitical Organization
exempt from taxation and corv´ee labour. Where there was a need to defend
the state against external enemies who were not tied to an agricultural cycle,
there may have been a greater need for soldiers who were wholly disengaged
from agricultural production. Yet full-time soldiers provided the cores of mass
armies in all early civilizations and were essential to the support of civil author-
ities within each state. In most cases, the ultimate control of military and police
forces lay with the king. Among the Yoruba, control was shared by non-royal
ofﬁcials who belonged to a small number of powerful lineages, but even these
were able to use their armed retainers to control slaves and intimidate the lower
classes. Career soldiers could be provided with more elaborate equipment and,
because they were better trained and disciplined, could make better use of it.
Chariots were advantageous for directing battles and smashing through poorly
coordinated infantry lines. Metal weapons were more deadly than ordinary
stone or bone ones. Shields and armour, whether made of metal, thick leather,
or padded cloth, protected combatants. On the whole, however, technology
was less important than the discipline and ﬁghting style most evident in the
phalanx techniques of Mesopotamian soldiers and the military formations of
Chinese ones.
Professional soldiers were recruited in various ways. For Aztec commoners
it was as a reward for valour. For Yoruba slaves it was a way to escape from agri-
cultural drudgery and a move towards eventual emancipation. Mesopotamian
kings recruited regiments from among the free men of their own cities, pre-
sumably those who were seeking to better themselves economically. Inka ofﬁ-
cials recruited career soldiers from among ethnic groups and individuals who
displayed a conspicuous talent for military life. Career soldiers were paid with
grain allotments or given the use of land which they or their families could
work themselves or rent to full-time farmers. The economic beneﬁts that they
and their families enjoyed were inducements to support their patrons, since
continuing service depended on their patrons’ military and political success.
Professional military forces were larger in territorial states than in city-
states, but it is unclear whether a higher percentage of the population was
so employed. Career soldiers always represented a small fraction of the total
population. Most states relied on temporary conscripts to form the bulk of their
armies. In the Valley of Mexico all free men were subject to military service
and had been specially trained for it. In Shang China military service may have
been limited to some of the farmers and labourers who lived in and around
administrative centres, many of whom might better be described as soldiers
who farmed in their spare time than as farmers who also served as soldiers.
While there is no direct evidence of conscript armies among the Classic Maya,
there is no direct proof of career soldiers either. Denying the existence of

Military Organization
263
conscript soldiers would suggest that Maya warfare was a ritual game mainly
played by kings and nobles, a view that does not accord with what we know
about it.
In city-states professional soldiers were key in asserting the power of kings
and ruling groups over rival factions and the lower classes. The wealth that the
leaders of hegemonic states extracted from neighbouring polities augmented
the ability of rulers to support more soldiers and maintain their political dom-
inance. Yet the decentralized military and political leadership of Oyo demon-
strates that hegemony did not inevitably increase the political power of kings.
Nevertheless, even where kings did not control the army, military success
reﬂected favourably on the role they played as the ultimate intermediaries
between the human and the divine realms.

13 Sociopolitical Constants
and Variables
T
he development of early civilizations appears inevitably to have pro-
duced monarchs; even in societies with patterns of dual leadership at
lower levels there was a single preeminent ruler. The unity of the state seems to
have been conceptualized by imagining the political, economic, legal, military,
moral, and cosmological dimensions of society to be embodied in the person
and will of a single human being. Kingship was viewed as inherited within kin
groups; the Sumerians may have believed that it was conferred on individuals
by the gods, but even for them kingship was hereditary in practice. The powers
of kings, the roles they played, and the ways in which kingship was concep-
tualized varied considerably from one early civilization to another. In Egypt
monarchs could exercise great personal inﬂuence, although doing so required
considerable skill. Among the Yoruba, in contrast, kings had to share power
with the leaders of important kin groups and sometimes were no more than
ﬁgureheads. Kings were present in all early civilizations not so much because
they were practically necessary as because kingship was a master concept in
terms of which other, less comprehensible political relations could be under-
stood and negotiated. The unity of states had to be achieved not only politically
but also symbolically.
All early civilizations were based on the idea of social and economic in-
equality, which not only informed the understanding of society as a whole
but also pervaded the family. As a consequence, ideas of inequality and obe-
dience to authority were inculcated in everyone from earliest childhood. As
children grew older, the concept of obedience was reinforced in schools, so-
cial life, and relations with government ofﬁcials. In each early civilization a
small number of privileged people were supported by a large number of
taxpaying farmers. This upper class governed society and controlled much
of its wealth and surplus labour. Beneath it were various groups of special-
ists ranked according to how much they resembled the upper classes in not
264

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
265
having to engage in hard manual labour. Ordinary bureaucrats normally ranked
above professional soldiers and they in turn above specialized craft work-
ers and household servants. The highest grade of farmers possessed land,
either individually or collectively; of lower status were farmers who had to
rent land, farmers who were tied to land owned by others, and landless man-
ual labourers. At the bottom of the class hierarchy in many early civilizations
were slaves: temporary debt slaves, who could hope to regain their freedom,
hereditary household slaves, and prisoners of war or criminals, who were of-
ten condemned for the rest of their lives to labour under extremely wretched
conditions. Slaves tended to be most common in city-state civilizations. In ter-
ritorial states they were often replaced by individuals who were bound to the
service of government institutions or individual members of the upper class
but could not be bought and sold. Both slaves and such bound individuals were
relatively few.
There was some vertical mobility in all early civilizations, but it varied consid-
erably in degree. Slaves were absorbed fairly easily into the lower free classes.
Upward mobility was possible for commoners in states that were expanding
either economically or militarily, but it was impeded by the difﬁculty of acquir-
ing the appropriate skills and generally subject to the approval of the upper
classes.
The rich and powerful strengthened their social position by contracting
marital alliances with members of their own class. Rulers often married their
younger daughters to ofﬁcials or client rulers to consolidate the support of
such individuals, and upper-class families might maritally co-opt promising
young men. While peasants married within the same village or landowning
group and artisans often married among themselves, the upper classes forged
marital links within their own class that often extended across whole states
and sometimes united families of equivalent status in neighbouring polities.
These far-reaching ties helped them to cooperate in controlling the rest of
society.
In all the early civilizations for which we have adequate documentation,
the privileges of the upper classes were protected by armed forces and the
legal system. While lower-class conscripts were generally used to ﬁght for-
eign wars, professional soldiers served as a police force to protect the upper
classes, government property, and ofﬁcials. Commoners were encouraged to
settle their own disputes, provided that this did not disadvantage the upper
classes, but the legal system invariably had higher levels at which decisions
were enforced by the punitive power of the king. This system was used to
intimidate the lower classes and protect the privileges of the wealthy and
powerful.

266
Sociopolitical Organization
forms of state
The early civilizations in our sample exhibited only two varieties of political
organization: city-states and territorial states. These types of states were dif-
ferentiated on the basis of numerous organizational principles not only from
each other but from later regional urbanized kingdoms, later city-states, and
true empires. City-states in early civilizations controlled small territories and
often had a single urban centre surrounded by farming villages, although the
geographically largest of them and those with the most dispersed populations
also had small towns that served as secondary administrative centres. These
secondary centres caused the general arrangement of settlement units of those
city-statestoresemblesuperﬁciallythearrangementsofterritorialstates.Other
aspects of their settlement patterns were, however, very different.
City-states frequently had numerous farmers living in their urban centres
and intensively working the land nearby. This arrangement reduced the cost
of transporting food to the city and offered farmers’ homes maximum pro-
tection against attacks by neighbouring states. It also encouraged the broader
participation of the well-to-do in political life. Cities were centres for the pro-
duction and marketing of goods. High-quality raw materials imported from
abroad were sold publicly by long-distance traders (the Maya being a possible
exception). Full-time craft workers manufactured goods not only for temples,
the government, and the upper classes but also for other craft workers and for
farmers. Markets made such goods more accessible to ordinary people, and
this increased the demand for manufactured products and supported more
specialists and the production of better-quality goods.
Territorial states had one or more royal capitals and numerous regional
administrative centres. These urban centres tended to be inhabited only by
administrators, full-time craft workers, and labourers employed by the govern-
ment and by government ofﬁcials. Farmers lived in villages in the countryside
and, in addition to growing food, produced handicrafts from locally available
raw materials and exchanged these products at local markets. Full-time spe-
cialists generally worked for the government, often in government workshops,
where they were provided with exotic raw materials obtained by the state.
Relatively little of what they produced was accessible to ordinary people and
then only as gifts from members of the ruling class.
Archaeological evidence makes it clear that neither the ancient Egyptian
nor the Inka territorial state evolved from a city-state as deﬁned here. Egypt’s
development involved the political uniﬁcation of a series of chiefdoms or small
early states, and the Inka united a large number of chiefdoms. In China, the
Yellow River ﬂoodplain was probably a zone of chiefdoms resembling those

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
267
found in Predynastic Egypt and the central Andean highlands rather than of
city-states prior to the emergence of territorial states. Nor did the city-states in
our sample eventually become territorial states. Mesopotamia moved toward
a deﬁnitive regional uniﬁcation in the mid-second millennium b.c., but large
urban centres continued to play a crucial role in the economic, cultural, and
religious life of the region rather than coming to resemble the administrative
centres of early territorial states. In Egypt after the New Kingdom and in
late Zhou China, territorial states evolved more populous and economically
more important urban centres, economies that were less controlled by the
central government, and administrations that were increasingly based on the
centralized control of military power. Rather than city-states’ evolving into
territorial states (or, alternatively, developing from the breakup of such states),
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and China civilizations of both types evolved into a
single later form: the urbanized regional kingdom (Trigger 1985a).
ElizabethStone(1997:25),followingEisenstadt,Abitbol,andChazan(1988:
186–92), has suggested that it would have been much easier to create territorial
states where existing hereditary nobilities could be absorbed into expanding
power structures than where expansive rulers had to rely wholly on military
power. Mesopotamia and the Yoruba, the early civilizations that she treats as
quintessential examples of city-states, did not have hereditary upper classes.
In them a heterarchical sharing of power resulted in large urban centres where
there was political competition, a moderate amount of social mobility, a high
degree of entrepreneurship, and broad access to goods produced by full-time
artisans. Kings were not embedded in a hereditary nobility through which
they could dominate the rest of society. Instead, they shared power with other
sections of the upper class and played a mediating role in city-state politics.
While they were regarded as essential for placating the gods, they reigned with
the consent of their more powerful subjects.
All the rulers of the city-states in the Valley of Mexico, and probably the Maya
kings as well, belonged to a hereditary nobility that was coterminous with the
upper class. The mutual recognition that the Aztec monarchs and the rulers of
tributary states all belonged to the same, genealogically related regional upper
class may have provided a basis for closer relations between them. The Aztec
used marital alliances to establish more intimate ties with the rulers of some
subject states, and this may help to explain how they were able to create a
tributary network far more extensive than any Yoruba or Mesopotamian one.
It also might be argued that, because of their hereditary nobilities, the Aztec
and Maya had greater potential for creating regional urbanized kingdoms than
did the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians. Evolutionists who do not distinguish
between territorial states and regional kingdoms might also argue that the

268
Sociopolitical Organization
Aztec and Maya represented an intermediate level of political development
between the Yoruba and the Mesopotamians, on the one hand, and territorial
states with hereditary nobilities, such as those of the Inka and Shang, on the
other.
Yet the claim made in the Valley of Mexico that all kings and nobles were
descended from the god Quetzalcoatl was paralleled by the claim of Yoruba
and Benin rulers that they and all the members of Yoruba royal clans were
descended from the god Oduduwa. While the Aztec quickly expanded the
descendants of their ﬁrst kings, traced through either the male or female
line, into a sizable nobility, the Yoruba curbed the expansion of their royal
clans by restricting membership to male descendants and creating economic
conditions that encouraged most kings’ sons who had no hope of becoming
kings to seek adoption into their mothers’ patrilineages. Hence the potential
for creating a larger hereditary aristocracy, which was actively pursued in the
Valley of Mexico, was rejected by the Yoruba. This calls into question the
proposal that the presence or absence of a hereditary nobility can by itself
account for the major political differences between the Valley of Mexico and
the Yoruba. It is also noteworthy that the Mesopotamians, who appear to
have lacked any arrangements predisposing them to develop a hereditary elite,
repeatedly created hegemonic city-state systems and that Mesopotamia, after
remaining a city-state system for almost two millennia, was transformed into
a regional kingdom. There is no convincing evidence that this was about to
happen either in the Valley of Mexico or among the Maya. The chief source of
power for both Mesopotamian and Aztec kings was their control of the army
and the distribution of tribute. The Yoruba kings, by contrast, did not control
the army and had to share foreign tribute with their chief councillors. While
it has been argued that the expansion of royal power in Mesopotamia resulted
from foreign ideas imposed on the region by Semitic-speaking pastoral leaders,
the increasing military power of Sumerian rulers allowed them to bring about
an unprecedented degree of economic centralization within the hegemonic
city-state system they created during the Ur III period. The Yoruba rulers
were prevented from doing this by being forced to share military power with
other leaders.
Both the Inka and Chinese territorial states had hereditary ruling classes,
and incorporating the hereditary rulers of numerous small polities into a na-
tional upper class may have played a signiﬁcant role in the uniﬁcation of Egypt.
In Egypt hereditary nobles were, however, quickly eliminated as major power-
holders, and thereafter, at least in theory, the power of ofﬁcials depended
entirely on royal favour. Thus hereditary nobilities were not essential for the
governance of all territorial states, and the preexistence of a hereditary nobility

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
269
does not appear to have inﬂuenced whether early civilizations developed as
city-states or territorial states. There is also no evidence that the presence of
a hereditary upper class accelerated the rate at which city-states were trans-
formed into regional kingdoms.
Why some early civilizations developed as city-state systems and others de-
veloped as territorial states is unclear. The limited variation in our sample sug-
gests that viable early civilizations could be organized in only a limited number
of ways. Perhaps only two general forms of political organization functioned
well enough to endure for a signiﬁcant length of time. Once city-state systems
or territorial states arose in a region, there seems to have been little prospect of
the development of the alternative form of political organization. Either type
of state seems eventually to have been able to evolve into a regional kingdom.
The central governments of early civilizations preferred that small groups,
such as extended families, landowning collectivities, and craft associations, be
self-regulating. Higher-level authorities intervened only when their interests
were threatened by speciﬁc forms of non-compliance, such as refusal to pay
taxes in kind or to supply corv´ee labour, or by the breakdown of local order.
Otherwise, letting local groups manage their own affairs reduced the cost of
government.
In city-states, rich landowners, powerful lineages, temple corporations, mer-
chants’ associations, and inﬂuential voluntary groups had their own forms of
self-government and were represented in various ways on councils at village,
ward, or city levels. These councils, which exercised both legislative and judi-
cial functions, shared power with or organized their activities around a king.
Administrative procedures were less formal than in territorial states because
communication could be more direct and decision making more decentralized.
In some city-states, especially hegemonic ones that administered tributary net-
works, kings were able to use their control over the army and the distribution
of tribute to enhance their power and move towards a more centralized form
of government.
In territorial states and hegemonic city-states, high-level administration ap-
pears to have originated within the royal household, and a distinction between
the royal household and the state developed only slowly. From Old Kingdom
times on, the Egyptians differentiated between the ofﬁcers and revenues of
the royal court and those of the various branches of government, but into the
New Kingdom royal estates were used to support both the royal family and the
state. This reluctance to distinguish clearly between the royal household and
the state was reﬂected in a similar reluctance to assign mutually exclusive and
precisely deﬁned duties to individual ofﬁcials. High-ranking ofﬁcials seem to
have been viewed as ofﬁcers of the king’s household and therefore bound to do

270
Sociopolitical Organization
whatever the king ordered. Max Weber called this a patriarchal form of
government. Eventually, however, these states came to display two types of
administration – either delegational or bureaucratic. In delegational systems
a king, while keeping an area around the capital under his direct control and
receiving a share of the taxes collected by ofﬁcials in every part of the realm,
delegated a full (or nearly full) range of powers over more distant provinces to
subordinate ofﬁcials. Central control could be strengthened by relocating sub-
ordinate ofﬁcials from time to time. The bureaucratic approach strengthened
the power of the central government by dividing authority to administer differ-
ent activities, both at the capital and in provincial and local centres, into a sufﬁ-
cient number of parallel structures that no single ofﬁcial had enough power to
challenge the central authority. While delegational states were harder to hold
together, bureaucratic ones were often less efﬁciently governed, especially
when ofﬁcials were moved at frequent intervals not only from one province to
another but also from one branch of administration to another, unfamiliar one.
forms of family
Family organization among early civilizations varied, although it generally had
a masculine bias. The Yoruba, Chinese, and people in the Valley of Mexico
lived in patrilineal extended households. So did the Mesopotamians, although
over time the number of families living together appears to have grown smaller
and even to have given way to nuclear families, especially in urban centres.
The Classic Maya are generally believed to have lived in patrilineal extended-
family groups, but this is denied as a general principle by some Mayanists
and considered inapplicable to some major urban centres by others. Andean
highland peoples lived in extended-family units, although in some areas these
groups were matrilineal rather than patrilineal. In Egypt the ideal household
was a nuclear family, although often at least parts of two adult generations
lived together. There was no correlation between different types of family
organization and the distinction between city-states and territorial states.
To some extent, different types of family organization may represent a sur-
vival of various forms that had existed in particular parts of the world prior to
the development of early civilizations. The special emphasis placed on endog-
amous landholding units and dual leadership at lower social levels in the Valley
of Mexico and highland Peru may have resulted from historical connections
between these two regions, which shared crops of Mesoamerican origin. Yet
Mesopotamian extended families appear to have declined in importance in
urban settings as ownership of land and property shifted from a collective to
an individual basis. Among the Yoruba coresidential units were much larger

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
271
in the north than in the south, probably because of the need in the north for a
more integrated form of military organization to cope with the greater military
threat from adjacent non-Yoruba states. Thus family organization seems to
have been shaped to some degree by the functional requirements of particular
early civilizations.
Patrilineal extended families could be interpreted as encouraging the de-
velopment of a delegational form of government in Shang and Eastern Zhou
China and of a more heterarchical form of government among the Yoruba.
Conversely, the most bureaucratized form of government emerged in ancient
Egypt, where there was no extended family. Nevertheless, the growing military
power of kings among the Aztec and the Mesopotamians made it possible for
them to construct modest bureaucracies that operated without sharing power
with extended families or endogamous landowning groups. The Inka kings,
while favouring their close relatives for high ofﬁces, selected ofﬁcials from
among the various levels of the hereditary nobility without primary reference
to speciﬁc panaqa or ayllu membership. In these societies extended families,
while socially important, played a political role that was more modest than in
China or among the Yoruba. It is therefore impossible to determine whether
large extended families encouraged the development of delegational or het-
erarchical forms of administration or more centralized and bureaucratized
forms of government promoted the breakup of large extended families. While
in Mesopotamia the declining importance of large extended families appears
to have accompanied the growth of royal power, it is not clear that there was
a direct connection between these two trends or, if there was one, which was
cause and which was effect.
In all early civilizations women appear to have been signiﬁcantly disad-
vantaged by comparison with men. This disadvantage reﬂects, at least partly,
a pervasive tendency to model family relations on those that characterized
the state. Families were conceptualized as miniature kingdoms in which the
father had the same relation to his wife (or wives), children, and other depen-
dents that a monarch had to his subjects. Since all early civilizations had male
heads of state and female ones were regarded as exceptional or not allowed,
this arrangement either encouraged the development of patriarchal relations
within families or reinforced existing ones. While women had played important
decision-making roles in many small-scale societies, men had generally acted
as spokespeople in conducting public business. This form of behaviour may
have been related to strategies that sought to protect the reproductive capacity
of small groups by exposing males rather than females to greater risk of loss of
life in encounters with potentially hostile neighbouring groups. The exposure
of males to greater danger is found not only in human hunter-gatherer societies

272
Sociopolitical Organization
but also among higher non-human primates (DeVore and Hall 1965). As hu-
man societies grew more complex, the increasing regulatory importance of
the public domain may have enhanced the political role traditionally played by
men and, along with it, their authority to make decisions relating to all aspects
of public life. Through status emulation, such patriarchal attitudes inﬂuenced
the nuclear and extended family. While suggesting why patriarchal tendencies
were nearly universal in early civilizations, this explanation does not imply that
these attitudes were in any fashion biologically innate.
In everyday life the position of women varied considerably from one early
civilization to another. In general, Yoruba and ancient Egyptian women pos-
sessed more freedoms and explicit legal rights than did women in other early
civilizations. They did not, however, have an equal role with men in the po-
litical and administrative spheres, and married women were subordinated to
their husbands in many ways. Inka farm women played a signiﬁcant role in
religious activities, and their special role in growing crops was symbolically ac-
knowledged. Women in the Valley of Mexico could move about communities
freely and engage in local trade, but their participation in political and ad-
ministrative activities was extremely limited by comparison with that of men.
Mesopotamian women were even more limited in their freedom to move about
and manage their own affairs, and ordinary women in ancient China appear to
have been totally integrated into their husbands’ extended families. In many
early civilizations, slave women and prostitutes provided examples of the hu-
miliation and dishonour that could befall women who did not have male kin to
protect them. There is no evidence that overall the status of ordinary women
was different in city-states from what it was in territorial states, but for upper-
class women the situation was somewhat different. In territorial states royal
women appear to have played signiﬁcant roles in government, and, as mem-
bers of a small ruling group, upper-class women were viewed as suitable to
direct the activities of lower-class males as well as of subordinate females.
explaining regularities
There was considerable cross-cultural uniformity in the sociopolitical institu-
tions of early civilizations. The similar general conceptualizations of kingship,
similar class and legal systems, and the use of full-time police and soldiers to
support the upper classes recurred in every early civilization for which there
is adequate documentation. In addition, there were only two basic forms of
political organization (city-states and territorial states) and only two systems
for administering extensive territories (delegational and bureaucratic). Fur-
ther, despite variation in family organization and gender roles from one early

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
273
civilization to another, male dominance appears to have increased as a result of
the development of early civilizations. These ﬁndings do not accord with the
basic tenet of cultural relativism – that human behaviour is shaped primarily
by cultural traditions that are not constrained to any signiﬁcant degree by non-
cultural factors. They certainly do not conﬁrm the argument that universals, if
any, are insigniﬁcant (Geertz 1965).
It might be objected that the early civilizations examined in this study shared
many sociopolitical features only because these traits are the ones I employed
to assign societies to this general category. Yet the recurrent and correlated
features are too numerous and complex for this objection to carry signiﬁ-
cant weight. The societies at this level of complexity that are alleged to have
displayed radically different features are not well enough documented to be
certain that these features are not the anthropologists’ own inventions. Increas-
ing information about the Maya has made this early civilization, once believed
to be radically different from any other, closely resemble other city-state sys-
tems. The principal challenge in terms of sociopolitical features is therefore
to explain cross-cultural similarities and limited variation.
Many uniformities may reﬂect functional requirements. For societies to
grow more complex they may have to evolve speciﬁc forms of organization.
Information theory suggests that the number of decision-making nodes and of
decision-makers must increase as societies grow in scale and complexity. An in-
creasing number of nodes at any one level in turn requires the creation of more
higher-level nodes to coordinate them, which produces increasingly multilay-
ered decision-making hierarchies (van der Leeuw 1981). Such hierarchies also
require more resources to facilitate communication between levels and pro-
vide the compulsion that ensures that higher-level orders will be carried out.
For complex societies to function, decision-makers must be able to determine
courses of action for others without undue delay. This requires the setting
of strict limits on the amount of consultation and explicit personal consent
required to establish and implement public policy. Decision-making in early
civilizations was inevitably associated with what people in small-scale, egalitar-
ian societies would have regarded as unacceptably arbitrary power (Flannery
1972).
Information theory offers a functional explanation for the development of
institutionalizedsystemsofunequalpoliticalpower.Therepeatedindependent
evolution of early civilizations that possessed class systems, administrative hi-
erarchies, hierarchical legal systems, and military and police forces suggests
not only that these features corresponded to functional needs but also that hu-
man beings can repeatedly transcend the intellectual constraints of traditional
cultures to create structures that can satisfy new functional requirements.

274
Sociopolitical Organization
Neoevolutionists have argued that, because arrangements at the preceding
chiefdom level were already so similar, they facilitated the development of
cross-culturally similar institutions in early civilizations. This argument, which
reﬂects the neoevolutionist passion for unilinear change, diminishes the im-
portance of the functionalist causality which neoevolutionists also cherish. It
is also not a position that is supported by archaeological evidence, which in-
dicates considerable variation in the types of societies that gave rise to early
civilizations (Yoffee 1993).
A functionalist or adaptationist argument does not, however, explain why
in early civilizations the unity of the state was symbolically expressed by a
monarch. Nor does the presence of a king in each early civilization corre-
spond with the relativist-romanticist belief that peoples coping with similar
problems have virtually limitless speciﬁc ways of conceptualizing solutions for
these problems. It does, however, correspond with the nineteenth-century
evolutionist assumption that people at a particular level of social complex-
ity who face similar problems will tend to devise similar solutions for them.
This was a view to which Franz Boas (1963 [1911]: 154) subscribed, despite his
commitment to cultural relativism, when he drew attention to the detailed and
far-reaching cross-cultural similarities that characterized fundamental human
ideas. Varied cross-cultural similarities, especially those of a cognitive variety,
that cannot be explained simply by functional arguments suggest that certain
ways of thinking and behaving may in some manner be ‘hard-wired’ into the
human psyche even if they are not realized in the same way in societies at
different levels of complexity. This embeddedness may also explain why so-
cial scientists habitually treat many regularities in sociopolitical organization
as commonplaces, but the existence of these regularities requires explanation.
Limited variation, such as the differences between city-state systems and ter-
ritorial states, appear to reﬂect functional alternatives that correspond equally
well with human needs and perform equally as long as these two sorts of so-
cieties are not competing with each other or with any more complex societies
(Hallpike 1986: 75–76). More idiosyncratic variations in family organization
and gender roles, although still relatively limited, may partly reﬂect differing
cultural heritages from an earlier stage of development. Even these differences
seem to have been modiﬁed convergently in the context of early civilizations
as families became internally more hierarchical and patriarchal and the public
role of women was increasingly restricted.
In drawing attention to cross-cultural regularities in many major features
of sociocultural organization in early civilizations and to the limited range of
differences in other features, I am not seeking to impose undue uniformity on
the data. Kingship had a different speciﬁc meaning in every early civilization,

Sociopolitical Constants and Variables
275
as did slavery and the concept of an upper class. Yet these differences cannot
be allowed to obscure the great similarities in sociopolitical organization that
early civilizations came to share as a result of convergent development. To
ignore these similarities out of loyalty to hoary dogmas of cultural relativism or
historical particularism would be as misleading as to ignore cultural differences
in the name of unilinear evolutionism.

Economy

14 Food Production
G
ordonChilde(1928),KarlWittfogel(1938),JulianSteward(1949),and
many other social scientists believed that early civilizations originated
in river valleys located in arid or semiarid regions where, as a result of irrigation
works, rich, easily worked soils fed large rural populations, produced surpluses
that supported many full-time craft specialists, and allowed a ruling class to live
in luxury. Many Old World prehistorians continue to hold this view (Hassan
1997: 51). Yet primary civilizations evolved in many different kinds of envi-
ronments: river valleys in warm, arid regions (Egypt, Mesopotamia), tropical
forests and tropical forest-savanna borderlands (Maya, Yoruba), mountainous
valleys of different sizes, shapes, and elevations (Peru, Valley of Mexico), and
temperate rainfall zones (Shang China). Early civilizations are associated with
vast differences in temperature, rainfall, elevation, topography, soil fertility,
and microenvironmental diversity. In addition, very different assemblages of
domesticated plants and animals constituted the basis of food production in dif-
ferent parts of the world, with no signiﬁcant overlap between the Eastern and
Western Hemispheres. These domesticates, often considerably transformed
from their wild ancestors, and knowledge of how to care for them were part of
the cultural heritage from earlier phases in the development of each region.
Early civilizations are found in temperate or hot climates rather than in cold
ones (Northern China, where the average temperature in January would have
been close to the freezing point, and highland Peru were borderline cases)
and in areas with light, easily worked soils and without dense, deeply rooted
grasses. Yet not all regions with these characteristics produced early civiliza-
tions. There is no basis for theories that attribute the rise of civilization to the
inﬂuence of a single type of environment or climatic event.
Childe (1930) also maintained that the development of early civilizations
was a consequence of the invention of metallurgy and, in particular, of bronze-
working, which encouraged the manufacture of implements that permitted
279

280
Economy
more productive agriculture and the growth of cities and more hierarchical
societies. Others have argued that agriculture was impossible in tropical forests
such as those of West Africa prior to the development of iron tools. Yet agri-
cultural implements tended to remain simple in most early civilizations. The
Classic Maya and the peoples of the Valley of Mexico manufactured all their
agricultural implements from wood and stone. The Maya used stone axes and
adzes to cut down or girdle trees and simple wooden digging sticks to till the
soil and plant crops. The Aztec had a somewhat more elaborate wooden dig-
ging stick (huictli) with an enlarged base that could be pressed into the earth
with the foot and used as a spade (Donkin 1979: 6). Both lacked tools capable
of turning over soil impregnated with deeply rooted grasses. The highland
Peruvians employed agricultural implements made of wood with stone, bone,
and rarely bronze cutting edges. Their most important implement was the
chaki taklla (foot plough), a wooden digging stick with a heavy stone blade
and a ﬁrmly attached crossbar that could be pressed deeply into the soil with
a foot. These were used to turn over the shallow-rooted grasses of the Andean
highlands. All the Shang or early Zhou agricultural implements appear to have
been manufactured from wood, bone, shell, and stone, and two-pronged hand
ploughs managed by two men were used to turn over grass-covered soil. Alter-
natively, these have been interpreted as foot ploughs or digging sticks equipped
with a foot bar that two men might have employed to lever up clods of earth
(Hsu and Linduff 1988: 351).
The Yoruba, by contrast, employed an extensive array of iron implements
to till the soil, including heavy short-handled hoes and machetes with sharp
cutting edges. Yet Maya success in cultivating similar tropical forest and sa-
vanna environments far more intensively indicates that metal implements did
not provide the crucial advantage that is often attributed to them. In southern
Mesopotamia, little stone was available on the ﬂoodplain. In the Ubaid period
the Mesopotamians manufactured sickles and sometimes mullers, hammers,
and even axes from heavily ﬁred clay. The sickles had sharp, vitriﬁed cutting
edges but shattered easily, and by the start of the Early Dynastic period they
had been replaced by wooden sickles with cutting edges made of imported
ﬂint and some agricultural tools were already being made of copper. By the
Akkadian period copper sickles had become more common, and by the Ur III
period copper sickles, hoes, and axes were standard (Edens 1992: 125–26;
Pollock 1999: 85). In Egypt during the Old and Middle Kingdoms, agricul-
tural implements and all other tools used by farmers continued to be made of
stone, bone, and wood; only in the New Kingdom did metal farming imple-
ments become common (Andreu 1997: 107; David 1986: 169–70). The failure
to manufacture copper and bronze farming tools in most societies where these

