Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
585
colloquial speech (J. Allen 2000: 1–2). The royal version of Quechua spoken
by the Inka upper class differed from the Quechua that served throughout
their kingdom as a language of administration. Quechua had spread as a lingua
franca from the central coast of Peru and been used for trading and intereth-
nic communication in the central highlands long before the Inka adopted
it as their ofﬁcial language of administration. The Inka elite appear origi-
nally to have spoken a language of their own. The royal version of Quechua
that replaced this language coexisted with the Quechua used throughout the
Andean area and the parent Quechua languages that were spoken in central
coastal Peru (Gose 1993: 505; Rostworowski and Morris 1999: 807–9; Salomon
1986: 189).
A major source of the identity, self-esteem, and power of the upper classes
was possession of specialized knowledge, some of which increased their abil-
ity to organize themselves and administer society. One of the most interesting
technological innovations of early civilizations was the development of complex
systems for storing information. The structural properties of writing provide
detailed insights into the factors that produced cross-cultural similarities and
differences in a particular aspect of culture. More esoteric forms of knowl-
edge were believed to enhance the ability of upper-class people to manipulate
supernatural forces for their own beneﬁt as well as to promote the general
well-being of society. Especially elaborate knowledge of this sort included
calendrics, medicine, divination, and magic. Both administrative and esoteric
knowledge increased not only the self-conﬁdence of the upper classes but also
the respect and awe with which ordinary people regarded them.
recording systems
In the eighteenth century, writing was identiﬁed as the key feature deﬁning
civilization (Childe 1950; Gelb 1963: 221; Morgan 1907 [1877]: 12; Sjoberg
1960: 32–34, 38). Jack Goody (1986; Goody and Watt 1963) has argued, in
conformity with that view, that writing has made literate societies totally dif-
ferentfromnon-literateones,facilitatingelaboraterecord-keepingandmaking
possible the systematic development of scientiﬁc knowledge, philosophy, and
literature. Goody maintains that writing encouraged forms of thinking that are
increasingly decontextualized, more universal, and more concerned with logi-
cal coherence. He also argues that writing promoted discovery, invention, and
technological progress and facilitated the growing independence of institu-
tions from state control as well as the development of private property. Yet the
extent to which recording systems were developed or used varied considerably
from one early civilization to another. Writing as Goody deﬁnes it occurred in

586
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
only four of the early civilizations in our sample. The recording systems used
in other early civilizations varied in nature and in what they were intended to
accomplish.
The oldest and most generally accepted deﬁnition of ‘writing’ is that it is
a system which records sequences of words in durable signs. Thus a com-
petent reader who has never before encountered a particular text can read
from it the same sequence of words that its author wrote down. No writ-
ing system records every feature of actual speech (the loudness and speed
of utterances are rarely indicated), and many early forms of writing failed to
supply grammatical and phonetic elements that could easily and unambigu-
ously be inferred by the native speakers of a language. Whether or not every
morpheme (minimal meaningful semantic unit) is represented, writing, as de-
ﬁned above, is distinguished from protowriting or, more properly (since not
all ‘protowriting’ evolved into writing systems), semasiography. Semasiography
uses pictograms and ideograms to represent ideas. A pictogram is a sign that
has a speciﬁc meaning but one that may be expressed verbally in different
ways. Thus a pictogram in a list of North American Plains Indian year names
that represents the year 1876 by depicting the death of a long-haired United
States cavalry ofﬁcer could have been ‘read’ in any Plains Indian language
as ‘the year Long-Hair was killed by the Sioux’, ‘the year we defeated Gen-
eral Custer’, or ‘the year we won the Battle of the Little Bighorn’ (Nabokov
1996: 39–41). In such a recording system pictograms represent speciﬁc ob-
jects or events metonymically, by depicting some well-known aspect of them.
Ideograms are signs that arbitrarily represent speciﬁc concepts which, like pic-
tograms, can be read in any language. Examples are the Arabic numerals 1, 2,
and 3.
In semasiography more abstract concepts are sometimes represented by
rebuses, or phonetic extensions, which display an object that represents a word
that sounds similar to what is intended. Unlike pictograms and ideograms,
rebuses can normally be read only in a speciﬁc language. Examples in English
are representing the pronoun ‘I’ by drawing an eye or the preﬁx ‘be-’ by drawing
a bee. The most rudimentary applications of rebuses are to record personal or
place names that have literal meanings, such as ‘Red Cloud’ and ‘Big Bear’.
Semasiography can be used to record limited and isolated sets of concepts
such as personal names, toponyms, types of goods, or calendar dates and to
suggest sequences of events in mnemonic form. It cannot, however, record
consecutive speech, only certain general concepts and words belonging to
certain speciﬁc semantic categories. As such limited recording systems evolve
in the direction of representing speech, they typically ﬁrst indicate sequences
of nouns and verbs, then begin to specify adjectives, adverbs, conjunctions,

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
587
and prepositions, and ﬁnally note tense markers and other strictly grammatical
morphemes (Hanks 1989: 18; Sampson 1985: 49–50).
In recent years some Mesoamericanists have sought to have complex high-
land Mexican forms of semasiography, including those found in the Valley of
Mexico, accepted as writing systems. They argue that the term ‘writing’ should
be extended to cover any form of recording that represents some speciﬁc words
as well as ideas (Boone and Mignolo 1994; Marcus 1992a; M. Smith 1973).
In two early civilizations, Egypt and Mesopotamia, it is now possible to trace
the transformation of semasiography into writing. Yet, while acknowledging
that there can be a continuum between complex semasiography and writing
which makes the boundary separating them arbitrary, conﬂating the two prac-
tices fails to recognize their fundamental and irreducible differences. Writing
and semasiography can more proﬁtably be treated as two different types of
recording systems rather than as different types of writing.
Early recording systems served at least three different functions. One func-
tion was commemorating kings and their deeds. This sort of recording ﬂour-
ished in Egypt in the late Predynastic period, most notably on elaborate stone
maces and palettes. These objects, produced for the royal court and decorated
with scenes of royal activity, bore signs that speciﬁed the names of rulers, top-
onyms, and the names and titles of ofﬁcials. They marked the beginning of a
long tradition of labelled representations of Egyptian monarchs and ofﬁcials
(Davis 1992). Labelled representations of kings also provide a large part of the
surviving corpus of Maya inscriptions.
The second major function was administrative. This is attested in
Mesopotamian temple complexes beginning as early as the second half of the
fourth millennium. Over time such records developed into an elaborate corpus
of temple, palace, and eventually personal records associated with the receipt
and ownership of goods, the sale of land, houses, slaves, and other property,
loans and other commercial agreements, royal decrees and regulations relat-
ing to commerce, and legal proceedings concerning economic matters. At a
very early period sign lists were compiled for training Mesopotamian recorders
that helped to standardize and ensure mutual comprehensibility of the records
produced by different scribes (Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993; Postgate
1992: 66–68). Early Egyptian records on papyrus have been lost, but surviving
wood, bone, and ivory labels from the Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods
identify the owners, contents, and places of origin of jars, boxes, and bolts of
cloth (T. Wilkinson 1999: 41–42).
Finally, early recording systems were used for religious purposes. In China
theoldestsurvivingtextsaretheoracle-boneinscriptions,whichwererelatedto
divination. The Shang also appear to have regarded burning messages written

588
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
on strips of bamboo as an effective way to communicate with their ancestors
andthegods(Creel1937:161–62;1938:38).InMesopotamia,toensurethatno
mistakes were made in rituals, prayers were recorded in written form already
by the Early Dynastic period, while in Egypt written petitions for ensuring the
provisioning of the dead appeared early in the Old Kingdom. The enduring
role played by lector priests in Egypt suggests that literacy was as important
for ensuring the correct performance of rituals in that country as it was in
Mesopotamia (Postgate, Wang, and Wilkinson 1995).
Papyrus scrolls, which existed in Egypt as early as the First Dynasty, and
bamboo strips, which are known to have been used in Shang China, endured
less well than Mesopotamian clay tablets. Mesoamerican inscriptions on stone
and pottery have survived better than have Mesoamerican parchment and
bark-cloth books. Yet, despite the problems posed by the unequal survival
of evidence, what has endured appears to reﬂect real differences in the uses
that were made of recording systems by the various early civilizations. No
one function, such as administration, seems to have been everywhere more
important than any other in spurring the initial development of recording
systems. Writing developed in different institutional milieus, such as temples
and palaces, and for the most part continued to be employed for different
purposes in such milieus. Only in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and China does writing
appear gradually to have come to be used for private purposes by literate
individuals or those who could afford to employ professional scribes to read
and write for them.
Use of semasiography began in Mesopotamia about 3400 b.c., during the
Uruk IV period. The oldest known clay tablets have been found in temple
contexts at Uruk (Fig. 25.1). These early recording devices may have re-
placed or developed out of a still earlier recording system that used clay to-
kens (Schmandt-Besserat 1992), although the relationship between these two
systems is problematical (Yoffee 1995: 285–86). Much later, Mesopotamian
scribes claimed that writing had been invented (presumably in a fully devel-
oped state) by Enmerkar, a priest-king of early Uruk, so that messages could
be transmitted more accurately (Kramer 1981: 22–23; Postgate 1992: 56). Yet
early texts made no attempt to record speech. They itemized different types of
goods, noting quantities and possibly owners’ marks in no standardized order.
It was not until around 2900 b.c. that homophony began to play a signiﬁ-
cant role in expanding the range of concepts that could be recorded (Bott´ero
1992: 80). Only later, in the Early Dynastic period, were efforts made to
record speech. Yet, while the signs in these earliest examples of true writ-
ing were ordered in accordance with Sumerian grammar, their main purpose
seems to have remained mnemonic. Grammatical elements that were deemed

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
589
a
b
25.1. Early recording in Mesopotamia and Egypt: (a) a clay ledger tablet from Uruk, Uruk IV
period – the obverse uses signs to record names and numbers, the reverse records a total of
54 cattle; (b) small labels from Tomb U-j at Abydos, Egypt, dated 3250 b.c. – the round holes
were bored for attachment to goods; these labels record place names as well as quantities and
appear to employ signs as phonograms as well as logograms. Sources: (a) after Gelb 1963: 64;
(b)afterK.A.Bard(ed.),EncyclopediaoftheArchaeologyofAncientEgypt(London,1999),111.
unnecessary or that native speakers of Sumerian could have supplied unam-
biguously from context were omitted. These included many preﬁxes and suf-
ﬁxes that indicated tense, person, case, number, and mood. A fully developed
writing of the Sumerian language, which was not provided until the Ur III
period, was probably devised to satisfy the needs of Akkadian-speakers at a
time when Sumerian was ceasing to be a spoken language (Bott´ero 1992: 83–
85; Huot 1989: 52–55; Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993; Postgate 1992:
54–66). From the beginning, Mesopotamian writing was done primarily on
clay tablets, which only occasionally were baked to harden them for long-term

590
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Word
Meaning
Original
Form
Rotated 90˚ 
ca 3000 B.C.
Early
Dynastic
2500 B.C.
First
Millennium
B.C.
SAG
KU(A)
KA
mouth
head
fish
GUD
ox
SE
v
grain
orchard
APIN
plough
DU
foot, leg
SAR
v
25.2. Development of Mesopotamian signs from the Uruk IV period to the ﬁrst millennium
b.c., showing how signs were altered to improve them for writing on clay tablets and enhance
their clarity. Sources: after Gelb 1963: 70, and Cooper 1996: 39.
preservation. At ﬁrst, signs were drawn on clay; later they were composed
entirely of wedge-shaped marks impressed with a stylus. The directions and
lengths of these marks were increasingly standardized, making the signs ever
more abstract (Fig. 25.2).
The semasiographic recording of goods, place-names, and personal names is
ﬁrst evidenced in southern Egypt in connection with the growing royal power
that accompanied the gradual uniﬁcation of Egypt. Small tags from Tomb
U-j at Abydos, which is dated about 3250 b.c., appear to be inscribed with
phonetic signs as well as word signs (Davies and Friedman 1998: 35–38). Thus,
when it is ﬁrst attested, Egyptian semasiography was probably more advanced
in its techniques for representing spoken words than was its Mesopotamian
counterpart. Semasiography continued to be used by royal ofﬁcials during
Early Dynastic times to record personal names, toponyms, dates, the contents
of containers, and, in an increasingly complex mnemonic fashion, the events
of particular years. Continuous speech began to be recorded only in the late

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
591
Second or early Third Dynasties (Baines 1983). Around that time the signs
being used were also standardized and their number greatly reduced. Even
then, because Egyptian writing did not specify vowels, precise grammatical
forms and the pronunciation of words had to be inferred by the reader. This
arrangement persisted throughout Egyptian history.
Beginning in the Old Kingdom the Egyptians used a pictorial, or hiero-
glyphic, form of writing for religious texts and monumental display. Texts in
this script were carved on stone and wood or drawn with a brush on papyrus.
Hieratic, a cursive version of hieroglyphic, was used for administrative pur-
poses and normally written on papyrus (Fig. 25.3). Although, because it is not
pictorial, modern scholars ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to master, hieratic was used by
many scribes who never learned to write hieroglyphs. While royal and religious
texts appear to have been more frequent in relation to administrative texts in
Egypt than in Mesopotamia, the bulk of the texts produced in both civilizations
was probably administrative. The administrative records produced by state-
controlled institutions were already highly developed in Egypt during the Old
Kingdom. Writing appears to have been restricted to the ruling and adminis-
trative classes during the Old and Middle Kingdoms (Baines 1983; Gardiner
1950: 6–10).
Despite a tendency to ascribe great antiquity and sometimes divine origin
to speciﬁc texts in order to enhance their importance, literary, religious, and
professional writings appeared later than administrative, royal, and cultic texts.
In Egypt, a corpus of didactic wisdom, which itemized the sorts of behaviour
required to be a successful ofﬁcial, and the Pyramid Texts and some other ritual
compositions are all the ‘literary’ works that survive from as late as the Fifth
Dynasty. Some short narrative passages occur in royal and funerary inscriptions
from the Fourth Dynasty, but even terse autobiographies only start to appear in
funerary contexts in the late Old Kingdom (Lichtheim 1973). Literary works,
political manifestos of rulers, and medical papyri were ﬁrst composed in Egypt
during the First Intermediate Period and the Middle Kingdom. Many of these
writings were used for centuries as school texts and for this reason survive in
multiple copies. No Egyptian composition was longer than a modern short
story (Lichtheim 1973; 1976; Williams 1964).
Mesopotamian scribes recorded numerous stories, epic poems, myths,
hymns, proverbs, disputations, and laments in late Sumerian times, but the
stories and epic poems were not worked into larger literary compositions
such as the Enuma Elish until the second millennium b.c. Beginning in Early
Dynastic times, Mesopotamian royal inscriptions, including proclamations and
records of military and administrative actions, were recorded on stone stelae.
In both Egypt and Mesopotamia administrative accounts, because of their

592
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
593
ledger-like organization, retained many of the characteristics of semasiogra-
phy long after the spoken word was routinely being recorded in other genres
(Kramer 1963: 168–226).
In China inscribed oracle bones from Shang and Zhou royal sites provide the
only signiﬁcant corpus of texts surviving from prior to 1100 b.c. Inscriptions
are attested only after 1200 b.c., when Anyang became a Shang royal centre.
There is no archaeological record of the early development of Chinese writing
orofsemasiographyintheimmediatelyprecedingErligangandErlitouperiods
(Boltz 1999). Graphs etched on pottery of the Dawenkou culture of Shandong,
which dates approximately 2500 to 2000 b.c., may mark an early stage in
the development of the Chinese recording system. While limited evidence of
writingfordivinatorypurposeshasbeenfoundatothersites(Chˆeng1960:180),
it is not known to what extent writing was limited to royal court circles during
the Shang period. The Chinese later claimed that, before the development
of writing, they had kept records on knotted cords (Creel 1938: 33), as did
the Inka and some African societies (Lagercrantz 1968). The late Shang also
made ‘books’ (che) of bamboo strips bound together with strings, but none of
these have survived. The Zhou writing system, which is ﬁrst attested in the
late Shang period, is obviously of Shang origin. Oracle texts found at the two
courts differ mainly in the size of characters and their dating systems (Hsu and
Linduff 1988: 46–47).
In the earliest known examples of the Chinese script, sentences were al-
ready being written in the same subject-verb-object order used in modern
spoken Chinese. Pronouns and prepositions were also being indicated. The
longest known Shang oracle-bone inscriptions contain about 160 characters,
but texts on bronze vessels, which identify individuals and clans, rarely con-
sist of more than a few characters (Boltz 1986; 1994). Songs, speeches, and
25.3. Formal characteristics of writing systems in early civilizations: (a) portion of offering
formula carved in hieroglyphs on limestone block from an Old Kingdom tomb; (b) Egyptian
literary hieratic of Dynasty XII; (c) Akkadian inscription carved on stone; (d) hand copy of Ur III
bookkeeping entries on a small clay tablet; (e) Western Zhou inscription cast on a bronze vessel;
(f) Shang oracle-bone inscription carved on the shoulder blade of an ox; (g) Maya hieroglyphs
carved on Stela A from Copan; (h) painted Maya glyphs from the Dresden Codex. Sources:
(a) from H. Junker, Giza (Vienna, 1922–1955); (b) from A. Gardiner 1950, pl. 2; (c) from
J. Friedrich, Extinct Languages (New York, 1957), 36; (d) from C. E. Keiser, Neo-Sumerian
Account Texts from Drehem: Babylonian Inscriptions in the Collection of James B. Nies (New
Haven, 1971), document 448; (e) after K. Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 2nd ed.
(New Haven, 1968), 188; (f) from Lo Chen-yu, Yin-hsu, Shu-ch’i Ching-hua (Peking, 1914);
(g) from S. G. Morley, An Introduction to the Study of Maya Hieroglyphs (Washington, D.C.,
1915), p. 166; (h) from E. W. F¨orstemann, Die Maya-Handschrift der K¨oniglichen Bibliothek
zu Dresden (Berlin, 1962), p. 58.

594
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
historical records preserved in the traditional Chinese literary canon that are
ascribed to the Shang period have been demonstrated on linguistic grounds
to have been composed during the Western Zhou period. They were either
written by Zhou propagandists or created by the Song principality, which was
ruled by descendants of the Shang kings (Creel 1938: 50).
It is not clear what non-oracular uses were made of writing in Shang
times. Oracle-bone inscriptions incorporate detailed calendars for sacriﬁces
and annal-like accounts of military expeditions and other events, but there is
no direct evidence for the use of writing except by royal ofﬁcials for divinatory
and display purposes. Early Western Zhou bronze vessels were inscribed with
much longer texts that were often of a historical or ritual nature. Yet even these
texts do not appear to have precisely represented the spoken language of that
period. Inscriptions are extremely terse and lack the connectives expected in
spoken Chinese (Creel 1938: 24).
Chinese writing was done with brush and ink on bamboo slips, bone, and
cloth, but on oracle bones texts were also engraved. Characters retained their
pictographic quality, and many can easily be recognized as representations
of the objects with which they were associated either semantically or pho-
netically. Most characters became less representational and the brush strokes
which composed them more standardized over time. Characters cast on Shang
bronzes tended to be less schematized and simpliﬁed than were those engraved
on oracle bones (Chˆeng 1960: 177–94; Creel 1938: 24–47; Hsu and Linduff
1988: 46–49).
The Classic Maya were also able to record speech. Few texts survive except
ones carved on stone monuments, which are mainly records of kings and
dynastic histories, together with short labels painted on fancy pottery. The
Classic Maya also produced books, written on bark cloth or parchment. No
book survives, however, from the Classic period in legible condition, and the
few later ones that have been preserved deal exclusively with divination. It
is unknown whether the Classic Maya used writing to record administrative
data, historical chronicles, or religious texts.
The Maya script, which is abundantly attested only after a.d. 250, appears to
have evolved from the same Olmecoid recording system (1100–400 b.c.) that
gave rise to complex semasiography in highland Mexico (Justeson 1986). Maya
inscriptions consisting of block glyphs with minimal syntactical transparency
and syllabic content appear in the archaeological record between a.d. 1 and
a.d. 150. Shortly after, the addition of pronouns makes it clear that the Mayan
language was being represented. Syllabograms were used by the beginning
of the Early Classic period, around a.d. 250. Phoneticism, the representa-
tion of grammatical particles, and the optional substitution of syllabograms for

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
595
logograms increased after that time. After a.d. 650 witnessed the creation of
more syllabic signs that produced still greater phonetic clarity (Hanks 1989: 18;
Houston 2001; Justeson 1989: 29; Justeson, Norman, and Hammond 1988).
Maya glyphs were highly calligraphic, suggesting a painterly origin. Individual
signs were elaborate. They were arranged in square blocks consisting of princi-
pal glyphs accompanied by phonetic complements and associated grammatical
particles. The same forms of signs were carved on stone as were drawn with a
brush on pottery and books. There is no evidence that the forms of signs were
simpliﬁed over time (Coe 1992; Coe and Kerr 1998; Houston 2001).
The other early civilizations did not develop writing, and their recording
systems were highly idiosyncratic. The Yoruba had no indigenous recording
systems. In neighbouring Dahomey, however, numerical records were kept
by storing pebbles in boxes and bags (Dalton 1975: 100). These served as
simple mnemonic devices, with those in charge having to remember to what
the various quantities referred. The Inka kept accounts on sets of knotted
cords (khipu). Different colours and thicknesses of strings denoted different
goods, while various-sized knots represented different quantities in decimal
order. Accountants (khipukamayuq) kept detailed records of goods entering
and leaving government storehouses and could report precisely what these
storehouses contained at any time. Sometimes two or more accountants were
responsible for keeping track of the same information so that higher ofﬁcials
could compare their accounts. It is unclear to what extent particular colours
and types of cords were used to record speciﬁc types of information or each
record-keeper had to remember individually what the various strings on his
khipus represented. Experts therefore disagree whether khipus were purely
mnemonic devices or to some extent ideographic. It has been suggested that
information relevant to the long-term management of storehouses could have
been recorded on khipus, but it has not been demonstrated that this was done.
Such recording would have required ways of indicating to what periods various
information applied. No one suggests that memory did not play an important
role in providing semantic interpretations of khipus. Calculations relating to
the numerical information stored on khipus were done by manipulating sets
of stones (Ascher and Ascher 1981; Quilter and Urton 2001; Urton 1998).
King Pachakutiq is said to have had painted boards representing his ofﬁcial
version of Inka history placed in the Qorikancha (Kendall 1973: 45). These
were presumably mnemonic devices of a pictographic or even purely pictorial
nature. There is no evidence that the Inka used rebuses as phonetic indicators
to suggest personal names and toponyms.
In the Valley of Mexico a complex form of semasiography was employed.
Books (amatl) were made of deerskin parchment or, more often, of paper

596
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
manufactured from the native wild ﬁg tree or from maguey ﬁbre, sized with a
thin coating of white lime. The pages of these books were folded accordion-
wise. In these books or on single sheets of paper were recorded ritual, di-
vinatory, calendrical, astronomical, historical, and genealogical information,
maps showing state boundaries, records of landholding, laws, tribute lists,
and itineraries for travellers. Such writings were stored in amoxcalli (book
houses) in palaces and temple complexes. The art of recording such informa-
tion was said to have been introduced into the Valley of Mexico by Mixtec
scribes (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 58; Marcus 1992a: 53).
Accounts and tribute lists consisted mainly of drawings of different sorts of
goods, characterized by both shape and colour, accompanied by conventional
numbers. The rebus principle was used to suggest the names of people and
places. On the Tizoc Stone, dating from the 1480s, the town of Tochpan was
represented by a rabbit (tochtli) and Matlatzinco by a mat (matatl). There
were, however, almost no secondary signs indicating locatives or diminutives.
It has been suggested that after 1480 more use was made of phonetics to
record proper names, but there is no evidence that phonetic signs were used
to record abstract concepts or speech prior to the arrival of the Spanish. His-
torical information was recorded in the form of standardized representations
of various kinds of events, such as migrations of peoples and families and the
births, marriages, military exploits, and deaths of important people. These rep-
resentations were accompanied by standardized date signs, while the names
of people and places were suggested by rebuses. History was referred to both
as ihtoloca (what is said about something) and xiuhamatl (written records)
(Le´on-Portilla 1992: 39).
In Egypt and Mesopotamia, where the development of writing is now rea-
sonably well documented, it took between six hundred and eight hundred
years for complex semasiography to evolve into a script that was well equipped
to record language. In early civilizations that had writing systems, only a tiny
fractionofthepopulationwasliterate,andmostofthesewererulersandadmin-
istrators. Shulgi, an Ur III king, boasted that he could write, which suggests
that in Mesopotamia not all rulers were literate (Postgate 1992: 69). While
literacy was overwhelmingly a male prerogative, there were female scribes
in Old Kingdom Egypt. In Mesopotamia a few women belonging to the up-
per classes could write, including Enheduana, a daughter of Sargon I, whose
temple hymns became part of the literary canon (Postgate 1992: 26).
In Mesopotamia, a basic literacy seems to have been more widespread than
in any other early civilization. There, at least by the Old Babylonian period,
many merchants were literate, and writing facilitated more elaborate forms of
economic transactions than elsewhere (Postgate 1992: 69). Literate Egyptians

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
597
used their ability to read and write to transact personal business, but literacy
appears to have been more closely tied to government and temple administra-
tion than it was in Mesopotamia. Those who could not read or write depended
on scribes to record and transmit information for them. In Shang China and
among the Classic Maya there is no evidence that writing extended beyond
royal courts and state administration, although this may reﬂect the limitations
of current sources of information. In Egypt, China, and among the Maya, be-
cause of the pictorial aspects of scripts, some non-literate people may have
recognized the symbols representing the names of their city, major gods, or
the reigning king. Such knowledge, however, did not constitute or even ap-
proximate literacy.
Historical records began as brief accounts of events incorporated into royal
annals, monumental royal inscriptions, and funerary texts. Such records often
contained important elements of political propaganda (Marcus 1992a). The
systematic destruction and self-serving revision of historical records were car-
ried out by the Aztec king Ahuitzotl as part of his political centralization of
the Aztec kingdom (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 100). Early Zhou rulers may have de-
stroyed the ofﬁcial records of their Shang predecessors (Creel 1938: 1–50).
Yet, while the accumulation of historical records eventually permitted a more
systematic understanding of the past in some early civilizations, no literature
developed in early civilizations that resembled the detailed studies of human
history, the works of abstract philosophy, or the systematic analyses of the natu-
ral world that characterized scholarship in the Classical civilizations of Greece
and Italy and in China beginning in the late Zhou period. Writing in the early
civilizations did not produce the intellectual transformation that Goody (1986)
associates with it.
There is also no evidence that the political integration of the Inka kingdom,
which lacked writing, was any less effective than that of ancient Egypt or
Shang China, despite the importance that these two kingdoms attached to
writing as an instrument of bureaucratic control. The political systems of the
Yoruba city-states, which lacked any form of writing or semasiography, were
in no way inferior to those of Late Aztec city-states, which had a complex
form of semasiography, or those of Mesopotamia, which had a fully developed
script. A well-developed script appears to have provided a signiﬁcant advantage
only for ﬁnancial transactions in Mesopotamia and perhaps for calendrical and
astronomical studies among the Maya. Writing continued to play signiﬁcantly
different roles in different early civilizations and was not a precondition for
early civilizations to evolve and function. It is no longer warranted to claim
that, because the Inka and the Yoruba were unable to record speech, their
cultures were less developed than was that of the Old Kingdom Egyptians.

598
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
Nor can it be claimed that the Classic Maya, who had a fully developed script,
were more advanced than the Aztec, who did not.
The writing systems of early civilizations display extraordinary similarities in
their developmental patterns and basic structure. All of them were constructed
on the same general principles, although no two were structurally identical.
All the scripts associated with early civilizations were of a logophonic variety
and used from several hundred to several thousand signs.
No fully developed writing system can employ a different sign (logogram) to
representeachwordormorphemewithoutsomekindofciphering,whichtakes
the form of supplying phonetic elements that help to link the script to the spo-
ken language. Therefore all the scripts associated with early civilizations were a
mixture of logograms (word or morpheme signs), sound signs, and sometimes
taxograms (determinatives). Taxograms do not represent speech but clarify the
reading of logograms by assigning them to particular semantic classes. Such
scripts evolved by semantically extending the logograms for items that were
easy to depict to represent more abstract concepts. Thus the Egyptians used
a circle, which represented r (sun), to write hrw (day), while the Shang used
the sign for kou (mouth) to write ming (to call). In addition, logograms were
extended phonetically to represent homonyms or near homonyms. Thus the
Egyptian sign for ‘basket’ (nbt) was also used to represent nb (lord) and nb
(all), while the Shang used a single sign to write wang (king) and wang (to go
to town). Resulting ambiguities could be resolved by adding a phonetic com-
plement to indicate the pronunciation of a logogram or a taxogram to indicate
the semantic class to which a word sign belonged (Boltz 1994: 12–13).
The writing systems of early civilizations varied, however, in the manner
by which sounds were indicated. The Sumerian script was logosyllabic. Logo-
grams, many of which were derived from earlier pictograms, were used to
write the predominantly monosyllabic roots, or unbound morphemes, of the
language. Unbound morphemes included nouns, verbs, and adjectives. Syl-
labic signs, which were easily derived from monosyllabic root words, were
used to write preﬁxes and sufﬁxes and to provide phonetic complements that
clariﬁed the readings of logograms. Syllabic signs took the forms CV (conso-
nant + vowel), V, VC, and CVC (or CV + VC). By 2500 b.c., Sumerian was
written using several hundred logograms, one hundred to one hundred and
ﬁfty syllabograms, and a few taxograms. As a result of increasing systemati-
zation, the total number of signs being used declined from more than one
thousand in 3000 b.c. to approximately three hundred around 2400 b.c.
Old Akkadian began to be written at the time when Mesopotamian sema-
siography was being perfected to record the Sumerian language. Akkadian
was a Semitic language, which meant that roots composed of one to three

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
599
consonants expressed semantic meanings while grammatical relations were
indicated by changes in interconsonantal vowels and by preﬁxes and sufﬁxes.
The numerous sound changes that this produced within words favoured the de-
velopment of syllabic writing (Postgate 1992: 65). While Sumerian cuneiform
remained heavily logographic, in Akkadian almost any word could be written
phonographically or logographically according to the preferences of individ-
ual scribes. In discursive texts, logography rarely exceeded 15 percent. Be-
cause Sumerian signs were used to write Akkadian words, relations between
sounds and signs grew increasingly complex as Akkadian-derived sound values
were added to but did not systematically replace existing Sumerian readings
of phonograms. This made taxograms more important for specifying correct
readings. Yet, at most periods, scribes used only two hundred to three hundred
signs to write Akkadian, although a scholar had to be familiar with both the
syllabic and logographic values of approximately six hundred signs in order
to read a wider corpus of texts (Cooper 1996: 45–57; Nissen, Damerow, and
Englund 1993: 117–18; Sampson 1985: 47–56).
The Maya script, like the Mesopotamian ones, was logosyllabic. It had ap-
proximately 800 signs, but only about 200 to 300 were actively employed at any
one time. The Maya used a large number of logograms to write nouns, verbs,
and other unbound morphemes and a relatively compact syllabary of CV com-
binations to write afﬁxes, clarify the meaning of multivocalic logograms, and
sometimes replace logograms. The word pakal (shield), which was the name
(or part of the name) of a seventh-century king of Palenque, could be written
with a single logogram (a shield), a logogram with phonetic complements, or a
set of three syllabograms. The Maya script does not appear to have employed
any taxograms. About 150 of its signs had syllabic functions (Coe 1992: 262–63;
Justeson 1989).
Ancient Egyptian was an Afroasiatic language and therefore historically re-
lated to Akkadian. It too had roots, usually made up of two or three conso-
nants, which supplied semantic meanings, while grammatical relations were
indicated by preﬁxes, sufﬁxes, and intervocalic vowels, as well as by syntax.
Unlike the Akkadian script, however, Egyptian writing was based on the prin-
ciple that, whenever it was possible for a native speaker to infer the correct
vowels and other grammatical elements, only the basic consonants were writ-
ten. Hence ancient Egyptian writing developed not as a logosyllabary but
as a logoconsonantary composed of logograms, consonant signs, and taxo-
grams. There were twenty-ﬁve uniliteral signs representing single consonants,
about eighty biliteral signs representing two successive consonants, and some
seventy triliteral signs representing three successive consonants, all without the
intervening vowels. Many of these phonograms were derived from logograms

600
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
for words containing one to three consonants. Egyptian scribes made extensive
use of consonant signs to supply, where necessary, phonetic complements that
designated the precise word to which a logogram referred. Taxograms were
employed to distinguish the meaning of homonyms or to identify categories
of words, including personal names (distinguished by gender). Taxograms
were also used to separate words. Throughout most of Egyptian history about
seven hundred signs were used at any one time (J. Allen 2000: 1–31; Ritner
1996).
The Chinese script is often described as purely logographic because it
provides a separate sign or character for each word (morpheme). In the Late
Shang period, when the script is ﬁrst attested, the vast majority of known signs,
which total about one thousand, were unit characters representing single mor-
phemes, often in pictorial form. Because most words in Early Chinese were
monosyllabic, there were no characters without semantic meaning. Even then,
however, as characters underwent either phonetic or semantic extension in an
effort to write words that had more abstract meanings, it became necessary to
supply clues to either their pronunciation or their meaning in order to maintain
intelligibility. This was done by combining two unit signs to create compound
characters, one segment of which provided a clue to the pronunciation while
the other suggested the meaning.
Later, in the Han Dynasty, a tendency to use alternative homophonic signs
(ignoring tone) to write the same word – a movement in the direction of syl-
labic writing – was arrested by imposing semantic classiﬁers on all characters
to ensure that they remained logographic. Gradually the semantic classify-
ing element (or radical) came to be written on the left side of the character
and the phonetic indicator on the right. This procedure ensured that every
homonym was represented by a different sign. Despite this triumph of logo-
graphy, 66 percent of the characters used to write modern Mandarin are de-
scribed as ‘functionally syllabograms’ and 99 percent offer some phonetic spec-
iﬁcation for their readings. Thus from Shang times on, Chinese writing has
been a logosyllabic script disguised as a logographic one. Although ninety-ﬁve
hundred characters were included in a Chinese language lexicon by a.d. 100
and ﬁfty thousand characters are listed in modern dictionaries, twenty-four
hundred characters sufﬁce to write 99 percent of the words used (Boltz 1986;
1994; 1999; Sampson 1985: 145–81; Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 52).
There is general agreement, based on their idiosyncratic formal and struc-
tural properties, that the writing systems of Mesopotamia, China, and the Maya
originated independently of one another. Although it has been argued that the
development of complex semasiography in Upper Egypt was stimulated by
knowledge of the recording system used in Mesopotamia (Diringer 1962: 47;

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
601
A. Spencer 1993: 61–62), not only the signs but also the general principles
developed for representing sounds in the two scripts were completely dif-
ferent. Moreover, when it is ﬁrst attested, Egyptian semasiography appears to
have been more advanced in its techniques for representing sounds than its
Mesopotamian counterpart (Davies and Friedman 1998: 35–38). Each of the
four writing systems, then, appears to have developed independently of the
other three. These are the only ‘pristine’ writing systems associated with early
civilizations that are well documented and reasonably well understood.
That all four scripts were logographic in nature suggests that in the devel-
opment of early writing systems the representation of words everywhere had
cognitive priority over the representation of sounds. Yet it also appears that a
script based on the representation of words alone would have been too cum-
bersome to be workable; users would not have been able to remember so many
different signs. Hence all these developing scripts had to combine word signs
(logograms) and sound signs (phonograms) to represent sequences of spoken
words (DeFrancis 1989: 58; Hill 1967; Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 53). Yet
early scripts created sound signs in different ways. The Mesopotamian and
Maya scripts both utilized syllabograms, although the Maya had a much more
regular syllabary than the Mesopotamians (Trigger 1998b). Ancient Egyptian
was consonantal, and Chinese was logographic in the sense that each sign re-
tained its own semantic value, although indications of sound values were built
into many characters. All four writing systems had a large number of signs by
comparison with later writing systems based solely on the representation of
syllables (both syllabaries and South Asian–style alphasyllabaries [abugidas])
or phonemes (both alphabets and Semitic consonantaries [abjads]) (Daniels
1996a: 4; Trigger 1998b). The Sumerian and Maya scripts actively used
three hundred to eight hundred signs, ancient Egyptian about seven hundred,
and Shang Chinese over one thousand. While the number of signs diminished
as the Sumerian and Egyptian scripts became more standardized, the number
of Chinese characters continued to increase.
The signs that composed the Mesopotamian and Chinese writing systems
acquired increasingly abstract forms over time. In Mesopotamia this was re-
lated to signs’ ceasing to be drawn on clay and instead being impressed with
a stylus, a change that increased the speed of writing. Abstraction was also in-
creased when sign columns on clay tablets were rotated ninety degrees so they
could be written horizontally from left to right rather than vertically. This shift,
which made writing physically easier, occurred about the middle of the third
millennium, although on stone stelae vertical columns continued to be carved
until much later (Postgate 1992: 63–64). Chinese signs were conventionalized
to accord with an increasingly standardized set of brush strokes.

602
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Mesopotamian and the Maya scripts each had a single form. The
Chinese employed a single script, which had two or more calligraphic ver-
sions of varying degrees of formality. The Egyptians quickly developed a highly
abstract, hieratic version of their script for everyday use but maintained the
elaborate pictorial or hieroglyphic version for display and religious purposes.
In all early civilizations aesthetic considerations played a signiﬁcant role in the
development of scripts.
Once established, logophonic scripts persisted over long periods (Gelb 1963:
165). There is no example of such a script’s ever evolving directly into a pre-
dominantly phonographic one. On the contrary, the number of signs used for
Egyptian hieroglyphic writing increased from about seven hundred to more
than ﬁve thousand in the Greco-Roman period (332 b.c.–a.d. 400), prior to
the script’s being replaced by a slightly modiﬁed version of the Greek alphabet
(Ritner 1996: 74). This elaboration reﬂected the increasingly esoteric nature
of traditional Egyptian religion. Reversing early trends toward phonography,
the use of logographs also increased in Babylonian cuneiform during the late
second and ﬁrst millennia b.c. until logograms were being used to write over
85 percent of words in divinatory, astrological, and other technical records
(Cooper 1996: 53). In the seventh and sixth centuries b.c., the Babylonian
language, with its cuneiform script, was superseded as the lingua franca of the
Middle East by the Aramaic language, with its twenty-two-letter consonantary,
although a few conservative priests and scholars continued to use Babylonian
cuneiform into the ﬁrst century a.d.
The major shifts towards more phonographic writing occurred when scripts
were adopted by foreign peoples, who were not constrained by ﬁrmly es-
tablished cultural traditions of literacy and by pedagogical and professional
interests that were tied to an existing script (Gelb 1963: 165). Increased pho-
neticization occurred when the early Sumerian writing system was adapted to
write Akkadian. In this case, however, the cultural milieu remained the same,
and the beneﬁts of increased phoneticism were largely offset by the increasing
multivalencyofsyllabogramsasAkkadiansoundvalueswereaddedtosignsthat
already expressed Sumerian sound values. While the Semitic consonantaries
fromwhichallalphabetsandSouthAsianalphasyllabariesarederivedmayhave
been inspired by Egyptian uniliteral signs, these scripts were not invented in
Egypt, nor is there any evidence that Egyptians played a role in their creation
(Millard 1986). It is generally agreed that the principles that guided the writ-
ing of ancient Egyptian would have made it difﬁcult for Egyptian scribes to
realize that they could have written their language using only uniliterals. Even
if any Egyptian scribes had realized that this was technically possible, they
almost certainly would have resisted abandoning their more complex writing

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
603
system, into which many cultural values had been pictorially encoded (Kroeber
1948: 517).
It is often assumed that, because logophonic scripts were complex and dif-
ﬁcult to learn, they were inherently inferior to phonographic and especially
alphabetic scripts. Yet in modern China and Japan heavily logographic scripts
have not impeded the development of mass literacy, the high consumption
of published material, and the functioning of modern industrial economies.
These developments suggest that the practical advantages of phonemic scripts
are less than is usually believed (Unger and DeFrancis 1995: 54–55). They also
call into question the widespread assumption that in early civilizations scripts
were deliberately kept complex to ensure that they stayed the exclusive posses-
sion of a small administrative or upper class. Literacy remained restricted for
numerous economic, social, and cultural reasons. In Egypt hieroglyphs were
called mdw ntr (the words of the god), and their invention was attributed to
Thoth, the god of wisdom; learning to write in this fashion or to write at all
was viewed as a sacred art not meant to be widely shared. In East Asia, sim-
pliﬁed, more phonemic versions of scripts have been regarded as appropriate
for use only by women, children, and the lower classes (Daniels 1996b; King
1996: 218, 226; J. Smith 1996: 212). It appears that, once a logophonic script
developed, the prestige that was associated with using it reduced its chances of
being replaced by a structurally simpler script so long as there was no serious
disruption of elite cultural patterns (Trigger 1998b).
oral literature
Along with the uses that were made of writing in early civilizations, strong
emphasis continued to be placed on the oral transmission of knowledge. In
non-literate early civilizations and among the non-literate lower classes in
early civilizations that had writing, oral transmission was the only means of
preserving knowledge. Even the upper classes in civilizations that had writing
systems accorded high status to the oral communication and presentation of
knowledge. Eloquence was greatly valued, and material that was intended to
be remembered was often composed in metrical or poetic form.
The Yoruba preserved the histories of individual patrilineages in the form
of itan, oral prose narratives recited by male elders. Itan recounted the migra-
tions and extolled the achievements of a patrilineage and its most renowned
members, traditions that were often at odds with the ofﬁcial histories of towns
and their dynastic rulers. Elders, both male and female, also preserved their
lineages’ distinctivelullabies,folktales,andriddles.Thoseresponsibleforsacri-
ﬁcing to the gods had to remember their families’ special prayers, incantations,

604
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and blessings (Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 8). Oriki (praise songs), poet-
ical compositions performed in honour of deities, communities, households,
individual persons, both living and dead, and even special trees and animals,
played a signiﬁcant role in struggles among individuals and groups to enhance
their social and political status. While they were recited by many people,
the most elaborate ones were composed and performed at public festivals
by professional praise-singers, most of whom were women (K. Barber 1991;
Pemberton and Afolayan 1996: 7–10). The ofﬁcial historians of the state of
Oyo (arokin), the ruler’s bards, drummers, and cymbalists, were responsible
for remembering and reciting the ofﬁcial myths, histories, and praise songs of
the royal lineage. These works afﬁrmed the priority of the king of Oyo in rela-
tion to other Yoruba rulers. Royal reciters, it was claimed, could be executed
if they made a single error in their performances (Apter 1992: 14; Mercier
1962: 46).
IntheAndeanhighlands,localpoliticalleadershadtheirpredecessors’deeds
remembered in poems that had rigid phonetic structures but rarely rhymed.
Local religious ofﬁcials also had to remember and transmit to their successors
the prayers and hymns that related to the cults for which they were responsible.
The Inka royal court and the various Inka royal descent groups cultivated their
own origin myths and historical traditions. Each set of traditions sought to
promote the political interests of a particular branch of the royal family.
Pachakutiq’s revised version of Inka history, which was composed following
his usurpation of royal power in the ﬁfteenth century, appears to have been
sustained by subsequent Inka rulers. Royal promotion of stories supernatu-
rally associating the origins of the Inka royal family with the Lake Titicaca
region may have been intended to facilitate the integration of that impor-
tant region into the Inka state. Learned men (amautakuna) at the Inka royal
court composed narratives, songs, and dramas about the royal ancestors that
were performed on feast days, as well as prayers, hymns, and love songs. These
compositions were memorized, and the most esteemed were transmitted from
one generation to the next (Kendall 1973: 46–49).
In the Valley of Mexico, elderly commoners addressed elaborate, formulaic
speeches (huehuetlatolli) to newborn infants, young people, and newly married
couples, exhorting them to work hard, behave soberly, and diligently discharge
theirresponsibilitiestotheirfamiliesandsociety.Composingandrecitingmore
elaborate and original works were pastimes of the nobility and ways in which
talented commoners could win royal favour and lasting fame. Rhythmic songs,
ceremonial addresses, and accompanying music were called toltecayotl. Sung
poetry was referred to as xochicuicatl (ﬂower songs), and beautiful speech
was compared to precious jade and quetzal feathers. Song was believed to

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
605
have existed before the universe, and it was said to bring humans into closer
contact with the forces of creation as represented by Ometeotl and ﬁll their
hearts with the creative power that had brought the universe into existence.
Songs celebrated the deeds of great warriors and explored such themes as
friendship and death. They also expressed hopes, fears, and doubts that ran
counter to the martial beliefs that were being accentuated by the Aztec state.
Palaces employed salaried professional singers to compose and perform works
that praised the achievements, wealth, and greatness of reigning kings and
their predecessors, celebrated their victories and conquests, and traced royal
genealogies. These works were sung at palace celebrations and public religious
ceremonies. Temples also employed professional singers to compose chants
and hymns that celebrated the deeds and greatness of their gods. Both sorts
of singers were called cuicapicque (Berdan 1982: 155–58; Clendinnen 1991:
219–22; Dur´an 1971: 299; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 180–81; 1992: 71).
Samuel Kramer (1963: 170) has maintained that the nar (poet-singer or
minstrel) is the key to understanding Mesopotamian literature. Some poet-
singerswereemployedbytemplestotrainsingersandconductliturgies.Others
worked for kings, for whom they trained court singers and composed and re-
cited myths and epic poems. Prior to the extensive use of writing, poet-singers
must have played an essential role in preserving and promoting knowledge of
the past as did the ‘bards’ at the Inka and Aztec royal courts. These poet-singers
probably began to compose elements of the Gilgamesh epic around 2100 b.c.,
presumably for the Ur III rulers, who claimed Gilgamesh as their ancestor. The
epic was not drawn together, however, before 1600 b.c., and its ﬁnal version
was edited six hundred years later. The known corpus of Mesopotamian liter-
ary works, including myths, epics, hymns, laments, disputes, and proverbs, has
been estimated to amount to about twenty-eight thousand lines. Most of these
works are characterized by systematic repetition, parallelism, epithets, simi-
les, and other characteristics of poetry. Hence much Mesopotamian recorded
literature appears to have been grounded in or stimulated by an oral literary
tradition (Jacobsen 1976: 195; Kramer 1981: 289–90).
There is no signiﬁcant record of or about purely oral literature in ancient
Egypt, but Egyptian written texts appear to reﬂect the pervasive inﬂuence of
orality. Many hymns, spells, and religious petitions that were carved on the
walls of tombs and temples and on amulets were intended to be read aloud.
Didactic literature was presented as a written record of verbal advice that
an elderly ofﬁcial had given to his son or pupil. While surviving ‘Songs of the
Harper’, a genre that expressed scepticism about traditional beliefs concerning
life after death, were engraved on the walls of tombs, they were represented
as songs that were sung by male professional musicians. Short stories, such as

606
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
‘The Story of Sinuhe’, ‘The Tale of the Eloquent Peasant’, ‘King Khufu and the
Magician’, and ‘The Shipwrecked Sailor’, seem modelled on the sort of tale
that a public storyteller might have presented. They were all relatively short
and had simple, dramatic story lines. Some were largely naturalistic stories set
in earlier times; others were ﬁlled with supernatural elements. The style of
writing indicates that these stories were composed in written form, and it has
been suggested that some of them were intended as propaganda to support
the kings who were re-establishing centralized royal power in the early Middle
Kingdom (Williams 1964). It is unclear, however, whether these politically
engaged stories were composed as models for public storytellers, who might
have worked as agents for the central government, or were intended only for
the administrative classes, whom they reached in written form. Most of these
stories have survived because they were used as school texts (Lichtheim 1973:
169–84, 211–35).
Among the Egyptian writings more obviously intended only for a literary
audience were compositions extolling the beneﬁts of being a scribe and the
political testaments ascribed to rulers of the First Intermediate Period and
the early Middle Kingdom. In general, the composition of works of political
propaganda that sought to justify the new political order ceased as the Twelfth
Dynastybecamemoresecurelyestablished.Thesecompositionswerereplaced
by hymns or songs celebrating the power of reigning kings (Lichtheim 1973:
134–63, 198–201). Yet, while the milieu of literate Egyptian bureaucrats was
socially and culturally remote from that of farming villages, their literary com-
positions were not very different from storytelling among the rural population.
The important role assigned to oral literature in shaping and transmitting
the values of the upper classes in early civilizations, whether or not these civ-
ilizations had fully developed writing systems, helps to explain why writing
was less crucial for them than was once thought. Writing was used to record
various types of information, but the qualitative difference between what was
written and what was spoken was not great, if a gap existed at all (Halverson
1992; Havelock 1986). Nothing appears to have been created in early civiliza-
tions that resembled the systematic philosophical treatises or studies of nature
produced by later Greek and Roman writers. Scholarship of that sort, while
strongly inﬂuenced by literacy, may have owed more to the desacralization
of the natural world than to a widespread ability to read. Writing invariably
facilitated a more detailed conservation of knowledge and its transmission
without the necessity of person-to-person contact. Even this advantage does
not appear, however, to have been widely recognized and systematically ex-
ploited until later. While the knowledge possessed by the upper classes of early
civilizations differed in content and elaboration from that of the lower classes,

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
607
the two sorts did not yet differ radically in their degree of generalization or
abstraction.
elite education
The ways in which specialized knowledge and skills were transmitted among
the upper and administrative classes varied considerably from one early civi-
lization to another.
Inka rulers paid careful attention to the education of male members of the
nobility and of chosen women. Chosen women were trained to weave ﬁne
clothing and cook and brew for the state; those of higher social rank were also
instructed in religious matters. About the age of ten, the sons of Inka nobles,
Inka-by-privilege, and some high-ranking provincial nobles were required to
attend yachawasi, special schools run by learned men (amautakuna) who were
members of the nobility. While at school, sons of provincial nobles and Inka
governors constituted de facto hostages for their fathers’ loyalty. Students are
reported to have remained at these schools for four years, studying the court
version of the Quechua language, Inka rituals and calendrics, khipu record-
keeping, and Inka history and learning about the law, how to govern, how to
lead armies, and how to behave in a manner appropriate to their social class.
Living in the Inka capital and often serving as pages at the royal court helped
to prepare such young men to become government ofﬁcials (Kendall 1973: 65,
77–78; Rowe 1944: 282–83).
In Egypt the only ofﬁcial school for training scribes and administrators
during the Old Kingdom appears to have been attached to the royal court.
There the sons of major ofﬁcials were educated together with the king’s sons.
Boys also appear to have been educated to be scribes and administrators by
their fathers or by being sent to live with important ofﬁcials. In the Mid-
dle Kingdom the main school continued to be located at the royal residence
and may have been divided into separate sections for princes and the sons
of lesser ofﬁcials. There were also, however, smaller schools in communities
such as Kahun, where the individuals who took turns tending the funerary
cult of Senwosret II lived. These schools probably were sustained on a fee-
paying basis. Children attended such schools between the ages of ﬁve and ten.
They then continued for a decade or longer to learn how to be bureaucrats
by working in a subordinate capacity in a government ofﬁce or on the staff
of a government ofﬁcial. At school students ﬁrst learned to write words in
the hieratic script and went on to memorize and learn to record simple sto-
ries, formulae, and sentences from an elementary textbook and then study
classical Middle Kingdom texts. Learning to read and write was accompanied

608
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
by the acquisition of elementary arithmetical and bookkeeping skills and a
growing understanding of the behaviour and values of the ruling and admin-
istrative classes. In the New Kingdom still more schools were established in
temples to supply a growing need for administrators (David 1986: 120; Janssen
and Janssen 1990: 69–83; Williams 1972). The main centres where knowl-
edge accumulated and could be consulted in Egypt were the ‘Houses of Life’
(pr nh˘ ), or scriptoria, attached to major temples. The writings preserved in
these institutions concerned not only theology, temple ritual, and architecture
but also astronomy, medicine, history, and all other forms of knowledge related
to the gods and their creation (R. Wilkinson 2000: 74).
In Shang China there appears to have been a palace school where the king’s
sons, children of collateral royal lineages, and sons of non-royal administrators
were educated (Chao 1972: 25–26). These boys were instructed in martial arts
as well as administrative skills, which in some cases may have included learning
how to write. Alternatively, writing may have been the prerogative of a small
group of specialists who learned it from their patrilineal kinsmen as a form of
highly respected craft knowledge.
Among the Yoruba all transmission of knowledge seems to have been accom-
plished by apprenticeship. Sons of ofﬁcials and members of palace and town
associations acquired their administrative skills and knowledge of specialized
rituals by assisting ofﬁce-holders. Often knowledge was acquired through ini-
tiation into ritual societies and organizations and rising slowly through their
ranks. The most demanding apprenticeship was that required to become a di-
viner (babalawo). Divination was required to gain the approval of the god Ifa to
be instructed in the secret knowledge of his cult. Three years of intensive study
were needed to qualify for the lowest rank of the Ifa priesthood. Such experts
generally divined for their extended families. Many more years of instruction
were required to rise to the second and third ranks, the third being that of a
high priest (Abimbola 1973; Bascom 1969: 70–71; Eades 1980: 125–26).
The Aztec required all boys to attend one of two sorts of schools. Sons
of nobles and a few commoners attended schools attached to major temples
where they were trained to become priests, high-level administrators, and
scribes. This required intensive instruction in astrology, calendrics, dream in-
terpretation, record-keeping, oratory, and the martial arts, as well as in the
cultivated speech and manners of the nobility (Berdan 1982: 88–90, 143; Le´on-
Portilla 1963: 134–39). Probably associated with these schools were the tlama-
tinime (learned men), who are described as composers and teachers of songs
that encoded scientiﬁc and historical knowledge and advisers to rulers. The
Texcocan kings were renowned for promoting such scholarship (Berdan 1982:
143; Le´on-Portilla 1963: 16, 69–74).

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
609
In Mesopotamia record-keeping was ﬁrst associated with temples. Standard-
ized word lists suggest that record-keepers were being formally trained already
in the Uruk period. At least as early as 2500 b.c., schools called ´edubba (tablet
houses) were located next to temples and palaces, where scribes (dubˇsar) were
trained to manage the affairs of these institutions. These schools were the ma-
jor centres in which Mesopotamian culture was conserved and elaborated. By
the Ur III period there were also private schools for children from families
that could afford tuition. Every school was under the authority of an adda
´edubba (school father), who was assisted by one or more senior students or
assistant teachers, called ‘big [or older] brothers’ (ˇseˇsgal). The students were
dumu ´edubba (school’s sons). Boys (only very rarely girls) began attending
these schools when they were between ﬁve and seven years old. They were
taught writing, elementary mathematics, and the forms of legal and admin-
istrative documents. They ﬁrst learned to write syllabograms and logograms,
then multisign words, and then short and long texts, which they copied or
memorized. Semitic-speaking children also had to learn Sumerian, which, al-
though it continued to be of literary and sometimes administrative importance,
was ceasing to be a spoken language. Bilingual lists of words, accompanied by
phonetic renderings of the Sumerian ones, were compiled to facilitate this
study. The establishment of private schools was associated with the spread of
literacy beyond the conﬁnes of temple and palace administrations, in partic-
ular among merchants and some craft workers, but hymns were included in
the libraries of private schools that had no direct connection with temples.
Schools as an institution aspired to be centres of learning where old texts were
copied and preserved and new ones composed (Kramer 1963: 229–45; 1981:
3–16; Nissen, Damerow, and Englund 1993: 104–10; Postgate 1972: 814; 1992:
67–70, 153).
Thus, in the two best-documented territorial states, Inka Peru and ancient
Egypt, the royal court was the main centre of formal education and the
place where sons of the most important administrators were trained. A
similar arrangement probably existed in Shang China. In Egypt the growing
need for scribes to handle administrative matters led to the creation of
schools that were community-based and privately supported. Specialized
education was more variable in city-states. Among the heterarchical Yoruba,
all education was by apprenticing or initiation into a society or cult. In
Mesopotamia, where class membership was not formally hereditary, the
increasing use of writing encouraged the development of private schools in
addition to temple and palace ones. In the Valley of Mexico, where class
divisions were hereditary, upper-class education was controlled by the state
and managed through temples and priests. Formal schools seem to have

610
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
been the most developed and varied in states where writing or complex
semasiography became essential for bureaucratic management and private
business.
specialized knowledge
Societies that did not distinguish the natural and supernatural realms could
not differentiate as we do between natural science and religion. Miguel Le´on-
Portilla (1963: xxi) maintains that the Aztec did not distinguish philosophy,
religion, and science. The sixteenth-century Yucatec Mayan term miats cov-
ered what the Spanish differentiated as philosophy, science, art, culture, and
wisdom (Tate 1992: 30). Modern distinctions do not accord with the cosmo-
logical understandings of early civilizations.
Notably absent in the surviving records of literate early civilizations are
documents relating to their extraordinary architectural and other technologi-
cal achievements. While Egyptian school texts contain formulae for calculating
the approximate volumes of pyramids, no manuals describe how a real pyramid
was planned and built. Nor are there early Chinese texts dealing with bronze-
casting. Either these operations were carried out by non-literate craftsmen or
such records and instruction guides as existed were insufﬁciently numerous
or appreciated to have survived. There is therefore no way to know whether
Chinese bronze-casting was treated as a straightforward technological pro-
cess or whether magic and ritual played an integral role in casting ceremonial
vessels, as it did in at least some metal-casting in Benin. Much more docu-
mentation is available concerning calendrics, medicine, divination, and magic,
which routinely combined what we would interpret as rational practices with
magical and religious ones.
Anthony Aveni (1989), in his comparative study of calendar systems, con-
cludes that all governments of early civilizations bureaucratically organized
time. Calendars took account of the periodicities of astronomical bodies and
of seasonal and biological cycles and related them to human activities. Day and
night, monthly lunar cycles (which affected how much light was available for
activities after sunset), and annual rounds of changing weather were important
features of the natural world to which government activities and planning had
to adapt. Yet arbitrary choices were necessarily involved in determining the
relative importance accorded to speciﬁc factors and how different cycles were
integrated with one another. There was still greater variation in the extent
to which, and how, different early civilizations recorded time over long dura-
tions. This paralleled the greater variation among cosmogonies than among
more observation-based cosmologies.

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
611
The Egyptian diurnal cycle began at dawn. Egyptian ofﬁcials divided each
daylight period (hrw) and each night (grh
• ) into twelve equal hours (wnwt),
which altered in length as the duration of day and night varied throughout
the year. The Egyptians also recognized an ecological year that began with the
rising of the Nile ﬂood, as presaged by the ﬁrst observed rising (prt) of the
star Sirius (spdt) just before dawn in mid-July. Egyptian ofﬁcials utilized a civil
year (rnpt) of 365 full days (sw). This year was divided into three seasons (tr):
inundation (3h˘ t), the growing season (prt), and summer (ˇsmw). Each season
consisted of four months (3bd) of 30 days each, followed by 5 additional days
(h
• ryw rnpt). Each month was divided into three 10-day weeks, called ‘ﬁrst’,
‘middle’, and ‘last’. Although it was originally timed to begin with the heliacal
rising of the star Sirius, the civil year fell one day behind the solar year every
four years, with the result that the calendrical ‘inundation’ season eventually
occurred during the actual growing season and then during the dry season. It
took approximately 1,460 years for the civil calendar to correspond once more
with the solar year. This suggests that the civil year may have been created
about 2773 b.c., probably in the Third Dynasty.
A twelve-month lunar calendar was used to organize everyday life. To keep
this calendar in accord with the solar year, an extra lunar month was added
whenever the ﬁrst day of the lunar year preceded the heliacal rising of Sirius in
mid-July. This month had to be added approximately once every three years.
The Egyptians also used this lunisolar calendar to determine the dates for
religiousfestivals.Priestsdividedtheecliptic,orpathofthesunthroughthesky,
into thirty-six decans, each marked by a star constellation. At night the rising
of each new decan in the east indicated that two-thirds of an hour had passed.
The rising of different decans at a particular time of night also divided the solar
year into thirty-six units of approximately ten days (one Egyptian week) each.
Initially, each year was named after one or more distinctive events, either
in anticipation of these events or after they had occurred. During the Fifth
and Sixth Dynasties, years were numbered according to the biennial cattle
counts of each monarch’s reign. Finally, beginning in the Middle Kingdom,
they were numbered consecutively according to the years of a king’s reign.
In the Middle Kingdom, the second year of a king’s reign began on the ﬁrst
day of the ‘inundation’ season following his accession. In the New Kingdom,
each regnal year began on the actual day of the king’s accession; thus each civil
year consisted of parts of two regnal years (J. Allen 2000: 104–6; L. Bell 1997:
157–59; Gardiner 1950: 203–6).
In Mesopotamia each daily cycle commenced at sunset. The Sumerians
divided each night and each day into three watches, while the Babylonians
divided the time from one sunset to the next into twelve equal parts. The year

612
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
was divided into two seasons, with summer (emeˇs) beginning in February or
March and winter (enten) in September or October. The Mesopotamian cal-
endar was a lunisolar one, based on real lunar months of twenty-nine and thirty
days. These months were named differently in different cities. The ﬁnancial
year began two months after the spring grain harvest, but for other purposes
the year began with the harvest. An extra lunar month was inserted into the
calendar approximately every three years to keep it in line with the seasons.
This was done at different times in different cities. By 2400 b.c., a schematic
year composed of twelve thirty-day months was introduced for accounting
purposes. Years were named after auspicious events such as military victories
or the building of a temple. In the Old Babylonian period, they began to be
numbered, as in Egypt, according to regnal years (Kramer 1963: 91, 140).
The Shang daily cycle began during the night or at dawn. Daytime (ri) was
divided into at least eight periods deﬁned by the position of the sun and by
daily human activities; the night (xi) was not subdivided. The Shang observed a
ten-day week (xun) and had a lunisolar calendar in which ‘big moons’ (da yue)
thirty days long usually alternated with ‘little moons’ (xiao yue) of twenty-nine
days. A normal year began with the ﬁrst new moon after the winter solstice and
lasted twelve lunar months. The lunar calendar was kept in time with the sea-
sons by intercalating seven extra thirty-day months every nineteen years. The
conservative ritualists added these months at the end of years, the progressive
ritualists whenever the need for an adjustment was perceived. Each day was
assigned what at least since Han times has been called a ganzhi name. Ten
so-called celestial stem (tiangan) names and twelve terrestrial branch (dizhi)
names were permuted to produce a series of sixty day-names that were used in
divination and sacriﬁce. Towards the end of the Shang dynasty, six successive
ganzhi cycles made up an ancestral cult cycle (si) that nearly corresponded
with a solar year but was not synchronized with it. These cult cycles were
numbered according to how many had occurred during a king’s reign. Only
much later in Chinese history were the ganzhi combinations also utilized to
label successive years. King’s names were sometimes mentioned in connection
with dates, but this, together with a combination of ganzhi and lunar dates that
formed a thirty-one-year cycle, was inadequate to order years sequentially
over long periods. Later king lists and other chronological information that
have been conﬁrmed by Shang oracle-bone texts suggest that the Shang must
have preserved information about the length of each king’s reign as the ba-
sis for constructing a long-term chronology (Chˆeng 1960: 228–33; Keightley
1999b: 249–51; 2000).
The Aztec and their neighbours, in accordance with their ideas about the
construction of the universe, divided days into thirteen hours (equivalent to the

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
613
number of sky worlds) and nights into nine hours (equivalent to the num-
ber of underworlds). The tonalpohualli (counting of days) permuted thirteen
numerals and twenty day-names to identify 260 consecutive days and was used
for divination and guiding personal affairs. The xihuitl or solar calendar con-
sisted of 18 meztli, each with its own name and made up of 20 numbered days
plus 5 and perhaps in some years 6 extra days (nemontemi) to produce a 365-day
year. Despite its short duration, the term meztli literally meant ‘moon’. The two
calendars ran concurrently to produce a recurring ﬁfty-two-year calendar
round known as a xiuhmolpilli (bundling of years). Although two such calendar
rounds were recognized as corresponding with thirteen 584-day cycles of the
planet Venus, the 52-year round was the longest calendrical unit explicitly dif-
ferentiated by the Aztecs. Thus there is often uncertainty about the precise cal-
endar round in which a speciﬁcally dated event occurred. Different city-states
also used different day-names and appear to have begun their years with differ-
ent months. Historical records kept track of events that occurred over consec-
utive calendar rounds (Berdan 1982: 143–48; Bray 1968: 163–71; Caso 1971;
Le´on-Portilla 1992: 47; M. E. Smith 1996: 253–58; van Zantwijk 1985: 226).
ThebasicstructureoftheMayacalendarwasalsoaritualyearof260daysand
a solar year of 365 days that ran concurrently to form a ﬁfty-two-year calendar
round. In addition, however, the Maya used a long count of consecutively
numbered days. In this system, 20 days (kin) constituted one winal, 18 winals
one tun (roughly a year), 20 tuns one katun, and 20 katuns one baktun. Thus the
date 9.18.5.0.0 fell 9 baktuns, 18 katuns, and 5 tuns, or 1,427,400 days, after the
start of the current baktun on August 13, 3114 b.c. This date corresponds to
September 15, a.d. 795 of the modern calendar. By embedding baktuns in
progressivelylongercycles,theMaya,aloneamongtheearlycivilizations,could
extend their long count forward or backward indeﬁnitely. Inscriptions dealing
with the supernatural record dates that are up to nineteen positions above
the baktun and hence extend over many billions of years. The greatest span
of time known to be indicated is 142 nonillion (142 followed by 36 zeros)
years. According to Maya calculations, all the cycles above the baktun currently
stood at the thirteenth position (Aveni 1989: 190–254; A. Miller 1986: 17–29;
Schele and Miller 1986: 316–22; Tate 1992: 13–15).
The long count did not conceptualize time as linear. Instead, it viewed time
as composed of short cycles of days embedded in successively longer rounds.
The Maya used their long count to correlate calendar-round dates over long
periods. Dates were cited in terms of the long count followed by the day in
the 260-day cycle, the phase of the moon in a 29- or 30-day cycle, which of
nine ruling lords of the night was presiding, and ﬁnally the solar date. Long-
count dates were ﬁrst recorded in the late third century a.d. This suggests

614
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
that the long count was introduced at a time when dynastic kingship was
becoming more important. Yet, if the principal goal of the long count was to
record dynastic continuity, the Maya calendar dramatically overshot its mark.
It became a vehicle for speculating about continuities and transformations in
the cosmic order on a temporal scale unmatched in any other early civilization.
The importance that the Maya accorded to astrology as a means of divination
appears linked to the extraordinary development of their calendar.
The Inka used a calendar of twelve lunar months named for qualities, ac-
tivities, and rituals associated with particular seasons. The solstices and the
time for planting were ascertained by establishing the positions of the rising
and setting sun in relation to stone towers (sukanka) constructed on the sky-
line to the east and west of Cuzco. An extra lunar month was probably added
approximately every three years to adjust the lunar calendar to the solar cy-
cle. It is unclear whether the year began with the month of Qhapaq Raymi,
which corresponded with the southern summer solstice, or the month of Inti
Raymi, which occurred at the time of the winter solstice. The solar year was
also divided into twelve months, each made up of three ten-day weeks. It is
not understood how the solar and lunar months were correlated, and there is
no evidence on the way in which successive years were identiﬁed. These dif-
ﬁculties, combined with a lack of written records prior to European contact,
greatly complicate understanding Inka dynastic history (Bauer and Dearborn
1995; Julien 2000; MacCormack 1991: 166; Rowe 1944: 308; Sadowski 1989:
212; Ziolkowski and Sadowski 1989b: 167–69).
The Yoruba observed a lunar year made up of thirteen ‘months’, each com-
posedofsevenfour-day‘weeks’.These‘weeks’wereassociatedwiththeholding
of markets as well as with ritual observances. Each day of the week was named
for a local market held on that day. It is not clear how or whether the lunar
calendar of 364 days was correlated with the solar year. Years were identiﬁed
according to the regnal years of a particular king, memorable events, or the
cultivation of particular plots of land (Bascom 1969: 25; Ojo 1966a: 296–307).
The common use of a lunisolar calendar, which sought to correlate a set of
lunar months and a solar year, and the eventual adoption of a schematic year
for administrative purposes might have resulted from the various historical
links between Egypt and Mesopotamia. The employment of calendar rounds
for ritual purposes in early China and Mesoamerica also might be interpreted
as evidence of some sort of historical connection between these two regions.
Yet the development of lunisolar calendars in Peru as well as China and of a
schematic administrative calendar in Peru as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia
indicates that these sorts of reckonings may have been invented independently
in Egypt and Mesopotamia. The Chinese and Mesoamerican divinatory cycles

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
615
are also very different, suggesting that any historical connections were very
remote and general. The Maya long count was unique. To explain the similari-
ties and differences in the calendrical systems of early civilizations, more than
historical connections must be considered.
All early civilizations recognized units of time approximating a solar year di-
vided into ‘months’ approximating a lunar cycle and ‘weeks’ of four to ten days.
It has been suggested that days, months, and solar years may reﬂect human cir-
cadian rhythms that developed as long-term, selective adaptations to cycles in
the natural environment (Aveni 1989: 28). Yet, while some ‘months’ measured
actual lunar cycles, others were arbitrarily ﬁxed at twenty-eight, twenty-nine,
or thirty days. The Aztec and their neighbours even more arbitrarily divided
the solar year into eighteen ‘months’ of twenty days each. The calendars of
early civilizations appear to have been divided into ‘months’ in order to take
account of the changing seasons as these related to agricultural activities, state
projects such as waging war, and the rituals associated with these projects.
Four-to-ten-day ‘weeks’ facilitated the scheduling of repetitive, short-term
labour tasks in agricultural societies, and in early civilizations they were used
to regulate short-term administrative and ritual activities. As elaborated by the
governments of early civilizations, calendars also became complex devices for
correlating the terrestrial and cosmic realms and managing relations with the
supernatural. Annual calendars have numerous generic similarities that reﬂect
the similar purposes they served in all early civilizations, but their idiosyncratic
differences indicate the culturally speciﬁc ways in which these goals were
realized.
The Yoruba, Mesopotamian, Valley of Mexico, Shang, Egyptian, and Inka
upper classes carefully recorded the names of successive rulers, but their cal-
endars were not equipped to order events chronologically over long periods.
The ﬁfty-two-year calendar round used in the Valley of Mexico was the most
extensive of these systems. In Egypt and Mesopotamia, careful records were
kept for administrative purposes ﬁrst of the names used to identify succes-
sive years and later of counts of each king’s regnal years in order to track the
passage of time over long periods. Yet episodes of political disruption and
associated breaks in record-keeping created problems for maintaining such
chronologies, particularly when it was no longer remembered which rulers
had reigned sequentially and which concurrently. Only the Classic Maya long
count, by embedding short cycles in exponentially longer ones, created a de-
vice for recording all possible events in a comprehensive chronological order.
While, in general, early civilizations that possessed writing or complex sema-
siographies were better equipped to order events chronologically over long
periods than were ones that did not, the vast qualitative difference between

616
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the general principles governing the Maya long count and all other systems for
recording time over long periods provides striking evidence of the culturally
speciﬁc factors shaping such phenomena.
Medicine in early civilizations was a combination of what we would regard
as natural methods, such as applying herbal remedies that were known em-
pirically to have speciﬁc beneﬁcial effects, and supernatural methods. This
combination did not distinguish medicine from other forms of technological
practice.
That people in early civilizations distinguished between illnesses that could
be cured by natural means and other diseases that required supernatural inter-
vention is often interpreted as signifying that they believed that at least some
illnesses had natural causes. It does not follow, however, that diseases that
could be cured by natural methods were believed to be naturally caused. In
cultures in which the natural and supernatural were not clearly separated no
such distinction was possible. A wound that could be treated naturally might
have been caused by a god’s failure to protect someone in battle, and super-
natural help would be sought for any infection that did not respond quickly
to regular herbal treatment. Ultimately, therefore, all medical problems were
caused and could be cured supernaturally.
The Yoruba attributed diseases to deities who used them to punish social
misconduct and offences committed against the supernatural. Oya, Sango’s
favourite wife and the goddess of the Niger River, afﬂicted worshippers who
displeased her with sometimes fatal throat diseases; Yemoja, Sango’s mother
and the goddess of the Ogun River, caused stomach-aches and drowned her
enemies; Sopona, Sango’s brother, spread smallpox far and wide. Numerous
illnesses were also attributed to witches and sorcerers. The Yoruba sought
to cure illnesses by atoning for their sins and wrongdoings and by having
specialists or ritual societies perform ceremonies that would counteract or
placate the malevolent beings who were seeking to harm them. While there is
noevidenceamongtheYorubaforherbalistsorritualspecialistswhocuredonly
the upper classes, wealthy and powerful individuals could afford treatments
that ordinary people could not (Bascom 1969: 87–95).
In the Valley of Mexico it was believed that illness was inﬂicted by the gods
as punishment for human wrongdoing or as a result of divine malevolence, as
well as by sorcerers who manipulated supernatural forces to harm others. The
god Tlaloc released cold winds that caused gout, palsy, swellings, the withering
or stiffening of limbs, ulcers, leprosy, and dropsy. The spirits of women who had
died in childbirth paralysed young people, while Xipe Totec caused skin and
eye diseases. Excessive sexual activity, which displeased the gods, produced
melancholy and tuberculosis in families, and failure to obey ritual prohibitions

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
617
was punished by venereal diseases, haemorrhoids, and skin ailments. Sorcerers
produced illnesses by injecting powerful charms into people’s bodies.
The Aztec and their neighbours sought to avoid the gods’ anger and to elicit
their help to overcome diseases by means of rituals and amulets. There were
two types of doctors. The more specialized were the ticitl, who were consid-
ered tlamatinime (wise men) and had been trained in the calmecacs. Ticitl
were also priests. Of lower status were female curers and midwives. Doctors
sought, by means of divination, to discover what god or sorcerer had caused
an illness. This involved casting lots, staring into a bowl of water, or ingesting
hallucinogenic substances and, on the basis of what was revealed, prescrib-
ing cures. Treatments for illnesses that were determined to be curable using
natural remedies included purgatives, teeth-cleaning, bone-setting, lancing of
boils, suturing, bleeding, and steam baths. Over twelve hundred herbal reme-
dies were also used. If an illness was determined to have been caused by
witchcraft, efforts were made to locate the charms – worms, pieces of paper,
pebbles, or stone chips – that were responsible for it and extract them from the
sick person’s body. Special offerings were made to deities who were reputed
to be able to cure particular illnesses. (These deities were not always the same
ones that caused the disease.) Midwives and curing women prescribed food
taboos for nursing mothers.
The standing of doctors in Aztec society appears to have been related not to
the kinds of diagnosis and curing they attempted but to the wealth and status
of their clients. Both ticitl and curing women sought to heal diseases that
were believed to require supernatural as well as natural treatment, and both
supernaturally diagnosed the causes of illnesses. Ticitl were more thoroughly
trained and therefore considered better able to diagnose and cure illnesses;
they were also feared because they were thought to have the power to cause
as well as cure illnesses (Berdan 1982: 148–50; Bray 1968: 182–85; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990; Ruiz de Alarc´on 1984: 156–208; M. E. Smith 1996: 260–63;
Soustelle 1961: 191–200).
Mesopotamian society also supported two kinds of specialists in curing dis-
eases. The asˆu (doctor) was trained in the medical lore associated with the
city of Isin. He did not examine the body but noted symptoms and prescribed
medicines. The medicines (ˇsammu) consisted of herbs, animal products (fat,
blood, milk, bone), and certain minerals. These substances, none of which
was rare or expensive, were mixed with beer, vinegar, honey, or tallow to be
swallowed or administered as enemas, suppositories, lotions, and salves. Other
remedies included laxatives, diuretics, and cough syrups. Asˆus consulted clay
tablets that listed symptoms, cures, and sometimes a sick person’s chances of
recovery.

618
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The second type of healer, the aˇsipu (diviner physician), was said to have
been trained in the lore of the city of Eridu. He carefully observed the sick
person’s body, treating its temperature, colour, and pulse as omens that would
reveal the cause of the disease and allow him to propose a cure. Cures consisted
of a combination of the traditional pharmacopoeia and conjuration. An aˇsipu
sought to persuade the gods to reverse their sentence by employing exorcistic
rituals (namburb¯u) that transferred the illness to someone else or to an image
(salmu). Animal sacriﬁces might be offered to Erishkegal, the ruler of the
underworld, as a substitute (p¯uhu) for the sick person. Doctors and diviner
physicians shared the view that disease was mainly caused by supernatural
powers, including divine intervention and witchcraft (Bott´ero 1992: 142–43;
Oppenheim 1964: 288–305).
Doctors had the same social status as innkeepers and bakers, and they and
the midwives plied their trade on a freelance basis. Diviner physicians were
superior to them but also generally self-employed. The most successful were
appointed as palace staff. Surgical interventions were rare and discouraged by
laws that inﬂicted draconian punishments on medical practitioners if an op-
eration caused the death of a patient (Pritchard 1955: 175–76, laws 215–23).
Leo Oppenheim (1964: 298–301) noted that very little development occurred
in Mesopotamian medical practice after the Old Babylonian period. He at-
tributed this to the stultifying effect of reducing any practice to writing (a view
contrary to Goody’s) and to Mesopotamian fatalism.
According to John Rowe (1944: 312), the highland Peruvians believed that
all diseases (o˜nqoy) had supernatural causes: the actions of evil spirits, the
annoyance of deities over sinful behaviour (including neglect of their cults),
sorcery, or loss of the soul as a consequence of fright. Most people were treated
by so˜nqoyoq or kamasqa, old men and women who had acquired knowledge
of the medicinal properties of plants or had themselves recovered from severe
illness. The nobility were treated by hampikamayuq (medical specialists). Both
sorts of curers sought to divine the causes of ailments and apply appropriate
natural or supernatural treatments. Collawayna people, who were reputed
to possess great knowledge of the curative powers of plants, were obliged to
serve the king as doctors. Doctors also recommended purges and bleeding and
set broken bones. They sought to counteract witchcraft by removing magical
charms that had secretly been injected into people’s bodies. Hampikamayuq
put some high-ranking sick persons to sleep, presumably using drugs, and
claimed to open their bodies and cleanse them of the toads and other charms
that sorcerers had injected into them. Ordinary people regarded washing in
ﬂowing rivers as a way to cleanse their bodies of diseases. It is unclear if the
trepanning – cutting holes in skulls of living people – that was practised in the

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
619
Cuzco area was intended to treat injuries to the brain or to remove supernatural
charms.
Sacriﬁces played an important role in Inka healing. The treatment of broken
bones involved not only setting them but also sacriﬁcing to appease the spirit
who had caused the injury. A high-ranking noble who contracted a very serious
illness might sacriﬁce one of his own children in the hope that the supernatural
powers who were attacking him would accept the child’s life in place of his own.
Midwives got their power from bearing twins and besides delivering babies
turned foetuses and induced abortions (Cobo 1990: 164–67; Kendall 1973:
91–94; Rowe 1944: 312–15).
In Egypt the upper classes and perhaps corv´ee labourers were treated by
professional physicans who belonged to the scribal class. Physicians employed
by the state were enmeshed in a bureaucratic hierarchy of at least ﬁve lev-
els: ordinary (swnw), chief (wr swnw), inspector (sh
• d swnw), overseer (ımy-r
swnw), and controller (h˘ rp swnw). The higher ranks may have been medical
administrators.Somedoctorsworkedforthekingandothersforthepalace,var-
ious members of the royal family, ofﬁcials, and apparently commoners (swnw
mrt). In the Old Kingdom female physicians, who were other than midwives,
attended high-ranking female members of the royal family. In the service of
the upper classes were specialists who treated the eyes, stomach, rectum,
teeth, and other parts of the body. Dentists (swnw ıbh
• ) were distinguished
from tooth-makers (ıry ıbh
• ), who were craft workers. Physicians who served
the king often played prominent roles at the royal court. Other royal doctors,
who also served as wb priests, attested the suitability of sacriﬁced animals,
and doctors may have certiﬁed the ﬁtness for human consumption of animals
slaughtered for the royal kitchens. The goddess Sakhmet, who was associated
with the awesome power of the eye of Re, was the patron deity of doctors.
Despite the great religious signiﬁcance of embalming, the practical work of
mummiﬁcation was performed by low-ranking craft workers. Doctors do not
appear to have taken advantage of the opportunities that embalming offered
to study human anatomy. Their medical manuals suggest that their anatomi-
cal knowledge was based largely on the examination of animals’ entrails. The
heart was thought to be the location of an individual’s life-force, reason, char-
acter, and emotions. It was also the source of all signiﬁcant bodily functions;
blood, tears, saliva, semen, urine, faeces, gases, and bodily poisons came from
the heart and were distributed to other parts of the body through veins and
other channels (mtw). It was believed that female reproductive organs opened
into the interior of the body and that the eye was connected to the ear. The
Egyptians did not know that blood returned to the heart. The brain’s only
function was thought to be as a source of mucous.

620
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
The Egyptians viewed illnesses as punishments by the gods, demonic afﬂic-
tions, and results of witchcraft. Disease was believed to be brought about by
the blockage of channels, which resulted in the accumulation within the body
of bad substances of both internal and external origin. Egyptian medical books
identiﬁed over two hundred different types of illnesses, none of which related
to the lungs, liver, gall-bladder, spleen, pancreas, or kidneys, and prescribed
treatments. Specialized works dealt with subjects such as gynaecology and the
treatment of physical injuries. Herbs were often used as medicines, but other
frequent ingredients included blood, animal faeces, and ﬁngernail dirt. The
use of these substances reﬂected the belief that the best way to purge noxious
substances was to accumulate more of them in the body. The frequent use
of enemas, vaginal douches, and emetics reﬂected a similar concern to purge
the body of disease-causing impurities. Doctors tended to treat illnesses by
natural means unless they proved resistant; then they resorted to supernatural
cures. While some medical treatises claimed great antiquity, their writing style
indicates otherwise; most major surviving texts appear to have been compiled
in the Middle Kingdom. Thereafter, the same medical treatises continued to
be copied and consulted for many hundreds of years without any serious at-
tempt to expand, rethink, or replace them (Andreu 1997: 56–57; David 1986:
123–30; Ebeid 1999; Ghalioungui and el Dawakhly 1983; Jonckheere 1958;
Nunn 1996; Strouhal 1992: 243–49).
Both of the territorial states for which we have information, Egypt and Inka
Peru, had specialists to treat the upper classes. In city-states, the same types
of medical practitioners seem to have been available to all classes on a fee-
paying basis. The Aztec distinguished medical specialists from folk doctors,
but the methods they used were based on the same general principles. In
Mesopotamia diviner physicians worked for kings, but the difference between
them and ordinary curers was not simply a class one; their basic approaches to
healing were quite different.
All early civilizations believed that some or all diseases were caused by
witchcraft or the anger and malevolence of the gods. It is not clear that people
thought of any illnesses or misfortunes as being purely natural or fortuitous.
When it was known how to treat diseases effectively by natural means, this was
done. Illnesses that were known not to respond to natural treatment or failed
to respond to such treatment were handled supernaturally. Such behaviour
accords with a general view in which the world was understood to exhibit
cause-and-effect relations in much of its daily working but was also believed
to be animated and therefore ultimately controlled by supernatural powers.
None of the early civilizations gave rise to anything resembling the highly
distinctive,moreelaborate,andfarmoresystematizedbodiesofmedicaltheory

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
621
that characterized the later preindustrial civilizations of China, India, Greece,
and Rome (Bates 1995). Physicians in early civilizations nevertheless enter-
tained many ideas that were similar to those of these later systems.
A concern with the supernatural dominated other major intellectual cre-
ations of the early civilizations. While the production of new medical knowl-
edge appears to have reached a virtual standstill in late Middle Kingdom Egypt,
the collection and editing of spells intended to ensure the well-being of in-
dividuals after death remained a vital focus of that civilization’s intellectual
activity. In the Old Kingdom the Pyramid Texts, which were inscribed in royal
tombs, performed this function ﬁrst for kings alone and then for a few queens
as well (Faulkner 1969). In the First Intermediate Period the Pyramid Texts
evolved into the Cofﬁn Texts, which were available to all who could afford to
have them inscribed on their cofﬁns. In the New Kingdom spells, some based
on Cofﬁn Texts, were inscribed on papyrus scrolls which were sold to indi-
viduals to be buried with them. Almost two hundred chapters of spells were
assigned to ‘The Spells of Coming Forth by Day’ (rw nw prt m hrw), better
known in English as ‘The Book of the Dead’. Some of these chapters, such
as ‘The Declaration of Innocence’ and ‘The Judgement of the Dead’, were
deemed essential elements of this work, but no surviving copy contains every
chapter. At the same time, special funerary texts were being inscribed in royal
tombs. The composing of new texts to assist the souls of the dead ceased only
at the end of the New Kingdom (Sørensen 1989). All these works were based
on the belief that magic (h.k3) played a major role in maintaining the cosmic
order. Another form of organized supernatural knowledge was lists of lucky
and unlucky days (or parts of days) accompanied by advice for coping with the
unlucky ones (D’Auria 1988; Englund 1989b: 24; Faulkner 1985).
In Mesopotamia the main focus of upper-class study was divination. Omen
texts appear late in the Old Babylonian period, but allusions to divination
abound in historical and religious texts in Early Dynastic times. In later peri-
ods neighbouring peoples regarded divination as the Mesopotamians’ major
intellectual achievement. Mesopotamians believed that the gods communi-
cated their wishes and warnings to humans through dreams, bird ﬂights, the
movement of smoke, patterns formed by oil ﬂoating on water, earthquakes,
thunder, rain, hail, and the births of multiple or malformed children and ani-
mals. The most common form of divination was based on the size, shape, and
colouring of the livers and other entrails of sacriﬁced animals. Astronomical
observations did not become the major focus of divination until after 1500 b.c.
The interpretation of each class of natural phenomena required its own diviner
priests. Their goal was to extract the correct messages from omens, so that rit-
uals could be performed to ensure that bad prognostications did not come to

622
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
pass. While diviners worked for private individuals as well as kings, anxiety for
both their own welfare and that of the state made kings the chief patrons of
the art of divination.
To try to improve the accuracy of their predictions, diviners kept records of
speciﬁc divinations and their outcomes. They also amassed detailed informa-
tion concerning events in the natural world. They sought to transform these
observations into generalized statements about what natural occurrences re-
vealed concerning the will of the gods and what might happen in the future if
ritual actions were not taken to alter the situation. While these activities have
been interpreted as leading to the development of the scientiﬁc method, their
goal was to assist relations with a universe that was believed to be controlled by
powerful and quixotic supernatural forces (Bott´ero 1992: 105–42; Crawford
1991: 24; Oppenheim 1964: 206–24).
The Aztec also devoted much attention to divination. Divinatory methods
were taught in the religious schools, recorded in almanacs and other manuals,
and cultivated by specialist priests. Deities and humans alike were believed to
be subject to shifting cosmic forces that vitally affected their personal destinies.
Mexicans sought to divine the future so that they could take action to avoid
personal and collective misfortune. Aztec diviners determined the fate of a
newborn child by casting lots to ascertain how the gods associated with the day
of its birth might inﬂuence its destiny. Likewise, a merchant setting out on a
trading expedition would have his chances of success or failure divined. If the
prognostications were not good, sacriﬁces would be offered to try to improve
the situation. There were pictographic guides for interpreting dreams, which
were viewed as messages from the supernatural realm. Ball games constituted
a form of divination used by rulers. Divinations for the king and members
of the nobility were usually performed by expert priests, who were better
trained and more highly regarded than those who divined for commoners
(Le´on-Portilla 1963: 116–20; Ruiz de Alarc´on 1984: 141–55; M. E. Smith 1996:
240–41, 256).
The Maya were deeply interested in the future. The divinations for their
upper class appear to have been based largely on astronomical observations.
Maya rulers supported detailed studies of the movements of the sun, moon,
and planets over long periods in the hope of being able to foretell the future of
individuals, kingdoms, and the cosmos. The Maya believed that events of the
past repeated themselves in accordance with the motions of heavenly bodies.
Cycles of planetary movements were correlated with each other and linked to
cycles of the Maya long count, and these observations used to forecast super-
natural and historical events. Because of the detailed astronomical data base
which their calendar allowed them to create, expert Maya diviners were able

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
623
to extend their calculations of planetary and stellar conjunctions far beyond
anything commoners could attempt (Aveni 1992).
The Inka elite also elaborated special forms of divination. Fire divination,
practised by specialists called yakarka who came from Waro, near Cuzco,
was used to uncover treason. A special form of lung divination (kalpa), which
involved inﬂating the lungs of sacriﬁced llamas, was employed to determine
issues of major importance to the king, such as the outcome of military cam-
paigns or the choice of an heir to the throne. More routine issues were divined
using the lungs of birds or guinea pigs. Other forms of divination included ob-
serving the forms taken by smoke rising from sacriﬁces, casting pebbles, beans,
or maize kernels, and observing the movements of spiders or snakes. These
simpler forms were used for deciding whether to plant crops, travel, or marry
and how to cure common illnesses. Guidance was also sought from the dead
speaking through spirit mediums, through spirit possession involving the thun-
der god Illapa and other nature deities, and by having mediums prophesy while
they were intoxicated or inﬂuenced by drugs. Both divination and oracular
communication were practised by commoners as well as by the upper classes,
but the forms employed by the latter were more elaborate and more carefully
controlled by the state (MacCormack 1991: 303–6; Rowe 1944: 302–4).
At the Shang court, divination received lavish royal attention and patronage.
Scapulimantic diviners kept records of the successes and failures of their di-
vinations, apparently in an effort to improve their methods. They also kept
recordsofsolarandlunareclipses,includingonesthatwereobservedonlyinre-
mote provinces, and information about the weather and the movements of the
planets, which were believed to affect the fortunes of the kingdom and its rulers
(Chˆeng 1960: 226–27; Keightley 1978a; 1999b; 1999c).
A Yoruba diviner had to memorize and learn the various meanings of more
than one thousand verses that facilitated the interpretation of divinatory pro-
cedures and guided him in prescribing sacriﬁces that were appropriate for
gaining a desired blessing or averting misfortune.
The most important upper-class intellectual activities in early civilizations
were concerned with improving relations with the supernatural powers that
animated the cosmos. These activities were focused on divining the will of
the gods, deﬂecting their anger, maintaining the cosmic order, averting illness,
helping individuals after death, and averting social calamities. Analogous con-
cerns were shared by the lower classes, but the upper classes were able to
sponsor specialists to develop divinatory techniques that they hoped would
beneﬁt themselves and their kingdoms. Such efforts often encouraged the de-
tailed observation of natural phenomena, but their primary goal was to regulate
relations with the supernatural and natural orders.

624
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
knowledge and its uses
Scholars such as Gordon Childe (1965 [1936]) and Benjamin Farrington (1936)
maintained that theoretical as opposed to practical knowledge was ﬁrst pro-
duced by the scribes of early civilizations, but they believed that the initial
objective of systematic observation of the natural world was not the enhance-
ment of technical knowledge but the cultivation of techniques for sociopolitical
control and the manipulation of the supernatural. Technological knowledge,
when its development was not actively discouraged, was regarded as the pre-
serve of craft workers and farmers. Thus the distinction between a managerial
class that was exempt from manual labour and lower-class artisans and farmers
was reﬂected in a dichotomy between thinking about nature and acting on
it. This distinction, Childe and Farrington claimed, in some early civilizations
eventually created hitherto unknown dichotomies between mind and matter,
subject and object, and society and nature. They argued that the rulers of early
civilizations rejected the pursuit of scientiﬁc knowledge in favour of magic and
superstition because they regarded the latter as powerful techniques for social
control and therefore supportive of their own despotic power. Childe, as a
Marxist, identiﬁed technological change as a threat to the established social
order that early ruling classes instinctively feared. As a result of upper-class
patronage of magic and superstition, he suggested, far more magical lore than
craft knowledge was preserved in written form, and craft knowledge itself was
probably riddled with ritual and magic designed to restrict highly developed
crafts to small groups of practitioners.
This sort of functional explanation may be misleading. Early civilizations had
inherited a general view of the cosmos in which no signiﬁcant distinction was
drawn between the natural and supernatural realms and these realms differed
from society only in degree. Perception of the social order as a terrestrial copy
of the cosmic order precluded the concept of cultural progress that Childe
and Farrington saw the rulers of early civilizations resisting. However much
early civilizations changed, the most powerful models for human behaviour
and social order were believed to have been revealed to humans by supernat-
ural forces when the world was created. Cause and effect were understood to
be operative in everyday life but regarded as contingent aspects of a cosmic
order that reﬂected the potentially changeable will of the divine powers that
animated the natural world. In some early civilizations the ultimate causality
was an unalterable fate built into the structure of the universe, but more of-
ten and more proximally it was a personal process by which individual deities
created and managed the cosmos by issuing orders. The aim of rulers was
to sustain the divine model of social organization that had long ago been

Literacy and Specialized Knowledge
625
established or revealed to humans by the gods. Within this framework, no
one was likely to have regarded a lack of signiﬁcant development in medicine
or technology as abnormal or technological change as something that had to
be resisted. The long-term attention paid to the elaboration of divination and
magic in Egypt and Mesopotamia is evidence of the importance that the rulers
of early civilizations accorded to understanding the supernatural and ﬁnding
ways to placate or control it.
While supernatural concerns sometimes encouraged careful observations of
the natural world that in later, neighbouring civilizations would play a role in
the development of scientiﬁc knowledge, these observations were made within
a framework in which science and magic were not distinguished from one
another because nature and the supernatural were not differentiated. Rulers
sought supernatural power to control the natural forces on which the welfare of
society and ultimately their own political and personal power depended. The
same view of the cosmos encouraged farmers and craft workers to combine
their detailed knowledge of cause and effect and of ritual to produce food and
goods. Rulers seeking to control relations with the supernatural with respect
to matters about which there were no routine understandings of cause and
effect were forced to rely on divination and magic.
A concern with manipulating and gaining the support of supernatural pow-
ers was ubiquitous in early civilizations. Amulets, incantations, and divina-
tion were employed to ward off evil and win the protection of benevolent
deities, and scribes and priests were encouraged to develop ever more effective
techniques. The worldview of early civilizations encouraged the conviction that
the natural world could be most effectively controlled by supernatural means.
The main aim of research was to obtain a better understanding not of the nature
of things but of how to shape more favourable relations with the supernatural.
In this endeavour, general similarities among the beliefs of early civilizations
appear to have been grounded in ideas that were already present in the various
societies that gave rise to them. This does not rule out the possibility that com-
mon psychological tendencies were important in shaping human behaviour in
these societies. It does suggest, however, that these psychological factors must
be understood in a broader historical context.

26 Values and Personal Aspirations
B
eliefs varied greatly from one early civilization to another concerning
the nature of an ideal human life and what characterized a successful
individual. Despite many similarities in social and economic institutions, life
as experienced by an Aztec must have differed greatly from life as it was
experienced by a Mesopotamian or a Yoruba. Inspired by the views of the
eighteenth-century German philosopher Johann Herder, cultural relativists
have interpreted these experiential variations as vindicating the humanist claim
that every culture is a unique expression of the human spirit that is worthy
of study for its own sake (Vernant 1995).
The source materials available for studying these variations largely concern
the understandings and aspirations of high-ranking males, but these ideals
were probably shared or at least admired to some extent by most people in
the society. Consensus could have been either a product of status emulation
or a reﬂection of long-established, culturally speciﬁc views that were retained
and adapted to new situations as societies developed more complex class hier-
archies. The lack of comparable data concerning the values and aspirations of
women in early civilizations invites the suggestion that greater cross-cultural
similarities in their roles as wives, mothers, and homemakers made their views
about themselves more similar than those of men, but this conclusion may
simply impose androcentric prejudices on early civilizations. Opportunities
for women to participate in the political and economic activities of their soci-
eties varied greatly from one early civilization to another. Women must have
used the varied social ideologies of their societies to construct culturally dis-
tinctive roles for themselves within their families and communities. It would
seem that, along with male commoners, they participated to varying degrees
in a set of social values and aspirations that were realized most fully in the
lifestyles of upper-class males and are documented most fully in relation to
such individuals. Women must often have exploited these ideals in pursuit of
626

Values and Personal Aspirations
627
their own objectives. At the same time, they would have had reasons to view
male ideals and aspirations ambivalently and even critically.
ideal lifestyles
Ideal behaviour for the ancient Egyptian male was expounded in great detail
in Egyptian books of wisdom or instruction (sb3yt) – in fact, career manuals –
which began to be composed in the late Old Kingdom. The model was the
successful government ofﬁcial. The ideal ofﬁcial sought always to appear calm,
polite, self-effacing, and cautious as well as transparently honest and efﬁcient.
He was described as a ‘silent’ or ‘reserved’ man (gr) and as a ‘knowing’ man
(rh˘
), which meant that, unlike a ‘fool’ (wh˘
3), he was able to control his anger
and conceal both his resentments and his ambitions. He knew how to behave
so as not to offend his superiors or annoy equals with whom he had to cooperate
as well as compete. He treated those under his command politely and with
consideration but made sure that they respected and obeyed him. He was
generous as a way of cultivating friends and recruiting supporters.
The ideal ofﬁcial was expected to remain composed even when subjected to
severe provocation. Every aspect of his conduct was guided by rules of digniﬁed
behaviour that he had learned in the course of his education. Self-control,
combined with administrative talent, was viewed as the best way to avoid
being disgraced by enemies and rivals and to attract the notice, support, and
preferment of senior ofﬁcials. Responsible behaviour was viewed as according
with the cosmic order upon which the survival and satisfactory functioning
of both Egypt and the universe depended. In the terrestrial realm, the chief
force sustaining that order was the Egyptian monarch, and being a good team
worker was a manifestation of loyalty to the king.
Moderation under all circumstances was advocated. To be successful a man
had to avoid boasting, drinking too much wine, losing his temper, getting into
brawls, or associating with men who had a reputation for behaving badly or who
might be suspected of subversive behaviour. Adulterous affairs and relations
with prostitutes were to be avoided not for moral reasons but so as not to be
drawn into dangerous disputes and entanglements with their male kinsmen.
Early marriage with a suitable woman was advocated as the best means to
ensure a man’s respectability. A prudent bureaucrat would never eat too much,
especially when invited to dine with his superiors, since gluttony suggested a
general lack of self-control. He had to avoid engaging in idle gossip or saying
things that might embarrass or annoy his superiors. A superior’s mistakes were
to be drawn to his attention privately and very discreetly, if at all. The wisest
course was often to let a superior get himself into trouble rather than oppose

628
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
his policies and risk angering him. Functionaries who carefully followed these
instructions could take comfort in the thought that superiors or rivals who were
boastful, greedy, dishonest, or quarrelsome would eventually be demoted or
barred from holding ofﬁce.
The ultimate ambition of an Egyptian ofﬁcial was to be sufﬁcently successful
that he could live a quiet family life free from the cares and conﬂicts of public
ofﬁce. The favourite setting for such a life was a rural estate, where an ofﬁcial
could relax, ﬁsh, and perhaps hunt for his amusement, enjoy the visits of his
friends, and oversee farming operations. These ideals, which were explicitly
formulated and expounded by administrators and scribes and inculcated in
members of the upper and administrative classes in the schools, provided a
model of male conduct for the whole of society. While the lower classes were
caricatured as quarrelsome and violent, status emulation encouraged them to
copy the manners and attitudes exempliﬁed by their social superiors (J. Allen
2000: 258–59; Morenz 1973: 117–23).
Men and women living in the Valley of Mexico were urged to cultivate mod-
eration, responsibility, and restraint in their communal life. Politeness was a
key virtue and boasting a manifestation of extreme bad taste. The more high-
rankingpeoplewere,themoreselﬂesslytheywereexpectedtobehave.Individ-
uals were expected to be serious and calm – to speak, eat, and walk slowly, avoid
interrupting others, obey superiors and elders, and help the needy. Honesty,
hard work, and service to family and city were extolled as virtues, and compet-
itiveness and aggressiveness were supposed to be curbed by a deep concern
for the welfare of fellow citizens. Humour was not valued. Individuals were
encouraged to feel that they were constantly being observed and evaluated
by those around them. Although violence in the form of war and human sac-
riﬁce was common, its occurrence was carefully controlled by the state. Yet,
despite these ideals, Aztec men were competitive, and eager to enhance their
positions in society. Commoners were described by the upper classes as being
quarrelsome and litigious. Gambling, ritual ball games, and especially warfare
were sources of considerable prestige for men who were successful in these
endeavours, but soldiers could lose their lives and gamblers end up as debt
slaves. These activities were viewed as ones in which individual prowess, skill,
bravery, and supernatural favour counted for more than effective teamwork.
The supreme male ideal was to be a successful warrior. All men were ex-
pected to be prepared to sacriﬁce their lives defending their city-state or trying
to enhance its power. The public oration that accompanied the birth of every
Aztec boy asserted that his main purpose in life was to be a soldier. Schools for
commoners concentrated principally on military training, while young men
of the upper class received military instruction as part of a more extensive

Values and Personal Aspirations
629
education.Women’sreproductivefunctionsweremilitarizedbyequatingchild-
bearing with a man’s risking his life in battle. Young noblemen were required
to validate their hereditary privileges by distinguishing themselves in military
operations and risking debilitating wounds and capture or death in battle. For
commoners the only legitimate way to advance was by capturing enemy war-
riors in battle. Valour was rewarded by kings’ publicly conferring on individual
warriors the right to wear elaborate, minutely graded costumes and insignia,
memberships in military orders, and extensive social and economic privileges
according to the number of enemy warriors they had captured. Men who
never captured an enemy in battle were subjected for the rest of their lives
to various public humiliations. The sacriﬁces it required of men made waging
war the key activity deﬁning their worth. Long-distance traders were despised
because they did not ﬁght for their city-states, but even they carried arms and
were prepared to defend themselves valiantly if attacked (Bray 1968: 35–38;
Clendinnen 1991: 46, 141–45; Soustelle 1961: 217–24).
Early Dynastic Mesopotamian elite art and literature gloriﬁed male political
competition and heroic struggle (Pollock 1991: 383). Rulers sought to increase
their power and wealth by dominating one another and extending their control
over adjacent city-states, while individual scribes and craft workers competed
to be recognized as outstanding in their professions (Kramer 1981: 11). The
hero-rulers of ancient times dared to taunt and oppose deities, although they
never succeeded in overcoming them (R. McC. Adams 1966: 151). Yet, in their
everyday lives, Mesopotamians were enmeshed in activities related to farming
and commerce. For men the most important source of prestige was owning
enough farm land and urban property to live comfortably on the income de-
rived from their investments rather than having to engage personally in manual
labour or long-distance trade. Such a life was modelled on that of the gods,
the divine landowners for whom all human beings worked as paid labourers or
tenant farmers. Men who owned much property had the leisure to participate
in the business of city councils and law courts, and these activities enhanced
theirprestigeandpoliticalpower.Successfulmerchantsinvestedtheirproﬁtsin
land and property in the hope that eventually they could abandon long-distance
trading and shift from the traders’ area into the city proper to participate in its
esteemed lifestyle (Oppenheim 1969; Van De Mieroop 1999: 212–13).
Western Zhou society, according to Mark Lewis (1990: 7), was dominated by
a militaristic upper class set apart from the rest of the population by its devo-
tion to elaborate ancestral cults. These cults involved blood sacriﬁces that the
nobility supplied in part through warfare and hunting. The ritually encoded
acts of violence that characterized the lives of the Zhou ruling class were
therefore linked to their most venerable religious practices. Such relations

630
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
appear to have characterized the value system of the Shang upper class to an
even greater degree. David Keightley (1978b: 222–23) has argued that the rit-
uals which governed relations between the Shang upper class and its ancestors
were characterized by a love of order that effectively bureaucratized these
relations. He maintains that ofﬁce-holding was regarded as superior to any
other occupation and that in due course gaining administrative ofﬁce became
a man’s chief goal in life. Holding high administrative ofﬁce was, however,
intimately associated with warfare, violence, and human sacriﬁce. Keightley
(1987) also argues that a marked concern for modularity and the imposition
of unusual forms and uses on material objects in late prehistoric times an-
ticipated a later preoccupation with ritual and decorum among the Chinese
upper class. These differences may have been linked to the segmentary, rather
than bureaucratic, nature of the regional political administration in northern
China, looser political organization having encouraged more use of ritual and
symbolism to promote political unity.
The Yoruba emphasized competition as the quintessential afﬁrmation of
the individual, but, they also valued a combination of forcefulness (ase), com-
posure (itutu), and character (iwa) – which resulted in the use of power to
beneﬁt rather than harm other people (R. Thompson 1976: P/1). Competition
not only occurred overtly in the economic and political arenas but was symbol-
ically encoded in community and religious rituals. Political contests occurred
between leaders on the same level of government or different ones and often
involved efforts by untitled but ambitious men to increase their reputations
and followings.
Andean males from earliest childhood cultivated the ability to ignore pain
(Classen 1993: 75). Coming-of-age rituals involved personal endurance tests
and military contests. These rituals were especially elaborate in the case of the
Inka male nobility, whose collective coming-of-age ceremony was held under
the auspices of the royal court in and around Cuzco each December as part
of the summer solstice feast of Inti Raymi. In the course of this ceremony,
which involved beatings and armed combat to test their bravery, young nobles
were transformed into adult warriors and instructed that their principal duty
was to risk their lives to defend and enlarge the Inka state. Bernab´e Cobo
(1990: 126–33, 215) reports that military activities were considered the most
important and noble ones in which an Inka man could engage.
counter-ideals
There were also counter-ideals. In New Kingdom school texts Egyptian scribes
scolded young men who thought of abandoning their formal education to join

Values and Personal Aspirations
631
the army (Lichtheim 1976: 171–72), contrasting the superﬁcial attractions
of a military career with the brutal realities of army life and the long-term
beneﬁts of becoming scribes. The existence of this literature suggests that the
adventure associated with military life appealed strongly to many young men.
Throughout Egyptian history, military ofﬁcers were never portrayed wearing
military uniforms; instead they were represented as scribes and government
ofﬁcials (Martin 1991: 47–88). It was impossible for a man to become a high-
ranking military ofﬁcer without ﬁrst becoming literate and a member of the
administrative class. This demonstrates both the strength of the idea of the
ofﬁcial as the model to which all men should conform and the extent to which
bureaucratic ideals intruded into even the least paciﬁc spheres of Egyptian
society.
In the Valley of Mexico, long-distance traders celebrated their adherence to
their own ideals of commercial rivalry with competitive feasting, which estab-
lished relative social status among them. They also sacriﬁced prisoners, whom
they had purchased rather than captured, in an attempt to win public esteem.
This was especially important for aspirants to leadership roles in the merchant
community that involved interaction with the king and royal ofﬁcials. Yet to of-
fer human sacriﬁces merchants had to secure the support of leading warriors,
and therefore these sacriﬁces also symbolized the subordination of merchants
and their distinctive values to the hegemonic values that were associated with
the larger society and especially with its military leaders (Clendinnen 1991:
136–38).
A more radical counter-ideal was embodied in the religious movement in
the Valley of Mexico that opposed the idea of blood sacriﬁces to sustain the
cosmic order. This movement, promoted by certain learned men, appears
to have received some support from Nezahualcoyotl, the king of Texcoco.
He was angered by the Aztec upper class’s manipulation of Mesoamerican
religious-military beliefs to justify not only their control of a vast tributary
network but also their increasing political domination of their allies within
the Triple Alliance. These alternative concepts claimed historical and religious
roots in the Quetzalcoatl who had ruled the ancient city of Tollan, but they do
not appear to have been sufﬁciently inﬂuential to produce any fundamental
questioning of the aspirations and understandings that shaped individual val-
ues throughout the region (Le´on-Portilla 1992: 163–67, 190; Townsend 1979:
35–36).
The Yoruba subscribed to two antithetical lifestyles: that of the successful
warrior-politician, who mobilized supporters and acquired wealth and power
within a community, and that of the contemplative sage or wise man, who was
expected to use his divinatory skills to promote harmony and well-being and

632
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
hold families and communities together. The warrior-politician and the sage
exempliﬁed the complementary qualities of compulsion and harmony that the
Yoruba regarded as fundamental components of the supernatural realm. These
qualities were linked to an equally fundamental dichotomy between disorder
and order that was associated with the trickster god Esu and Ifa, the god of
wisdom, and with the cities of Oyo and Ife (Apter 1992: 29). Yet, among both vi-
olent and contemplative individuals, struggles for personal preeminence were
consistent with the competitiveness that constituted the universally shared
value of Yoruba culture. What distinguished the Yoruba from the Egyptians,
Aztec, and Mesopotamians, with their single-minded focus on bureaucratic
skill, warfare, or landowning as a cultural ideal, was the Yorubas’ acceptance
that two radically different goals could be equally important. Nevertheless,
many more Yoruba men sought to excel as warriors and politicians than as
sages.
the impact of cultural traditions
Early civilizations exhibited a broad range of behavioural ideals. Some of this
variation may have been inﬂuenced by social and ecological factors. For one
thing, there appears to have been greater emphasis on individual competi-
tiveness in city-state systems and on personal subordination to bureaucratic
routines or state goals in territorial states. Again, the strong emphasis on mili-
tarism in the Valley of Mexico may have been encouraged by the exceptionally
dense population of that region in late pre-Hispanic times, increasing compe-
tition over land and other resources. The high value placed on land ownership
in southern Mesopotamia could have been related to the importance of con-
trolling crop surpluses in that alluvial region as a basis for procuring essential
raw materials by means of long-distance trade. The Egyptians’ idealization of
the quiet, self-controlled ofﬁcial could perhaps only have developed in a soci-
ety that had no signiﬁcant external enemies. The similar values of the Chinese
mandarinate did not acquire ascendancy until after the Chinese state came to
control so much of East Asia that it no longer had any serious rivals; in Shang
and Zhou times military prowess was valued much more highly than it was
later. It has also, however, been suggested that privileging learning instead of
violence evolved within the framework of formalist values that already had a
long history in Chinese culture (Keightley 1978b).
Yet short-term functional explanations of this sort do not explain the devel-
opment of enduring cultural traditions. While the Yoruba appear to have been
as warlike as the Aztec or the Inka, instead of glorifying military prowess as the
supreme male ideal they embraced a life of action and a life of contemplation

Values and Personal Aspirations
633
as equally acceptable alternatives. Moreover, while Chinese history demon-
strates that concepts of the self can change signiﬁcantly with political and
economic conditions, ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian ideals endured for
millennia despite signiﬁcant political and ecological transformations. Aztec
values, which were grounded in a belief that war and bloodshed were re-
quired to sustain the cosmic order, appear to have been of great antiquity in
Mesoamerica. The values that inﬂuenced personal aspirations in early civiliza-
tions often seem to have taken the form of long-enduring cultural traditions.
While particular social or ecological factors may at some early period have sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuenced these traditions, the values themselves acquired sufﬁcient
autonomy to survive considerable alteration in material circumstances.
The impact of these idiosyncratic values on life in the various early civi-
lizations was far from trivial. Men who were temperamentally predisposed to
feel comfortable in Egyptian society probably would have felt psychologically
stressed and ill at ease had they found themselves living among the Aztec,
while individuals temperamentally suited to pursue Aztec goals would have
found life dull and repressed had they lived in ancient Egypt. Yoruba civiliza-
tion offered a choice of ideal lifestyles within a general framework that stressed
individual competitiveness. While the plasticity of human nature probably led
most people to accept as normal the goals set by the society into which they
were born, it is clear that the core values of different early civilizations made
life in each early civilization unique.
In an examination of later preindustrial civilizations, John Hall (1986: 33–83)
has argued that, from the Han Dynasty to the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, the Confucian mandarinate succeeded in inhibiting the development of
dynamic, semi-autonomous economic and military sectors in Chinese society.
They did this in part to protect the interests of their own governing class but
also to safeguard the large but fragile Chinese state from changes that might
have encouraged institutional or regional autonomy. Hall also attributed the
weakness of the political order in India to the withdrawal of the Brahmins
from the political sphere, although they continued to play an important role
in regulating Hindu daily life, and asserted that the way in which these two
preindustrial civilizations were organized precluded developments analogous
to the industrial revolution.
Christopher Hallpike (1986: 288–371) suggests that inﬂexible ‘core princi-
ples’ – patterns of behaviour and belief that are not directly related to modes
of subsistence – supply sets of general propositions that guide the elaboration
of the knowledge and values of historically related societies. He maintains that
these sets of values originate as a result of historical accidents analogous to the
operation of random variation or the founder’s effect in biological evolution

634
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
but, once formulated, inﬂuence cultural development for long periods. Their
role is therefore a constraining one. Hallpike identiﬁes the core principles that
have shaped Chinese society since at least the late ﬁrst millennium b.c. as in-
cluding rejection of a series of activities that were highly valued in some other
cultures: war, militarism, interpersonal conﬂict, public debate, litigation, and
the public humiliation of high-ranking individuals. All these activities were
believed to violate a cosmic order in which forces that were antithetical and
unequal to one another but essential for the operation of the cosmos consti-
tuted a harmonious, self-regulating, organic unity. Thus the use of military
force or the resort to legal action to regulate relations between individuals was
viewed as threatening to undermine the cosmic and therefore the social order
(312–29).
The core principles shared by the Indo-European-speaking peoples, accord-
ing to Hallpike, included approval of competitive individualism as manifested
in athletic competitions and verbal exchanges, admiration of warfare com-
bined with personal loyalty to military leaders, uninhibited use of civil law to
regulate interpersonal disputes, the individual pursuit of wealth, and the idea
of representative government as embodied in an assembly. Both legal systems
and assemblies were viewed as terrestrial versions of arrangements that oper-
ated on the cosmic level. While the Chinese regarded large patrilineal descent
groups as constituting the basis of social order, the Indo-Europeans, although
also favouring patrilineal forms of social organization, avoided large descent
groups. Free Indo-Europeans were divided into three orders – priests, war-
riors, and farmers – which provided the basis for a later dichotomy between
church and state (1986: 329–49). By contrast, the Chinese, from the late Zhou
period on, divided society into a descending hierarchy of ofﬁcials, farmers, ar-
tisans, and traders, attaching little importance to priests and equating religion
(zhao) with moral teaching (315).
That the cultural traditions deﬁned by core principles can persist over
long periods despite major changes in technology, environmental settings,
and demography is evident, Hallpike claims, in the many features shared by
Indo-European societies, despite these societies’ being dispersed over a re-
gion stretching from Western Europe to India. This, he says, means that it is
possible to predict more about a culture by knowing the linguistic family to
which it belongs than by knowing its environmental setting. He also argues that
capitalism is not a universal stage of human development but a speciﬁc man-
ifestation of Indo-European values (370–71), a position that generally agrees
with Hall’s. If Hallpike is right, enduring cultural traditions that were at least
semi-autonomous with respect to ecological adaptation helped to shape the
value systems and functioning of early civilizations.

Values and Personal Aspirations
635
The fact that early civilizations that had broadly similar class structures,
analogous arrangements that permitted the upper classes to appropriate most
surplus production, a limited range of political organization, and formally sim-
ilar religious beliefs should have developed such distinctive and persistent
beliefs concerning what constituted a good life indicates the power of cultur-
ally constructed understandings to shape some aspects of human behaviour
independently of materially adaptive factors. Unlike art styles, which displayed
idiosyncratic variation but had no practical impact on everyday life, these val-
ues exerted enormous inﬂuence on how people behaved in early civilizations,
how they thought about themselves, and how their civilizations functioned.
The religiously based military ethos of highland Mesoamerica encouraged
armed conﬂict and socially and politically devalued long-distance trade. The
importance accorded to military prowess made it impossible for merchants to
compete for political power. The Egyptian idealization of bureaucratic values
may explain why, despite their large population, they were never as formidable
militarily as their numbers might suggest. The extension of civilian adminis-
trative values to the military sphere seems to have inhibited the development
of a distinctive military ethos even in the New Kingdom, when the army had
become institutionally more differentiated from the rest of society than ever
before. Personal value systems played a key role in shaping behaviour in every
early civilization. Contrary to what materialist anthropologists have claimed,
these value systems were neither epiphenomenal nor socially irrelevant.
Yet cross-cultural regularities indicate that the power of such ideals to shape
behaviour was subject to important limitations. This is particularly so with re-
spect to material self-interest. Whether the highest ideal posited by a society
was for a man to be an outstanding warrior, a rich landowner, or a successful
bureaucrat, those who were successful all believed that it was essential for
them to sustain their power, privileges, and luxurious lifestyles at the expense
of farmers and other manual workers. The Egyptian bureaucrat who strove
to embody the ideals of the ‘quiet man’ was no less prepared to use coercion
and violence to suppress opposition among the lower classes than the Aztec
warrior-ofﬁcial. Doing this involved exercising similar kinds of social controls,
including military and police repression, upper-class manipulation of legal sys-
tems, continued recruitment of corv´ee labour, protection of institutional and
private forms of land ownership, and maintenance of ideologies that sought
to justify the upper classes’ domination over the labouring classes. Those con-
trols, rather than some innate obsession with cruelty and violence (D. Carrasco
1990; Sagan 1985), encouraged the development of similar attitudes towards
power and upper-class rights in all early civilizations. While most Aztec, as well
as the Imperial Chinese ruling class, may have despised and socially penalized

636
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the commercial acquisition of wealth (Hallpike 1986: 325), all members of the
upper classes appreciated the need to control wealth in order to retain power
and continue to enjoy an enhanced standard of living. Economic and political
interests thus tended to be viewed similarly, and these uniformities imposed
signiﬁcant cross-cultural limitations on the operations of idiosyncratic cultural
traditions. Thus the role of such traditions in shaping behaviour, while impor-
tant, may have been more restricted than some extreme cultural determinists
have maintained.
values and self-interest
Idiosyncratic cultural traditions which assigned speciﬁc values to particular
sorts of individual behaviour had the power to privilege certain kinds of ac-
tions at the expense of others. Such traditions not only established differ-
ing social agendas that distinguished one early civilization from another but,
more important, constrained their development in idiosyncratically speciﬁc
ways over long periods. Scholars who study differing perceptions and values
have no difﬁculty in demonstrating that each early civilization was a unique
expression of human creativity. Yet, while all human behaviour is culturally
mediated, culturally idiosyncratic solutions guided human behaviour only in
those spheres where similar ecological constraints or universal considerations
of self-interest did not directly constrain such behaviour. In these underde-
termined spheres, cultural choices provided the cognitive and psychological
structuring that was required for a society to function properly. Without ade-
quate agreement about what constituted appropriate behaviour, disruptions,
conﬂict, and personal disorientation would render a society dysfunctional. As
Ernest Gellner (1982) argued, what is purely cultural must impose some kind
of order or structure on itself in order to be comprehensible. This does not
mean that cultural prescriptions had to be inﬂexible or that everyone had to
accept and follow them precisely, but an individual cannot rebel against rules
unless rules exist.
Despite these great variations in lifestyle, in matters that relate to eco-
nomic and political self-interest we ﬁnd that the ruling classes of early civi-
lizations conceptualized their power and privileges and the way in which they
should deal with the lower classes in much the same manner. Their behaviour
was therefore grounded in something other than idiosyncratic or free cultural
choice. Evolutionary ecologists, who focus on the clearly adaptive aspects of
human behaviour, have tended to interpret all such cross-cultural uniformities
as a justiﬁcation for an ecologically based, unilinear view of cultural evolu-
tion, but this approach ignores vast differences in the environmental settings,

Values and Personal Aspirations
637
demography, and productive arrangements of early civilizations. Many of the
important cross-cultural similarities that relate to political power and the con-
trol of wealth in early civilizations appear by default to be grounded in little-
understood species-speciﬁc tendencies to handle these issues in similar ways.
This again raises important psychological questions.

27 Cultural Constants and Variables
T
he collective identity of each early civilization was expressed by a dis-
tinctive and highly elaborated upper-class culture that formally symbol-
ized that civilization’s unity and differentiated it from neighbouring societies.
The patronage of these elite traditions helped to distinguish the upper from the
lower classes while identifying the upper classes with the civilization as a whole.
Each early civilization possessed its own religious beliefs, myths, and festivals
and its own distinctive style(s) of art, architecture, music, and dance. The most
ambitious forms of conspicuous consumption in early civilizations were the
sponsorship by rulers and the upper classes of the production of monumental
architecture and high-quality works of art. The deployment of large amounts
of lower-class labour to erect buildings that became symbols of upper-class
dominance constituted further evidence of the power of the upper classes.
In territorial states, the culture of rural dwellers was regionally variable,
while that of the upper classes was statewide and unitary. In city-state systems,
local variants of the elite culture frequently distinguished one polity and its
leaders from another, while pancivilizational similarities signalled the shared
membership of the upper classes in a broader upper-class interaction network.
There were, however, differences in the extent to which upper-class traditions
were distinguished from those of commoners. In city-state systems, especially
those that lacked a hereditary nobility, high-quality art tended to be a techni-
cally superior and aesthetically more sophisticated version of commoner art,
while in territorial states it developed radically different canons and was pro-
duced by artists working full-time for the state rather than simultaneously for
upper-class patrons and the marketplace. In territorial states, stringent upper-
class controls and guidelines tended to unify production stylistically, while in
city-states different groups of craft workers developed and perpetuated their
own styles. There was also considerable variation among early civilizations
in the materials that were preferred for making works of art. Imported raw
638

Cultural Constants and Variables
639
materials were often used to produce luxury goods for upper-class clients. Al-
though elite art works were created, as material expressions of secular and
supernatural power, for the ruling classes in all early civilizations, the styles
of these works varied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to another.
There was iconographic as well as stylistic cross-cultural variation, although
iconographic differences were not totally idiosyncratic. The particular styles
and iconography of upper-class art and architecture tended to be established
at an early stage in the development of a civilization. While such art changed
slowly thereafter, innovations occurred within the context of an established
cultural tradition.
In all early civilizations, monumental architecture was consistently distin-
guished from ordinary structures. In addition to having a distinctive and uniﬁed
style, monumental architecture was used symbolically in various other ways
to integrate societies. In city-states, large buildings – temples or palaces or
both – invariably marked the centres of cities. While monumental architec-
ture manifested the political power and wealth of those who sponsored it, the
basic functional types remained strictly limited: tombs, temples, palaces, and
fortiﬁcations. All forms of monumental architecture developed from earlier
fortiﬁcations and from houses, which in early civilizations were differentiated
for the use of kings and other members of the upper classes, gods, and dead
members of the upper classes. In city-states, temples and palaces tended to
express community identity as well as royal and divine authority, while in ter-
ritorial states palaces, temples, walled administrative compounds, forts, and
rulers’ tombs signalled royal authority.
Each early civilization cultivated distinctive social values and personal as-
pirations. These were most explicitly deﬁned for high-status males and, once
formulated, endured for long periods. There may have been a tendency to
value individual competitiveness more highly in city-states and conformity
to bureaucratic and state goals more highly in territorial ones. Yet speciﬁc
value complexes, such as Aztec militarism, Egyptian self-control, and Yoruba
competitiveness, while too enduring to be explainable in narrowly functional
terms, inﬂuenced individual behaviour and thus each society’s capacity to pur-
sue speciﬁc goals. These values also made each early civilization unique. They
did not, however, impact the ability of the upper classes to control resources
and manpower and to protect their privileges using very similar techniques.
religion
In addition to a vast array of idiosyncratic concepts, religious beliefs displayed
signiﬁcant cross-cultural uniformity. The presence of religious beliefs in all

640
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
human societies seems associated with panhuman cognitive abilities that must
have been produced by natural selection in the course of biological evolu-
tion. These abilities include heightened individual self-awareness, the perva-
sive role of metaphor in thinking, and habitual anthropomorphization (Boyer
1994; 1996; Mithen 1996; Tilley 1999). As individual humans grew more con-
scious of the perils that confronted them in the natural and social realms,
they sought to alleviate psychic stress by postulating a universe controlled
by supernatural forces that were not indifferent to humans and might be
persuaded to protect them. Religious beliefs sought to account for the ori-
gin and nature of the cosmos and the forces that animated it, the origin and
nature of human beings, the fate of individual humans after death, and the
way in which humans might regulate relations with the supernatural to their
advantage. The beliefs that were associated with speciﬁc early civilizations
seem to have represented attempts by people of particular cultures to an-
swer essential questions about the nature of the universe and their relations
to it.
The rulers of all early civilizations expended vast amounts of wealth and en-
ergy on religious buildings, cult equipment, celebrations, and sacriﬁces. Each
early civilization venerated its own deities, conceptualized them in terms of dis-
tinctive beliefs, myths, and legends, and devised rituals to worship them. The
totality of religious beliefs and practices associated with each early civilization
was an original and unique creation.
At the same time, the people in every early civilization assumed that the
supernatural was immanent in the natural world as the power animating the
physical landscape, plants, animals, and human beings. While this power con-
sisted of primal energy, it was invariably personiﬁed and manifested itself not
as one but as many individual deities. Individual deities often took more than
one form, and their degree of physical anthropomorphization varied from one
early civilization to another. Deities were capable to varying degrees of merging
with one another or separating to form distinctive entities. They represented
powers of the natural world that were believed to possess human faculties and
personalities, including gender identity. Because they had these attributes, it
was possible for human beings to communicate and bargain with them. Yet,
because they also represented the forces of nature, they were far more pow-
erful and long-lived than individual human beings. They were also unequal in
power among themselves and often in conﬂict with one another. While deities
formed hierarchies that corresponded with their respective degrees of power,
these were often loose hierarchies resembling the arrangement of forces found
in the natural world. Apart from a few creator gods, hierarchies among deities
were not immutable.

Cultural Constants and Variables
641
The concept of nature’s being animated by supernatural forces that pos-
sessed human-like personalities meant that no clear distinction could be drawn
between what today we see as the natural, supernatural, and social realms. Be-
cause of this, the natural world was not viewed as something that could be
manipulated solely or even principally by means of systematic observation,
understanding, and practical action. People living in early civilizations under-
stood causal relations and regularly used such knowledge to exploit the natural
world, but their belief that the cosmos was animated by supernatural powers
inspired the conviction that ultimately humans could most effectively manipu-
late the natural world for their own purposes by establishing friendly relations
with the deities that controlled it or gaining power over these deities. This
conviction precluded the recognition of any need to develop a scientiﬁc view
of the cosmos.
People in all early civilizations believed that a supernaturally animated na-
ture sustained human life and that the gods depended on human offerings
to replenish their powers. This mutual dependence generated a cosmic cycle
in which energy was circulated from the supernatural realm into the human
world and back again. The degree of self-sufﬁciency attributed to the gods
varied from the Mesopotamians’ belief that without humans the lesser gods
would have to cultivate ﬁelds and build temples to the Aztecs’ conviction that,
without an endless supply of human blood, the supernatural forces that sus-
tained the universe would quickly cease to operate. Offerings were intended
to nourish the gods literally rather than metaphorically and normally consisted
of food and drink or the lives of animals and human beings. Because of their
dependence on offerings, deities in the early civilizations were not transcen-
dental as they were in most later preindustrial civilizations. It was only once
the gods were no longer believed to depend on human support that offering
them sacriﬁces became a purely metaphorical or symbolic act.
Within this system of belief, farmers created the resources that sustained
themselves, the upper classes, the gods, and the cosmic order. Every family
made offerings to deities, who often included their dead ancestors, but the
upper classes and in particular the king were especially important intermedi-
aries in conveying energy from the human to the supernatural realm. Their
ability to accumulate surplus resources on a larger scale than anyone else made
it possible for them to sustain the gods more lavishly than commoners. They
also possessed specialized ritual knowledge about how to relate to the gods.
The ritual activities of the king were viewed as crucial for maintaining the
universe. Kings, not priests, were responsible for offering major sacriﬁces.
When priests sacriﬁced on behalf of the king, they did so as his substitutes or
agents. Major sacriﬁces were usually made in ritually exclusive settings, such as

642
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
the interiors of temples and on elevated temple platforms – places accessible
only to rulers, priests, and members of the upper classes. Public participation
in state-sponsored rituals involved mass dancing, singing, and participation
in religious dramas that celebrated the natural changes and human activities
associated with the annual seasonal cycle. These rituals sought to renew the
world and reinforce the social order by strengthening relations with the gods
and revitalizing the universe.
While beliefs concerning what was appropriate for sacriﬁce and how sacri-
ﬁcial rituals should be performed varied from one early civilization to another,
the basic concepts concerning sacriﬁce were the same. Since these ideas dif-
fered signiﬁcantly from concepts of sacriﬁce in less complex societies and could
not have diffused from a single point of origin among all the early civilizations,
they must have been formulated separately in individual early civilizations.
There appears, however, to have been a high degree of cross-cultural unifor-
mity in the general patterns of religious beliefs among the societies out of
which early civilizations had developed. Not clearly distinguishing the natural,
supernatural, and social realms seems to have been typical of all societies prior
to the desacralization of nature that took place in most Eurasian civilizations
in the middle of the ﬁrst millennium b.c. In simpler societies, where all social
relations tended to be modelled on kinship ties, relations between the human
and the natural/supernatural spheres were formulated in terms of requests for
parental benevolence from the supernatural or the need for humans to sustain
and obey the spirits of deceased ancestors who controlled the fertility of the
land. In early civilizations, views of the supernatural as real or metaphorical
kin gave way to a belief that the gods constituted a superior social stratum.
The understanding of the supernatural that developed in early civilizations
therefore seems to have resulted from the reworking of a relatively uniform
set of beliefs about the supernatural in earlier societies to reﬂect the more
hierarchical structure of societies that were no longer being held together at
the highest levels by kinship relations.
The conceptualization of sacriﬁce in the early civilizations must have de-
veloped from earlier beliefs concerning reciprocity and exchange between
human beings and the supernatural. These beliefs were, however, radically
reformulated as a consequence of the evolution of complex systems of taxa-
tion and tribute. Sacriﬁce in early civilizations represented a projection into
the supernatural realm of the observation that farmers materially supported
the upper classes, who in turn maintained the larger political and social or-
der that was essential for a complex agricultural economy to function and for
farmers to prosper. Such projections made sense to both farmers and rulers,
who viewed each other as components of inegalitarian societies for which no

Cultural Constants and Variables
643
viable alternative could be imagined. Rulers were accepted as necessary to
maintain political stability; hence, by extrapolation, the role of the gods was to
maintain the cosmic order, and to do this deities required material support. If
rulers became too exploitative or permitted the upper classes to appropriate
too many resources from farmers for their own use, they endangered not only
the production of food but also the continuation of the cosmic order. Thus re-
ligious beliefs helped to curb exploitation by the upper classes on the grounds
that restraint was necessary to nourish deities and keep both the political and
the cosmic systems working.
Cross-cultural uniformities in the religious beliefs of early civilizations re-
sulted from analogous reﬂections on the taxation systems that were generically
common to all these societies. Sacriﬁce projected the taxation system into the
cosmic realm. Essential roles were assigned to farmers as producers of food
for the upper classes and the gods, to the human upper classes for maintaining
the social and political order that made a productive economy possible, and
to the gods for maintaining the cosmic order on which all life depended. The
upper classes played a vital role in sustaining the gods but depended on farm
labour to produce the food that was needed to do this. Therefore they were
answerable to the gods for their treatment of farmers, just as farmers were an-
swerable to the gods if they did not regularly produce food surpluses. Sahlins
(1976: 211–12) has maintained that religious beliefs were the dominant fo-
cus of symbolic production in the early civilizations. They provided powerful
concepts that helped to regulate political relations among classes in societies
that had grown too large and too complex to be managed by notions of real or
metaphorical kinship.
The concept of sacriﬁce thus supplied the equivalent of political constitu-
tions for early civilizations. While farmers and other lower-class people were
explicitly excluded from decisions about how society was to be governed and
denied the right to criticize the actions of the upper classes overtly, their duty
to ensure the continuity of the political and cosmic orders by feeding the upper
classes and the gods was balanced by the need for the upper classes to make
sure that farmers had the social peace and resources they needed to produce
enough food to sustain the cosmic order. The failure of either farmers or the
upper classes to respect and sustain the other threatened the functioning of
the universe.
The common features of beliefs about sacriﬁce in the various early civi-
lizations therefore appear to have been more than passive, epiphenomenal
reﬂections of an effective ecological adaptation. They represented a shared
understanding of the nature of social relations in early civilizations and of the
limits to which one class could exploit another without endangering the whole

644
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
system. Ideas about sacriﬁce and cosmic order in early civilizations constituted
an implicit discourse on political power that mediated class relations and lim-
ited dangerous behaviour in the form of either lower-class rebelliousness or
the overexploitation of farmers by the upper classes.
Whatever beliefs about the cosmos or the gods may have been shared by
the societies that developed into early civilizations, major features of the re-
ligious beliefs of early civilizations were shaped by thinking about economic
and political institutions that did not exist prior to the development of these
societies. This process illustrates the capacity of widely separated groups of
human beings at a particular level of development to transform common ex-
periences into similar understandings of the supernatural. The development
of these concepts also provides an astonishing demonstration of the ability
of the human mind to construct analogous religious concepts under similar
economic and political conditions and to use these ideas to stabilize conver-
gent forms of social organization. This suggests that practical reason played a
more extensive and important role in formulating general patterns of religious
beliefs than cultural particularists allow.
the universe and humans
Individual early civilizations produced numerous accounts, often differing in
detail, concerning the structure and creation of the universe, the origin of hu-
mans, the nature of human souls, and the fate of humans after death. Some
of these versions were associated with various cults or with different kinship
or ethnic groups that had been drawn together in larger political structures as
early civilizations developed. Others were deliberately synthesized for politi-
cal reasons. Yet these accounts displayed numerous cross-culturally recurrent
patterns.
Cosmologies exhibited many similarities. The universe was conceptualized
as a series of superimposed levels: a single terrestrial plane, one or more sky
realms above, and one or more underworlds beneath. The sky and under-
world planes were the exclusive realms of the gods and the dead, while the
earth was shared by living people and the supernatural. These levels were in-
terconnected, most often at the centre and around the edges of the terrestrial
realm, through hills, trees, caves, and temples. The gods and supernatural en-
ergy were able to move through these gateways, conveying life-giving powers
from the purely supernatural realms to the human one and back again.
The earth was generally believed to be a ﬂat plane, round or square in out-
line, at most a few thousand kilometres across, and surrounded by a salt-water
ocean. Each early civilization and usually each city-state believed itself to be

Cultural Constants and Variables
645
located at the centre of the terrestrial plane, which had been created especially
for its beneﬁt. The terrestrial plane was often thought to be divided into quar-
ters either according to the cardinal directions or at the points that marked
the rising and setting points of the sun at the summer and winter solstices.
This model took account of the geographical knowledge of the world that was
possessed by well-informed people who lived in early civilizations. Such infor-
mation declined exponentially beyond the borders of each early civilization.
Knowledge of particular seas or oceans was extrapolated as signifying that the
world was surrounded by salt water.
Lacking the contribution of practical knowledge, beliefs about the celes-
tial and underworld levels showed much less cross-cultural uniformity. While
the Mesoamerican civilizations postulated thirteen sky realms and nine un-
derworlds associated with speciﬁc deities and the Chinese likewise imagined
multiple levels, the Egyptians and the Mesopotamians postulated only one
major supernatural realm in the sky and another beneath the earth.
The understanding of the earth and the cosmos may also have been inﬂu-
enced by views held in earlier, less complex societies. Mircea Eliade (1954)
maintains that all early cultures believed in a multitiered universe, a verti-
cal axis mundi both separating and joining the different levels, accessibility
between the natural and supernatural levels, and the importance of shamans
for communicating between them. Unfortunately, we would need more de-
tailed and systematic information about small-scale societies to evaluate these
claims. If Eliade is even partially correct, however, cross-culturally uniform
beliefs that had existed prior to the development of early civilizations would
help to account for many otherwise inexplicable cross-cultural uniformities in
the cosmologies of early civilizations.
Myths concerning the creation and transformations of the universe were
cross-culturally more varied than cosmologies. A crucial factor shaping these
myths was measurement of time. Early civilizations tended to group days
into short periods of from four to ten days, longer periods of twenty to thirty
days, and various approximations of the sidereal year. These units facilitated
adaptations to seasonal changes, as well as the organization of labour, markets,
and tax collection. While the improved record-keeping of early civilizations
encouraged greater awareness of longer time-scales, there was much variability
in conceptualizing longer periods of time. The Aztec, Maya, and Inka thought
of time as moving in cycles of days, years, and longer units associated with
disintegrations and renewals of the cosmic order. Other early civilizations,
such as Egypt, Mesopotamia, and that of the Yoruba, appear to have believed
that a stable or self-renewing cosmos had been created at some point in the
past and would last indeﬁnitely. It is clear that ideas concerning the origin

646
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
and functioning of the universe were far more speculative and less subject to
empirical constraints than formulations dealing with the layout of the earth’s
surface. The overt importance accorded to cyclical processes in all three New
World civilizations probably arose from shared cultural traditions, which in the
case of the Maya and the Aztec are well documented.
It has been suggested that the Egyptians believed the cosmic order to be
more stable than the Mesopotamians did, because Egypt was ecologically more
stable than Mesopotamia (Frankfort et al. 1949: 137–39). Recent research on
the ecology of these civilizations has cast doubt on this interpretation, showing
signiﬁcant instability in Egypt as well; and the fact remains that the supernat-
ural punishments envisioned in Mesopotamia were rarely ecological disasters.
Alternatively, it has been proposed that, because of their greater political sta-
bility, territorial states encouraged belief in an ordered cosmos more than city-
states,whichwerefrequentlybattlingoneanotherforhegemony(Trigger1979:
40). The Maya, the inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico, and the Mesopotamians
viewed the rise and fall of individual city-states as events decreed by the gods or
inherent in the structure of the universe. Yet the Inka seem to have viewed the
universe as similarly unstable, although this may be because they and their sub-
jects in the central Andean highlands had only brieﬂy constituted a territorial
state.Moreover,theMaya,whothoughtthatthefortunesofcity-stateswereun-
stable because of ever-shifting relations among cosmic powers, believed that
the natural order was stable for periods lasting at least ﬁve thousand years,
and the Mesopotamians and the Yoruba, no less than the ancient Egyptians,
appear to have believed that the cosmic order would endure far longer. These
observations preclude any simple correlation between beliefs about cosmic in-
stability and city-state or territorial-state forms of political organization. Such
beliefs appear to have been shaped by various combinations of ecological and
political factors. Instability was attributed to supernatural punishment of spe-
ciﬁc human acts as well as to forces inherent in the supernatural order.
Accounts of human origins tended to be highly variable even within the
same early civilizations, but it was widely believed that all humans contained
some divine element. It was also claimed in many early civilizations that the
upper classes differed in origin from commoners. People in all early civiliza-
tions believed that human beings had two broad types of souls – impersonal
life-forces that animated bodies and souls associated with intelligence and per-
sonality. These souls were assembled at or near birth and tended to separate
at death, but one or both continued to exist. As did the gods, they required
sustenance from the human world to function properly both before and after
death. Yet the fortunes of the dead varied from one early civilization to an-
other. In Mesopotamia food offerings merely sustained the intellect soul of

Cultural Constants and Variables
647
the dead person, which was fated to live in misery in the underworld, whereas
elsewhere they empowered souls. In most early civilizations, the dead served
as intermediaries between their living descendants and the gods, the souls of
kings doing so on behalf of the entire society. Families feared that the souls of
dead members would punish them for misbehaviour or neglect.
It is tempting to interpret what happened to the souls of commoners after
death, as understood in different early civilizations, as a reﬂection of their social
status during life. This would suggest that commoners in city-states, especially
those that lacked a hereditary nobility, ought to have enjoyed a more favourable
existence after death than awaited commoners in territorial states. Yet, among
the Egyptians and Inka, the souls of commoners were believed to fare better
than the souls of commoners in city-states. As a result of status emulation,
the beliefs of the upper classes appear to have raised rather than lowered
commoners’ self-evaluation and expectations. In city-states, both upper- and
lower-class Yoruba, Mesopotamians, and Aztec expected less for themselves
after death. The fates of dead Maya rulers, although seemingly dependent
on the results of their individual efforts to outwit the gods of the underworld,
appear to have more resembled those of their counterparts in territorial states.
specialized knowledge
There was considerable cross-cultural uniformity in the sorts of specialized
knowledge that the upper classes chose to patronize in early civilizations. The
elaborate technological understanding developed by skilled craft workers gen-
erally went unrecorded, except indirectly in connection with supplying artisans
with raw materials and paying them for their work. The same is true for ar-
chitects; a few ceremonial plans and models of buildings have survived but
no detailed information about how major construction projects were planned
and carried out. Presumably, even in literate early civilizations, many of the
highly specialized skills required to perform this work were transmitted orally.
Genealogies and the deeds of former kings and great men were celebrated in
writing, oral traditions, or a combination of both. Bards and scribes helped to
preserve an understanding of the past.
In general, the knowledge that was of greatest practical concern to the upper
classes and regarded as most worthy of elaboration had as its goal improving re-
lations with the supernatural. Ascertaining the will of the gods through reading
omens and practising divination was highly elaborated in all the early civiliza-
tions. Concerns about health made medicine a subject of special interest to the
rich and powerful. Although some diseases were known to be curable using
natural remedies, no disease was believed to have only a natural cause, and

648
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
all diseases were considered susceptible to supernatural treatment. There was
also widespread fear of witchcraft or sorcery. Whereas in egalitarian societies
fear of becoming a victim of witchcraft or of being accused of having practised
it had encouraged generosity and redistribution, in early civilizations the abil-
ity of the upper classes to accuse commoners of witchcraft transformed such
accusations into a powerful means of intimidation. Witchcraft also continued,
however, to frighten the upper classes, who feared it as a covert form of resis-
tance to their authority. This encouraged the development of more effective
techniques for detecting witches and for counteracting witchcraft, demonic
powers, and even the ill will of the gods using magical spells, amulets, and
esoteric rituals.
Thus the forms of knowledge that were most assiduously cultivated under
upper-class sponsorship in early civilizations were linked to trying to ﬁnd ways
to deal with aspects of the natural/supernatural realm that could not be con-
trolled by natural means. This kind of specialized knowledge remained the
prerogative of the upper classes, highly trained priests, and administrative
specialists. The cultivation and preservation of specialized knowledge appears
to have been primarily associated with temples or religious groups in city-state
systems and with royal courts in territorial states. In some early civilizations
the upper classes were taught such knowledge, along with record-keeping and
other administrative skills, at special schools.
More complex understandings of cosmology, human origins, divination, and
medicine grew out of earlier beliefs that were elaborated by specialists em-
ployed in the higher echelons of early civilizations. Creating new and more
effective ways to control relations with the supernatural required understand-
ing the speciﬁc wishes of the gods. The purpose of such knowledge was to enlist
their political support and their assistance in counteracting human illness, mis-
fortune, and witchcraft and to use divine power to reinforce upper-class control
over the lower classes. These common concerns encouraged analogous elabo-
rations of ideas in all the early civilizations. Such elaborations manifested the
greatest degree of cross-cultural regularity in those domains of culture that
exhibited the greatest continuity from earlier periods and were most strongly
inﬂuenced by direct observation.
Early civilizations were the ﬁrst societies in which, for functional reasons,
speech, as opposed to ideas about speciﬁc topics, was recorded. Writing did
not, however, develop in all early civilizations, and the uses that were made
of it remained everywhere more restricted than in later preindustrial civiliza-
tions and modern industrial societies. Systems that were able to record speech
developed in only four of the early civilizations we are examining. Despite ev-
idence of an independent origin for at least three and possibly all four of these

Cultural Constants and Variables
649
scripts, they were all logophonic. The representation of sounds was achieved
differently, however, by each writing system. There was no precedent for the
principles of writing as it developed in these four early civilizations. Even
where it had been present, semasiography operated very differently. Yet these
earliest scripts indicate that, when people ﬁrst sought to record speech, they
habitually began with logography rather than by trying to represent phonemes
or syllables. Once a functioning logophonic writing system had been created,
there was no indication of any further evolution within individual early civiliza-
tions towards more phonetic scripts. The creation of phonetic scripts happened
(and then not always) only when logophonic scripts were used to write new lan-
guages in hitherto non-literate societies. The development of writing systems
provides dramatic evidence that precedents were not required for the occur-
rence of striking parallel or convergent developments in particular domains of
culture.
religious beliefs and practical reason
Much of the knowledge that characterized the elite cultures of early civiliza-
tions was derived from religious, cosmological, and therapeutic concepts of
earlier times, altered and elaborated to serve the needs of larger and more
complex class societies. Changes included the recognition of a larger terres-
trial world and longer periods of time, although, except with the Maya concept
of time, both space and time remained limited by comparison with modern
understandings. Cross-culturally similar beliefs in early civilizations often ap-
pear to have resulted from the adaptation of already similar earlier beliefs to
analogous new conditions. Class societies created elaborate art and architec-
ture that symbolized the unity of society at the same time as they reafﬁrmed
the dominance of the upper classes over commoners. Early civilizations also
exhibited idiosyncratic differences in aspirations and values which, because
they inﬂuenced human behaviour, affected the functioning of these societies
in signiﬁcant ways.
The most dramatic and far-reaching intellectual innovations that these class
societies produced were those related to religious beliefs. While the gods were
credited with supplying the cosmic energy that supported human life, humans
nourished the gods, and earthly rulers became the supreme intermediaries
in the process by which the cosmic cycle was maintained. This analysis pro-
jected into the supernatural realm the simultaneously complementary and
antagonistic relations that bound together the upper and lower classes in early
civilizations.Byassigningfarmers,rulers,andgodssigniﬁcantrolesinmaintain-
ing the cosmic order, this view imposed moral limitations on the exploitative

650
Cognitive and Symbolic Aspects
behaviour of the upper classes that enhanced the viability of society. Since
there had been no need for religious beliefs of this sort prior to the devel-
opment of larger, class-based societies, their cross-cultural uniformity in early
civilizations suggests that they were products of practical reason as it related to
some universal forms of self-interest. The same explanation can be offered for
the cross-cultural regularity of the measures that the upper classes employed
to protect their wealth and power. The logographic preference in the writing
systems of early civilizations seems to reﬂect as yet little understood cognitive
biases that all human beings share.
While scholars have long been fascinated with the cultural diversity of early
civilizations, there was much similarity in the basic religious concepts, cosmolo-
gies, beliefs concerning souls, and forms of knowledge that were thought worth
elaborating. Ironically, scholars seem less intrigued by truly unique forms of
knowledge, such as the Classic Maya view of time, than by diverse expres-
sions of similar themes. While we have encountered much speciﬁc diversity in
subsistence economies in early civilizations and at least two radically different
approaches to political organization, there appears to have been only one major
view of the operation of the supernatural. Far from being an epiphenomenal
reﬂection of culture as an adaptive system, this view appears to have been the
convergent outcome of profound reﬂections on how class societies served the
practical needs of their members. In early civilizations, religion was not only
the main locus of symbolic production but also the principal medium for vital
discussions and debates on political issues.

Discussion

28 Culture and Reason
A
nthropologists agree that all human perception is culturally and there-
foresymbolicallymediated.Eventhemostextremepositivistsacknowl-
edge that an understanding of the world is mediated by the categories and
associated meanings that individuals learn as members of societies and that,
human behaviour therefore represents an adaptation not to the world as it
really is but to the world as individuals imagine it to be. Yet anthropologists
disagree violently about the signiﬁcance of symbolic mediation and especially
about the degree to which culturally constructed images of the world approx-
imate reality. They also hold many different views concerning the forces that
shape culture (Trigger 1998c).
At one extreme are the ecological determinists, who seek to understand
human behaviour in terms of the same factors that govern the behaviour of all
other animal species. Culture for them is one component of an adaptive system
that modiﬁes human behaviour in response to changing demographic and nat-
ural conditions – a mechanism that helps a species to achieve adaptive ﬁtness.
While acknowledging the unusually prominent role of symbolic manipulation
in guiding human behaviour, they see culture as shaped by practical activity and
utilitarian interests. The human mind, in their view, is a device for formulating
rational adaptive stategies, and culture is a mnemonic for encoding and facili-
tatingtheimplementationofthese strategies.Formostpracticalpurposes,they
consider behaviour rather than culture the primary object of scientiﬁc study.
Supporters of this view argue that, even if the world that humans adapt to
is one of ideas, it has to bear a very close resemblance to the real world if
human groups are to survive. This discounting of the explanatory value of cog-
nition and an accompanying tendency to treat culture as a black box encourage
ecological determinists to emphasize the generically animal aspects of human
behaviour and to treat the speciﬁcally human aspects as epiphenomenal. Such
anapproachtendstominimizethesigniﬁcanceofculturaltraditionsinfavourof
653

654
Discussion
short-term, functionalist explanations of human behaviour and beliefs. There
is also a strong preference for Locke’s view of the mind as a tabula rasa on
which sensory impressions are inscribed for rational analysis (R. N. Adams
1988).
At the opposite extreme are those who attach supreme importance to cul-
tural meanings in the shaping of human perception and behaviour. For them
cultures are texts that are modiﬁed by endless individual decodings and en-
codings and no two individuals ever understand the same utterance or event
in precisely the same way. Advocates of this approach insist that principles of
classiﬁcation and understanding are culturally speciﬁc and historically derived
and therefore cannot be inferred from any objective qualities of the real world
(Sahlins 1976: 47). They also maintain that a vast array of alternative cultures
could be associated with any particular set of material conditions. They see no
clear order or direction to change, which they consider mainly a result of the
random variations (memory tricks) produced by ceaseless recodings of mes-
sages. George P. Murdock (1956) called this process ‘miscopying’ and likened
it to genetic mutation, and it is also the hallmark of a historical-particularist ap-
proach. Cultural relativists emphasize cross-cultural differences and treat cul-
turally mediated understandings as the most important factors shaping human
behaviour. Many of them also attribute the persistence of cultural traditions to
the inability of the people who are guided by a culture to formulate signiﬁcant
alternatives – a conclusion that is incompatible with the ethnographic obser-
vation that cultures characteristically provide multiple ready-made options for
dealing with ecological and social challenges (Salzman 2000). Carried to the
extreme of cultural determinism, a relativist approach becomes the idealist
counterpart of ecological determinism.
Between these two extremes lies a broad range of options. Structuralists
treat culture as a text but see it as controlled by hypothetical underlying struc-
tures that limit variation and change. Within structuralism there are harder
and softer options. Some theorists believe that the underlying structure in-
hibits change to the extent that French culture will remain identiﬁably French
regardless of how much economic or social change occurs. Others, in keeping
with the approach’s Saussurean origins, view structure as more analogous to
grammar,whichdoesnotprecludeanyparticularthoughtfrombeingexpressed
but determines how difﬁcult it may be to communicate a speciﬁc idea in
any particular language. Late Boasian anthropology believed that an innate
human need for psychological consistency required cultures to acquire pat-
terns that were reassuring to individuals. The need for such patterning was
claimed to be far more important than the speciﬁc nature of any pattern
(Benedict 1934).

Culture and Reason
655
On the materialist side, classical Marxism identiﬁed economic competition
rather than ecological adaptation as the primary source of social and cultural
change, at least in class societies. This approach, by assigning primary im-
portance to individual and group strategies as they relate to political power
and the control of resources, conceptualized human beings as active agents
shaping their collective destiny rather than as passive entities subject to eco-
logical or cultural forces. Still more permissive was the older Boasian belief
that, provided that a culture satisﬁed a basic set of functional prerequisites,
such as food and protection, cultural variation could be random (Aberle et al.
1950; R. E. Adams 2000: 2–6; Murdock 1945). This approach, which had
much in common with Bronislaw Malinowski’s belief that social institutions
were grounded in the biological needs of individuals, posited that functional
prerequisites could be satisﬁed in many different ways and that culture was
shaped by the idiosyncratic operation of diffusion as well as by the aggregate
outcomes of individual preferences.
Each of these theories has its supporters, and all of them have ﬂuctuated
in popularity over time. The cyclical rather than unilinear nature of these
ﬂuctuationssuggeststhatthesetheoriesaredeeplyembeddedinthecompeting
values of Western society, especially those associated with rationalism and
romanticism. For social scientists to proclaim that they are Marxists, cultural
ecologists, or cultural relativists is to assert that they are prepared to act as
if one of these explanations of how societies function and change constituted
the best approximation of the truth. Such a commitment is largely an act of
faith.
The evidence that has been examined concerning early civilizations does
not support the once widely accepted ecological-evolutionary position that,
because sociocultural phenomena are shaped most powerfully by ecologi-
cal or economic constraints, societies at the same level of development will
show the most cross-cultural regularity in their economic institutions, less
in their social and political organization, and still less in the cultural sphere.
The assumption here is that the features of most adaptive signiﬁcance will
be selected for most powerfully by material constraints, while less signiﬁcant
ones will display opportunistically determined random patterning (Friedman
and Rowlands 1978b). In every aspect of early civilizations we have en-
countered idiosyncratic practices and beliefs. In general, cross-cultural par-
allels have tended to be of a generic sort, while idiosyncratic features have
been more speciﬁc. The evidence does not, however, support the view that
cross-cultural regularities existed mainly at the level of economic and so-
cial behaviour as opposed to that of belief. This unexpected distribution of
cross-cultural patterning suggests the need for a more careful analysis of

656
Discussion
the factors that produced both idiosyncrasies and uniformities among early
civilizations.
culturally idiosyncratic patterns
Art styles, not surprisingly, varied idiosyncratically from one early civilization to
another, even among the neighbouring Maya and Aztec. Similar idiosyncratic
variation differentiated the monumental architecture produced for upper-class
patrons in each of the early civilizations. The elite styles of art and architecture
that characterized speciﬁc early civilizations evolved from local prototypes but
acquired their distinctive features at an early stage in the development of each
civilization. Because of their greater formality and elaboration, such styles
often bore little resemblance to their antecedents. Yet, despite stylistic differ-
ences, important features were shared. Lavish support by the upper classes
favoured the creation of more sophisticated and coherent styles. Conspicu-
ous consumption is evident in the large size of buildings, the vast amount of
labour required to erect them, and the specialized skills that were invested in
producing high-quality products. Luxury goods were frequently manufactured
from exotic and expensive raw materials. These forms of behaviour exhibited
in material form the wealth and power of the upper classes.
Distinctive art styles symbolized the political unity of particular territorial
states, the broader cultural afﬁliations of member polities of city-state sys-
tems, and the separate identities of individual city-states. Yet the extent to
which the art styles of the various elite crafts in individual early civilizations
were integrated varied. While innovations took place and to some extent were
valued in the art and architecture of all early civilizations, they occurred within
the constraints of well-deﬁned cultural traditions. Individual craft specialists
sought to produce works of art that were of exceptional quality, but their
aim was excellence within existing canons. The aesthetic principles underlying
the art of individual early civilizations changed over time and varied among
individual artists. Yet, the principles that deﬁned a single cultural tradition
constituted no less impressive a manifestation of patterning in human be-
haviour than the strongest cross-cultural regularity. The materials used and
the available technology imposed few functional limitations on stylistic varia-
tion. The continuing pressure for stylistic unity came mainly from the socio-
cultural sphere, with the upper class encouraging internal coherence and the
maintenance of distinctive cultural traditions. Yet the stylistic features of an
early civilization’s elite art and architecture constituted a self-contained mani-
festation of culture that exerted no speciﬁc functional constraints on every-
day life.

Culture and Reason
657
Propositions about goals for individual humans were also cross-culturally
variable. These propositions were not purely stylistic, however; they estab-
lished norms to which individuals had to conform in order to win public ap-
proval. Dominant cultural ideals represented values of the upper classes as
those of the entire society and thus encouraged society to function in accor-
dance with those classes’ interests. To some limited degree these values may
have accorded functionally with different forms of sociopolitical organization.
A heightened emphasis on competitiveness seems to have been associated with
city-state systems and obedience to authority with territorial states. Such cor-
relations were not, however, very speciﬁc. As did art styles, attitudes relating
to ideal individual behaviour tended to persist for long periods. The ancient
Mesopotamian belief that kings were not inherently different from their sub-
jects stubbornly survived strenuous efforts by some hegemons and later rulers
of Mesopotamian regional states to persuade their subjects to regard them as
gods.
Cultural ideals also focused the performance capabilities of whole societies.
The Aztec, like the early Indo-Europeans, gloriﬁed individual males as war-
riors; the Egyptians and increasingly the Chinese idealized the ordered and
harmonious conduct of public affairs; and the Mesopotamians and Yoruba,
each in their own way, positively valued interpersonal competition. The same
set of values tended to be shared by people living in all the states making up
a city-state system. The often very different values that prevailed in nearby
less complex societies exerted little inﬂuence on early civilizations and were
frequently dismissed as barbarous. Even when long-established civilizations
came to be coerced by societies whose ideals differed from their own, a set of
values that had become less than optimally adaptive could persist indeﬁnitely.
It is frequently asserted that aspects of culture that vary idiosyncratically
among historically unrelated cultures are ‘stylistic’ rather than ‘functional’ and
therefore selectively neutral (Dunnell 1978; Wenke 1997a). This argument is
problematical for several reasons. First, some features of human behaviour
that are idiosyncratically variable are highly adaptive. Because there was great
variation in the types of environments that the different early civilizations ex-
ploited and in the performance characteristics of their domestic plants and
animals, there was also great variation in the ways these resources were man-
aged. Diverse agricultural regimes made food production effective in different
environmental settings. Most of these practices were continuations of adap-
tive patterns that had evolved separately in each region long before the rise
of civilization. There was also considerable variation in agricultural technol-
ogy, which ranged from simple digging sticks in some early civilizations to
a broad range of metal hand tools in others. While some of this technology

658
Discussion
developed in early civilizations, most of it has been shown to have been a her-
itage from earlier times. Thus there was great idiosyncratic variation among
early civilizations in quintessentially adaptive features. Neoevolutionists such
as Julian Steward (1949), who maintained that early civilizations had simi-
lar subsistence economies, wrongly assumed that all these civilizations had
developed in similar environmental settings. They failed to recognize the
variability in the subsistence patterns of early civilizations as a prime exam-
ple of ecological adaptation. Unlike stylistic variation in art and architecture,
idiosyncraticvariationinagriculturalpracticeswasadaptivetovariedecological
settings.
Style has long been recognized as a symbolic way to assert ethnic, class, and
gender identity. Sahlins (1976: 203) noted that an unconscious dress code can
create a cohesive society out of perfect strangers. In early civilizations, elite art
and monumental architecture both expressed and reinforced the power of the
upper classes and the corporate identities of early civilizations and individual
states. Values and lifestyles deﬁned generally acceptable behavioural patterns
and thus provided individuals with needed guidance and reassurance. Patterns
for living were powerfully sanctiﬁed by tradition and religion as well as by fa-
miliarity. In addition to privileging certain general types of behaviour, each
society provided speciﬁc guidelines applicable to relations between parents
and children, men and women, old and young, and people of higher and lower
rank. While these values played mainly a neutral facilitating role in relation to
society as a whole when early civilizations existed in relative isolation from one
another, they acquired strong, if unpredictable, selective values when compe-
tition developed between societies with different values. The sort of warfare
practised in the Valley of Mexico, which was focused on gaining individual
prestige and maintaining the universe through prisoner sacriﬁce, fared badly
when the Aztec had to confront Spanish forces that fought for different reasons
and by different rules. Yoruba personal competitiveness, by contrast, proved
highly adaptive for coping with British colonial administration. It therefore
seems unlikely that an operational distinction can be drawn between style and
function.
The ubiquity of patterns of elite art, monumental architecture, and reﬁned,
upper-class lifestyles suggests that they fulﬁlled signiﬁcant functions that were
necessary for the operation of early civilizations, providing symbols that struc-
tured identity, promoted psychological stability, and gave meaning to life. From
a vast range of possibilities, they created coherent cultural patterns, goals, and
aspirations for people to follow. It is unclear whether the speciﬁc choices made
reﬂected some deep structure underlying cultural patterns, the operation of a
conscious set of core principles, or mere chance. Whatever their source, the

Culture and Reason
659
resulting conﬁgurations provided meaning to what people did in what would
otherwise have been a chaotic situation.
Idealists maintain that idiosyncratic cultural patterns represent the
quintessence of creativity of the human spirit, free from ecological constraints,
and celebrate each cultural pattern as a unique creation of the human spirit.
Yet at the same time they see cultural change as the result of a random suc-
cession of unique understandings that each human mind brings to culturally
transmitted experience, every decoding being another encoding. This theory
implies that cultures ought to change in a random fashion and exhibit random
cross-cultural patterning, and many historical particularists and postprocessual
archaeologists in fact assert that such randomness characterizes all of human
behaviour.
Postmodernist claims about cultural idiosyncrasy revive long-standing an-
thropological debates about the relation between cultural traditions and func-
tionality. Nineteenth-century anthropologists treated cultural traditions as a
dead weight constraining human behaviour and the means by which obso-
lete and often irrational ideas from the past survived into the present. Edward
B. Tylor (1871) deﬁned the main goal of evolutionary anthropology as exposing
the useless and even dangerous survivals of more primitive stages of human
development in modern society. This approach encouraged anthropologists to
view culture as an uncritically accepted and change-resistant set of customs
inherited from the past.
Later many social anthropologists argued in opposition to this idea that there
was no such thing as a ‘survival’; any concept that persisted from the past either
continued to perform its original function or had acquired a signiﬁcant new
one. They also argued that there was no reason that new functions needed
to resemble previous ones. Cultures had to be understood in terms of the
relations that their various parts bore to the whole at any given time. Social an-
thropologists who followed A. R. Radcliffe-Brown (1958) stressed the primary
importance of social relations and viewed culture as acquiring its functional
signiﬁcance from the relations that individual beliefs, habits, and bodies of
knowledge bore to social behaviour.
Classical Marxism posited a more complex and reﬂexive relation between
tradition and function. According to Karl Marx, ‘human beings make their
own history . . . not under conditions chosen by themselves, but ones directly
encountered, given, and transmitted from the past’ (Marx and Engels 1962, 1:
247). In other words, each generation starts with a heritage of past beliefs and
practices that individuals and groups reshape to accord with their changing
needs and aspirations. Culture simultaneously guides human behaviour, pro-
vides ideas that can be used to bring about change, and encourages resistance

660
Discussion
to change. Old institutions can be either rejected or altered to serve new pur-
poses. Gordon Childe (1965 [1936]: 98) argued that no one could infer the
details of British parliamentary government in the nineteenth century from
a purely theoretical understanding of the capitalist mode of production. Al-
though there was a close connection between the economic dominance of
the entrepreneurial bourgeoisie in nineteenth-century Britain and the form of
power that was exercised in that country, the speciﬁc nature of the British con-
stitution had to be understood in relation to an evolving set of English political
institutions and practices that had originated during the medieval period.
A powerful tendency, derived from functionalism, nevertheless persists to
dismiss cultural traditions as non-explanations of human behaviour (Binford
1989: 14–16). Culture continues to be regarded as a passive residue of ideas
inherited from the past that is destined to be either discarded or reshaped to
serve present needs. This view has been seriously challenged by the ecologists
Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson (1985), who point out that the great selective
advantage of the symbolic capacity of human beings is the ability it confers
to beneﬁt from the experiences of others without having to share or even
witness them. The vast majority of the ideas that guide behaviour are learned
symbolically from others either in infancy or later in life. Individuals therefore
do not have to reinvent the wheel, nor do they have to alter established ways
of doing things unless they conclude that there is a compelling reason for
doing so.
Boyd and Richerson (1985: 95–116, 276) maintain that ideas inherited from
the past are generally superior to innovations, in part because repeated use
and modiﬁcation have enhanced their effectiveness as guides for individual
behaviour. While innovations are initially devised to serve personal ends, as
they are applied by large numbers of people over long periods they become
better adapted to serving the needs of society as a whole. Innovations may
become necessary as a result of ecological or economic changes, but because
they are untested they generally have higher initial social costs than traditional
solutions. If this is the case in modern industrial societies, it must have been
even more so in earlier societies, where, because of the slower rate of change,
the necessity to alter existing rules of human behaviour would usually have
been less pressing.
This argument calls into question the notion that it is practical reason that
accounts for cross-cultural uniformities and cultural reason that explains cross-
cultural particularities. Ecological patterns are adaptive precisely because they
are variable from one natural setting to another. Other idiosyncratic cultural
patterns persist not because stylistic traits are selectively neutral but because
they are selected for internal consistency in situations that relate to identity,

Culture and Reason
661
cooperation, and psychological well-being rather than to serve a cross-cultural
goal.
cross-cultural regularities
Early civilizations had many similarities. Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service
(1960) identiﬁed cross-cultural regularities as products of general evolution,
arguing that these were features that, for functional reasons, all societies that
reached a particular level of complexity had to develop. Neoevolutionists as-
sumed that the explanation for these similarities was primarily ecological.
In all the early civilizations, farmers produced modest agricultural surpluses,
of which a disproportionate amount was appropriated by the upper classes.
All of them had generally similar class hierarchies, one of two basic types
of political organization (city-states and territorial states), and three types of
administration (heterarchical, delegational, and bureaucratic). Their religious
beliefs did not distinguish the natural, the supernatural, and the social any
more than those of smaller-scale societies. Early civilizations had convergently
created a single model of how the cosmos functioned and of the relations
linking humans and the supernatural, and in each early civilization the upper
classes patronized the study of a natural world that was believed to be animated
by supernatural forces.
The rulers of each early civilization used various economic, political, and
religious incentives to induce farmers to produce agricultural surpluses and
surrenderalargeportionofthemtothestateandtheupperclasses.Whilethese
‘tributary’ relations had features in common with the support of elders and big
men in some small-scale agricultural societies, the bureaucratic and coercive
measures that were used to ensure the regular production and delivery of sur-
plusesweredifferent.Thesizeofsurplusescontinuedtoberestrictedbysimple
technologies, which made human labour a relatively inﬂexible variable, and by
the limited extent to which farmers could be persuaded or coerced to produce
beyond their families’ immediate needs. Farmers paid moderate rates of taxes
with little protest in return for the state’s organizing defence against foreign en-
emies, maintaining internal peace, and sometimes coordinating projects that
promoted economic development. Increasing taxation beyond these modest
limits would have required increasing use of force and hence greater man-
agerial organization and expense. Unlike some later preindustrial civilizations,
early civilizations opted for a low-force/low-yield solution. Probably only about
10 percent of total food production was surrendered to the state.
Higher population densities were associated with more intensive forms of
food production. While more intensive agriculture yielded more food per unit

662
Discussion
of arable land, it often required more human labour to produce the same
amount of food and under these circumstances was not undertaken without a
good reason. While all early civilizations appear to have been able to intensify
food production, this was accomplished in locally speciﬁc ways. Intensiﬁca-
tion was mainly based on knowledge that ordinary farmers already possessed.
Where population densities or opportunities to sell food were increasing, ini-
tiatives for more intensive food production usually came spontaneously from
farmers.
Early civilizations required extensive areas of fertile, easily worked soils and
moderately dense, sedentary human populations. Population density by itself
was not, however, necessarily the key variable, and neither was the circum-
scription of a region with great agricultural potential by a much poorer one.
More important was a growing need to protect agricultural land and other
forms of immovable property as increasing amounts of labour were invested
in them. As possession of such property was increasingly threatened by rival
polities, pastoral marauders, and poorer or landless elements within society,
farmers became willing to submit to authority and pay taxes in order to ensure
that their property was adequately protected (Linton 1933). The development
of larger states often produced conditions propitious for agricultural intensiﬁ-
cation and population expansion. Such expansion made landowners even more
dependent on government protection, but where denser populations necessi-
tated more labour to produce sufﬁcient food, overall surplus production may
occasionally have declined. In situations where denser populations could have
been supported without adopting more labour-intensive forms of agriculture,
rulers sometimes sought to increase food production and their own revenues
by attracting foreign immigrants or settling prisoners of war. Despite the close
correlation between population density and the intensity of agricultural pro-
duction, there appear to have been many different strategies for managing
both population growth and agricultural intensiﬁcation. Population density
cannot be treated as an independent variable in the development of early
civilizations.
There were three main types of land ownership in early civilizations: collec-
tive, institutional, and private. While it is unclear to what extent collectively
owned land was a primordial form in all early civilizations, institutional land was
independently created in several and private land in at least two (Mesopotamia
and Egypt). We are prevented from positing an evolutionary sequence of land-
holding from collective through institutional to private by the considerable
variation in combinations of these types of ownership from one early civiliza-
tion to another and the varying capacity of collective and institutional forms to
resist erosion.

Culture and Reason
663
All early civilizations required corv´ee labour from commoners, although the
amount and importance of this form of tax varied. While the Inka collected
taxes only in the form of labour, other civilizations required in addition the
regular payment of taxes either on land or on harvests and herds. In most early
civilizations they were collected in kind, but in Mesopotamia they were even-
tually paid in silver. Aztec and Yoruba leaders extracted considerable revenues
by means of a sales tax, while Yoruba authorities also imposed duties on the
local and regional transport of goods. In many early civilizations, governments,
temples, and ofﬁcials derived income from institutionally or privately owned
land by requiring landless farmers to work it in return for being allowed to
keep enough produce to feed themselves and their families or by hiring wage
labourers, renting land, or sharecropping it. While the means varied, the re-
sult was the same: a large portion of the crops produced on such lands was
appropriated by the government and the upper classes.
The development of systems of taxation and appropriation involved the
repeated invention of a limited number of techniques for extracting resources
from commoners and the use of different combinations of these techniques. An
increasing variety of techniques appears to have been employed in individual
early civilizations over time. By disguising the total amount of wealth that was
being appropriated from individuals by the state and the upper classes, this
elaboration probably facilitated the increasing economic exploitation of the
lower classes. Tribute from conquered states further increased the revenues
of kings and the upper classes.
Although early civilizations displayed a wide range of kinship organization,
these forms exhibited a stronger masculine bias than that associated with less
complex societies. The position of women varied considerably in early civiliza-
tions, perhaps partly because of the differing status of women in the societies
that gave rise to them, but in no early civilization were women equal to men.
Moreover, where the position of women can be monitored over time it dete-
riorated rather than improved.
Early civilizations were characterized by a degree of division of labour
and craft specialization unprecedented prior to their origin. These develop-
ments resulted mainly from growing demands for luxury goods, more effective
weapons, and higher-quality domestic goods. While some households con-
tinued to manufacture goods for their own use and part-time craft workers
supplied local markets, there was a great increase in the number of full-time
artisans.Throughacombinationofmarketsalesandcommissionedproduction,
the self-employed full-time craft workers that were characteristic of city-state
systems made goods of varying quality available to all levels of society. The
elite craft workers of territorial states produced luxury goods exclusively for

664
Discussion
the government and the upper classes while part-time rural craft specialists
manufactured goods for the lower classes. In Mesopotamia and the Valley
of Mexico and among the Yoruba, long-distance traders, operating indepen-
dently of government control, imported exotic raw materials and circulated
high-quality produce among neighbouring, and often warring, city-states. In
territorial states, the government controlled both the local procurement of
valuable raw materials and the conduct of foreign trade.
Early civilizations possessed many analogous political institutions. The most
important of these was kingship. Monarchs were conceptualized differently in
the various early civilizations. In some the king was proclaimed to be a universal
ruler; in others he was simply one head of state among many. Some kings ef-
fectively governed their kingdoms; others tended to be ﬁgureheads. Although
in most early civilizations kings led their armies into battle, the Yoruba re-
garded such behaviour as incompatible with a ruler’s holiness. Egyptian, Inka,
Aztec, Maya, and Yoruba kings were believed to be infused with the powers
of one or more major cosmic deities; Mesopotamian rulers were regarded as
ordinary humans who had to depend on the goodwill of the gods for their
success. Despite the varied ways in which they were conceptualized, kings
invariably represented the unity of a state. They were also regarded as at least
symbolically responsible for the welfare of their kingdoms: for their agricul-
tural prosperity, social harmony, defence, legal systems, and dealings with the
supernatural. It appears that in early civilizations it was impossible to conceive
of political unity except as it was embodied in a single person.
All the early civilizations had essentially similar class hierarchies based on a
dichotomy between rulers and workers. At the top, a king and a tiny upper class
monopolized most of the resources of a society and made all the important
policy decisions. The upper class was hierarchized, with a royal family at the
apex. In many early civilizations, membership in the upper class was formally
ascribed and hereditary. In others, upper-class status was attributed to indi-
viduals or families either on the basis of relative power and wealth or position
in a government hierarchy. Male members of the upper class governed and
were military leaders; they did not engage in manual labour.
Below the upper class were full-time specialists – administrators and minor
civil servants, full-time soldiers, and craft workers. The bulk of the population
were farmers, landowning or landless, and at the bottom of society, except
in the Andes and perhaps in China, were slaves – debtors, criminals, military
captives, purchased foreigners, and their descendants. In all the early civi-
lizations, the social hierarchy was also one of power and wealth. The number
of people belonging to each free class increased exponentially from the top
to the bottom of the class hierarchy. Vertical mobility, where it was allowed,

Culture and Reason
665
was controlled from above, and classes tended to be endogamous. Perhaps
the most important distinction in the organization of social hierarchies was
between early civilizations that had hereditary nobilities and those that lacked
them.
Early civilizations exhibited two types of political organization: city-states
and territorial states. These types differed not only in size but in political, eco-
nomic, and social organization. In city-states, large numbers of farmers lived in
urban centres and full-time craft workers produced for an extensive clientele,
including farmers, who bought their goods at urban markets and shops. In
territorial states, urban centres were inhabited only by rulers, administrators,
retainers, and skilled craft workers who produced goods for the state and the
upper classes. Farmers lived in rural settings, where they manufactured the
goods they needed on a part-time basis. This created a two-tiered economy
integrated only by a system of taxation that funnelled surplus resources from
the bottom to the top.
Charles Maisels (1999: 342–59) attributes the origin of territorial states to
the greater extent to which differences in strategies of ecological adaptation
permitted ruling classes to exploit commoners. He argues that the solidarity of
rural communities in Egypt and of clan organization in China facilitated their
more effective exploitation. Much idiosyncratic argument is required to make
the four Old World civilizations that Maisels studies conform to this gener-
alization, and even more difﬁculties are involved in extending it to cover the
early civilizations of the Western Hemisphere. Moreover, the valid correlations
that he establishes between city-states and reciprocal exchange and between
territorial states and exploitative economies may have been the result rather
than the cause of these differences in political organization.
It is clear, however, that early civilizations had either territorial states or
city-states but both sorts did not occur together in a single early civilization.
While many unilinear evolutionists believe that city-states were consolidated to
form territorial states and Joyce Marcus (1998) has argued that early territorial
states broke apart to form city-states, there is no evidence that one of these
types of state ever evolved into the other. Both, however, in some instances
evolved into preindustrial regional states, a type of polity that combined some
features of both earlier forms with other, completely new features.
Early civilizations displayed limited variation in their forms of administra-
tion. In a city-state, power was vested in the government located in the main
urban centre, which was often heterarchical in structure. Territorial states
required more formal, hierarchical administration, either delegational or bu-
reaucratic. The information theorists of the late 1960s and 1970s viewed these
forms as having developed through the necessary delegation of authority to

666
Discussion
make various administrative decisions to lower-level ofﬁcials and the organi-
zation of hierarchies to process information and monitor whether higher-level
orders were being carried out (see, e.g., D. Clarke 1968: 88–101). Problems
ﬁrst developed, they argued, when societies expanded beyond the point where
all adults could know each other individually. Above the threshold of about
four hundred people there was increasing need for brokers or intermediaries
to shape public opinion and produce consensus. As groups became still larger,
the ever-greater amounts of time required to reach agreement about pub-
lic policy rendered consensual decision-making increasingly ineffective. Once
communities expanded much beyond ﬁfteen hundred people, leaders had to
be authorized to make crucial decisions that were accepted as binding on their
followers (G. Foster 1960: 178; Heidenreich 1971: 129–34). People agreed to
obey ofﬁcials in order to avoid chaos. The alternatives for political management
in early complex societies were, according to these theorists, extremely lim-
ited. They proposed that the number of levels in an administrative hierarchy
had to increase as the state expanded and, more speciﬁcally, that whenever ap-
proximately seven additional units required coordination a new level of control
had to be established (G. Johnson 1973; 1978; G. Miller 1956; van der Leeuw
1981). William Rathje (1975) argued that, as the range and intensity of con-
trol increased, controls became more standardized and eventually lower-level
units were encouraged to become largely self-regulating to reduce their cost to
the central government. Information theorists did not attempt to explain why
societies grew more complex or why in particular societies a bureaucratic or
delegational form of administration was preferred (Flannery 1972), but they
did show how a limited variety of workable solutions may have limited the
types of administration that were possible.
The military forces in early civilizations depended on peasant corv´ees to
supply most of the soldiers needed to defend frontiers and ﬁght in foreign
campaigns. A corps of full-time soldiers and police was employed to guard
members of the upper class, protect government installations, arrest crimi-
nals, and intimidate dissidents. As states grew more powerful they relied in-
creasingly on full-time soldiers. Armed forces, whether made up of conscripts
or professional soldiers, were organized in a modular, hierarchical fashion,
no doubt for the same reasons that the political administration was. Some
physical coercion was required to punish rebels and ensure the payment of
taxes. In general, such punishment seems to have been easier to impose in
territorial states than in city-states. The boundaries of territorial states were
fortiﬁed or patrolled, making it difﬁcult for dissidents to escape. Armed rebel-
lions were generally local and easily crushed. In city-state systems, in contrast,
malcontents and rebels could ﬂee to neighbouring states, where they had a

Culture and Reason
667
good chance of being welcomed by kings who were rivals or enemies of their
own ruler. Central governments also generally sought to curb blood feuds,
especially ones that might be directed against the sovereign.
The basic elements of legal procedures – socially recognized rules with
universal applicability, authorities who rendered judgements, and some means
of enforcement – were already widespread and probably universal among
small-scale societies (Pospisil 1958). What early civilizations added was a hier-
archicaldimensionthatparalleledthepoliticalhierarchy.Thekingwasascribed
ultimate authority in legal matters, especially with respect to life-and-death
decisions. Law courts were established at various administrative levels. Be-
cause of the greater ability of the state to deploy force, decisions by higher
courts tended to be rapid, deﬁnitive, and often arbitrary. Yet administrative
economy was achieved by allowing lower-level tribunals to regulate legal prob-
lems within extended families and local groups as much as possible. At this level
decisions were generally enforced by public opinion. Higher-level courts were
controlled by members of the upper classes, and their judgements reﬂected
the self-interest of that social stratum. They normally imposed much harsher
penalties on lower-class individuals than on upper-class ones. Only the Aztec
and their neighbours inﬂicted more severe penalties on the upper classes, in
this case for a series of personal misdemeanours that called into question their
self-control and hence the supernatural power they were supposed to possess.
Witchcraft accusations, which in small-scale societies had been used to enforce
redistribution and protect economic equality, were redirected to coerce the
less powerful and afﬂuent.
Whether the upper classes in speciﬁc early civilizations viewed themselves as
self-disciplined bureaucrats, audacious warriors, or comfortable landowners,
they agreed about the need to protect their privileges and possessions by keep-
ing the lower classes subservient. They also agreed about the means, including
both physical and legal coercion, by which this could be accomplished. It is,
however, also clear that those who controlled early civilizations relied heavily
on at least the passive consent if not the active support of a substantial majority
of the governed. Rulers could never have deployed enough force to suppress
even a signiﬁcant minority of their subjects. It is also evident that governments
of early civilizations did not interfere unduly in the affairs of the lower classes.
Kin groups and communities were allowed to regulate their internal affairs so
long as their doing so did not interfere with the privileges of the powerful. The
frequent delegation of political and legal power demonstrated a preference
for less expensive government, even if it increased the risk of disintegration.
The state focused its administrative skills and resources on key concerns of the
upper classes, such as collecting taxes. Because the wealth that was available

668
Discussion
to the upper classes was limited, leaders preferred to expend as much of it as
possible on their own lifestyles and on creating symbols of power and therefore
sought to spend only what was necessary on coercion.
The most potent source of power for the upper classes was probably the
pervasiveness and hence the seeming normality of inequality. Hierarchical re-
lations pervaded almost every aspect of life. Relations between a ruler and his
subjects provided a model for relations between male heads and other mem-
bers of extended or nuclear families, as well as between adults and children,
teachers and pupils, employers and employees, and masters and slaves. All
such relations tended to be construed as father-son relations. As the result of a
growing emphasis on male public leadership, the position of women declined.
Thus, from birth, children lived in families and communities that were char-
acterized by institutionalized inequality and the dominance of male authority
ﬁgures.
The training of children regularly involved physical punishment, which was
used to deal not only with disobedience but also with failure to perform up to
the level expected of them. Pupils, apprentices, and employees were required
to respect and obey those in authority. Thus the experiences of everyday life in
early civilizations encouraged obedience to authority ﬁgures. These relations
contrasted dramatically with what was found in small-scale societies, where
social control was enforced by public opinion and children were rarely, if ever,
physically coerced or punished (Trigger 1985b). Smaller-scale societies often
lacked even the concept of obedience, in the sense of one person’s being
thought to have the moral right to tell another person what to do. This dis-
tinction is understandable in terms of the information-theoretical notion that
the development of control hierarchies resulted from the need to regulate in-
creasingly large-scale societies. Information theory also explains why decision
making came to be associated with people who did not perform manual labour
and manual labour was associated with the carrying out of orders. The cultural
encoding of concepts of status and power into family life, gender relations,
and relations between young and old might appear to be a hierarchizing of
social relations at an intimate level where hierarchy was not operationally re-
quired. Yet, only by making hierarchical relations pervasive in everyday life
could unequal relations be made to appear sufﬁciently natural that they oper-
ated effectively at the societal and hence the political level. Unequal relations
probably diffused through complex societies as a result of status emulation.
The need to develop a command hierarchy to manage complex societies
does not, however, explain why decision-makers and their families invariably
acquired such exalted social status and appropriated such large amounts of
surplus wealth for their personal use. Few social scientists have recognized this

Culture and Reason
669
as an issue worth investigating. Instead they have assumed that power, wealth,
and social status are naturally correlated. Opposed to such a correlation is the
religious ideal of service without personal or material beneﬁt, as embodied in
the Christian belief that a true leader should serve his followers. Occasionally
ascetic religious ﬁgures appear to be satisﬁed with moral inﬂuence alone, but
even in religious hierarchies leaders normally control wealth and live more
luxuriously than their followers. In general, power over others is correlated
with control of wealth as well as with enhanced social status.
Several explanations have been proposed for this correlation. Leaders need
to possess wealth to reward their supporters and sustain subordinate ofﬁcials.
Unless those in command control sufﬁcient material resources, a hierarchi-
cal system cannot be created or maintained. Public displays of wealth may
also have been necessary to signal the importance of leaders and elicit re-
spect for them. To survive, people had always had to extract more calories
in the form of food from the environment than they expended in doing
so, and this had made them implicitly aware of the practical importance of
Zipf’s (1949) law of least effort. The ability to ﬂout this law by indulging in con-
spicuous and often wasteful consumption was therefore a statement of power
that would have been immediately comprehensible (Trigger 1990a; Veblen
1899).
In small-scale societies leadership is not correlated with the possession of
wealth. Hunter-gatherer societies are mobile, and those who live in them
have little opportunity to accumulate possessions. The sharing of food results
in balanced reciprocity, which promotes the well-being of everyone and is
therefore highly adaptive. The most successful hunters share their catches
with less successful hunters and their families and in return are accorded
implicit positions of leadership. Any lack of generosity or of appropriately
modest behaviour is punished by gossip and ridicule and believed to incite
assaults of witchcraft (Lee 1990). In small-scale sedentary societies, leaders
and their kin and supporters labour hard to produce surplus wealth that can
be given away to incur moral indebtedness and thus sustain political support,
often working harder than their followers and sometimes being poorer (Sahlins
1972; Trigger 1990b).
Eighteenth-century reports of such behaviour were interpreted by Jean-
Jacques Rousseau and other Enlightenment philosophers as evidence that
civilization had corrupted instinctive human generosity – an idea taken up
in turn by Marxist thinkers, who attributed oppression to the development
of hierarchy rather than to human nature. David Erdal and Andrew Whiten
(1996) have argued that there must be some innate human predisposition
that favours egalitarian behaviour in small-scale societies that is not present

670
Discussion
among other higher primate species. Yet it is clear that the social and economic
egalitarianism of small-scale societies is everywhere a product of social engi-
neering that requires the vigorous support of public opinion for its enforce-
ment. When leaders acquire the power to control public communication and
silence criticism of their behaviour, they invariably begin to accumulate wealth,
which they use not only to perform public duties but also to confer dispropor-
tionate social and material beneﬁts on themselves and their families.
That social and economic inequality becomes universal under these cir-
cumstances suggests that the tendency to equate power and wealth relates to a
general acquisitiveness that is deeply embedded in human behaviour. In small-
scale societies, such acquisitiveness is effectively suppressed by public opinion,
which enforces the redistribution of such wealth as exists. Public opinion also
imposes modesty on individuals who possess talents that are important for the
well-beingoftheirsocietiesandmakethemdefactoleaders.Yet,whileinprein-
dustrial civilizations public criticism and discontent were directed against the
arbitrary appropriation of wealth and the abuse of power, economic inequality
was accepted as a normal condition (Weber 1976 [1896]: 258). Revolutionary
activity, when it occurred, sought to curb excesses rather than to eliminate
the class system. Small-scale societies recognize acquisitiveness and domina-
tion as tendencies in human behaviour and seek ways to curb them through
the exercise of public opinion. These mechanisms fail to control leaders as
societies grow more complex, and power begins to be expressed through the
conspicuous consumption of wealth. Neither cultural ecology nor information
theory can readily explain why this happens.
Religions in early civilizations were based on the belief that supernatural
forces animated (or were) the natural world; hence they did not distinguish the
natural and the supernatural. Supernatural forces were ascribed minds, wills,
andsensesresemblingthoseofhumanbeings.Thesecapacitiesfacilitatedcom-
munication between the human and the natural/supernatural realms. Human
beings believed themselves to be animated by supernatural power, which fur-
ther reduced the distinction between the social and the natural/supernatural.
Because humans depended on the natural environment, they sought to guar-
antee their well-being by maintaining good relations with the supernatural
beings that controlled nature. These relations constituted the central focus of
religion in early civilizations. Morality remained primarily a social rather than
a religious concern.
Not distinguishing the natural, supernatural, and social realms appears, on
the basis of comparative ethnographic data, to have been an inheritance from
the past. Yet much older ideas of supernatural power as animal spirits that
had kinship relations with humans or as supportive but demanding ancestors

Culture and Reason
671
were increasingly displaced by the perception of major deities as powerful
natural or cosmic forces on whose support the welfare of all human beings de-
pended. This broader vision of the supernatural was stimulated by a growing
appreciation of the importance of political articulation and control for the sur-
vival and well-being of societies (Swanson 1960: 191–93). As forces of nature,
deities were born, died, competed with one another, changed, and revealed
both good and bad qualities. They were not all equally powerful, and weaker
deities were subordinated in various ways to stronger ones. Thus widely shared
beliefs that antedated the development of early civilizations were transformed
in signiﬁcant ways in the context of more complex and hierarchical social
structures.
Out of this process emerged a set of distinctive beliefs that were common to
all early civilizations. Humans saw themselves as dependent on the supernat-
ural energy that sustained the universe and provided for their material needs.
The gods, as the forces of nature, were the source of all life and sustenance,
but they depended on the energy that human beings returned to them in the
form of sacriﬁces. This complex of beliefs distributed complementary roles
that were believed essential for sustaining the cosmos among commoners,
the upper classes, and the gods. Deities provided the energy and order that
animated the universe and all that was in it, including human beings. Farmers
supplied the food and labour that supported the upper classes and the gods,
while the upper classes provided the political order that allowed farmers to
produce food surpluses and ritually cycled into the supernatural realm the
energy that permitted the gods to maintain the cosmic order.
By assigning responsibility for nourishing the gods to the king and the upper
classes, religious beliefs in early civilizations imposed strict limitations on the
upper classes’ exploitation of farmers. If food production faltered as the result
of mistreatment of commoners by the upper classes, not only the stability of
human society but the cosmic order was threatened – a situation for which
human rulers were answerable to the gods. The maintenance of balanced and
reciprocal relations between the upper and lower classes may explain why class
conﬂict was not a major feature of early civilizations.
Nothing resembling this conceptualization of relations between human
beings and the cosmic order could have existed before. Its tenets repre-
sented a projection into the supernatural realm of the general relations of
production and government that linked farmers and the upper classes in early
civilizations. Yet these religious beliefs cannot be dismissed as epiphenome-
nal. Nor, although based in part on views inherited from earlier times, can
they be described as a simple or predictable reworking of these beliefs to
ﬁt new circumstances. They were instead products of profound reﬂections

672
Discussion
concerning the nature of society that took account of the general practices and
accommodations that best governed relations among classes and extended
these relations to the supernatural forces that were thought to maintain
(or be) the universe. Relations between social classes were used analogically to
conceptualize relations between human beings and the natural/supernatural
forces on which humans had to rely. Through a conceptual inversion, the orga-
nization of the supernatural came to be perceived as a model and justiﬁcation
for human political and religious conduct. In a social realm that had become
too large to be conceptualized in terms of kinship metaphors, religious con-
cepts provided the basis for thinking about political issues and creating the
equivalent of a constitution. It is highly signiﬁcant that, in all the early civi-
lizations, religion offered the context for such formulations and that, despite
many speciﬁc differences in social organization and in beliefs concerning both
the cosmic order and the gods, the same view of a sociocosmic order was
created.
These conclusions are very different from those I would have reached had I
discovered, for instance, that the people in every early civilization in my sample
had believed in a powerful male deity named Ra, who was identiﬁed with the
sun. Such evidence would have supported an Egyptocentric, or perhaps an
Atlantean, explanation of the origins of religious beliefs in early civilizations.
The fact that detailed similarities of this sort were not shared by early civi-
lizations, combined with the lack of evidence of major historical links (except
those of Mesoamerica) among the early civilizations being examined, strongly
supports the view that we are dealing with a series of independent intellectual
constructions.
The early civilizations also shared many general beliefs concerning the struc-
ture of the universe. Ideas about a multilevel cosmos with exclusively super-
natural levels above and beneath the earth, a terrestrial world divided into
quarters and surrounded by an ocean, and communication between levels oc-
curring mainly at the centre and the outer edges of the earth may have been
derived from beliefs that were already widespread prior to the development of
the various early civilizations. These beliefs were supplemented by the more
extensive empirical knowledge of the world that people in early civilizations
were able to assemble as a result of contacts with increasingly distant societies
andtheirrecordingofobservationsofnaturalphenomenaoverlengthyperiods.
The constraints of empirical knowledge account for the greater cross-cultural
uniformity associated with beliefs concerning the terrestrial plane than with
beliefs about the celestial and underworld levels and those relating to cos-
mology by comparison with more speculative topics such as creation, cosmic
history, and the ultimate fate of the universe.

Culture and Reason
673
The idea that human beings possessed multiple souls, which disaggregated
after they died, also appears to have been a continuation of earlier widespread
beliefs. So too was the notion that an individual’s identity survived, though not
necessarily permanently, after death. Belief in the ability of souls to enjoy an
enhanced existence after death appears to have been stronger in territorial
states than in city-state systems. These optimistic beliefs seem to have devel-
oped among the upper classes and to have spread through status emulation to
the lower classes.
The most important forms of learning that were patronized by the upper
classes included divination and medicine. Doctors not only had to be familiar
with natural remedies but had to know how to practise divination, interpret
oracles, and discern the will of the gods in relation to health and sickness.
Divination, oracles, and magic were also thought to enable leaders to learn the
will of the gods concerning political and personal matters, avoid divine anger,
control deities, ward off evil, and uncover witches. Much of this specialized
knowledge was focused on regulating relations between human beings and
the supernatural. This focus was not an obfuscation of practical knowledge
that the upper classes hoped would halt technological and social progress
and hence protect their special privileges, as Marxist historians of science
once argued (Childe 1965 [1936]; B. Farrington 1936). While the people
of early civilizations coped with most everyday problems in a practical and
straightforward manner (Hallpike 1979), their view of the cosmos encouraged
them to rely on the supernatural to try to resolve any problems that did not
have an obvious pragmatic solution. To the upper classes, discovering tech-
niques for managing relations with the supernatural was a supremely practical
activity.
The development of writing systems provides detailed insights into the mix-
ture of conceptual uniformity and idiosyncratic variation underlying a major
intellectual achievement of some early civilizations. Writing systems were in-
vented in at least four early civilizations, and all four scripts adopted similar
logophonic approaches. Logograms, or word signs, were of primary impor-
tance, but sounds also had to be represented to resolve ambiguities result-
ing from their semantic extensions. Three different methods were employed
for representing sounds: the Sumerians and Maya used syllabograms, the
Egyptians noted only consonants, and the Chinese increasingly combined two
signs, one of which functioned as a logogram while the other suggested its pro-
nunciation. Purely syllabic or alphabetic scripts were produced only in societies
that lacked writing systems but were aware of existing logophonic scripts. This
pattern suggests a natural tendency for humans to privilege logography when
developing systems to record speech.

674
Discussion
theoretical implications
Comparative study reveals abundant idiosyncratic variation from one early
civilization to another. Some of this variation was ecologically adaptive. Other
variation helped to deﬁne the identity and status of different ethnic or po-
litical groups. Idiosyncratic variation characterized the content of the myths,
art styles, and knowledge of early civilizations. Because all understanding is
symbolically mediated, it is not surprising that idiosyncratic cultural traditions
shaped human behaviour in highly signiﬁcant and often unpredictable ways.
Yet there is also abundant evidence of cross-cultural regularities that cannot
be explained by historical relations. These regularities structured important
aspects of the economies, social and political organization, and belief sys-
tems of early civilizations. There is no sector of early civilizations that did not
display a signiﬁcant combination of cultural idiosyncrasies and cross-cultural
regularities. Such ﬁndings do not correspond with the expectations of either
neoevolutionists or cultural determinists.
Neoevolutionary anthropologists have long been preoccupied with explain-
ing cross-cultural similarities that appear to have arisen independently in so-
cieties at the same level of development. Most anthropologists assume that in
the course of hominid evolution natural selection favoured the development
of the biological capacity to manipulate symbols as a more ﬂexible means of
adaptation to the environment (Mithen 1996). This assumption has encour-
aged many archaeologists and anthropologists to interpret cultural transfor-
mations as rational responses to changing ecological conditions. Demographic
and environmental changes and shifting patterns of competition with other
societies require alterations in the ways in which human groups adapt to their
environments. Most neoevolutionists have assumed that sociocultural change
occurs only when ecological shifts require it. These ideas accord with the
views articulated by Boasian cultural anthropologists and Durkheimian social
anthropologists late in the nineteenth century and differ from those of a minor-
ity of materialists (mainly Marxists), who believe that systemic changes occur
as a result of competition over resources. Both approaches view convergent
change as a product of what Sahlins (1976) called ‘practical reason’ (Sanderson
1990).
Cultural ecologists regard human intelligence as individuals’ ability to
regulate, rationally and often on the basis of near-perfect knowledge, their
relations with the natural world and with other human beings. Considerations
of least effort and risk avoidance allow human groups to implement optimally
adaptive solutions. People who must cope with similar problems in analogous
environments are expected to devise similar solutions. For these theorists,

Culture and Reason
675
necessity is truly the mother of invention. They disagree, however, on the level
at which ecological inﬂuences are manifested. Leslie White (1949: 390–91)
suggested that technological subsystems shaped social subsystems, while both
together inﬂuenced philosophies and the arts, but he maintained (1945: 346)
that these inﬂuences shaped cultural patterns only in a general fashion. Marvin
Harris (1974; 1977; 1979), in contrast, has gone to great lengths to demonstrate
that adaptive strategies shape very speciﬁc aspects of human behaviour and
beliefs. He assumes that all aspects of cultures are functionally interrelated
and that adaptive changes produce alterations throughout cultural systems.
He further regards values and beliefs as epiphenomenal and determined by
adaptation to the environment. Culture is treated as a facilitator – a way to
encode adaptive behaviour and make it automatic.
Others, whose views are closer to White’s, regard change as limited to an
adaptive ‘core’ of society, while allowing that established aspects of behaviour
and belief, which promote adaptation or are neutral with respect to it, persist.
Julian Steward (1949) argued that the adaptive core revealed itself through
cross-cultural regularities, while less adaptive features of culture survived as
particularities. Thus kingship would have been identiﬁed as a core feature
of early civilizations, while the symbolic association of monarchs in speciﬁc
cultures with crowns, stools, or parasols would have constituted historical par-
ticularities. Steward (1955: 209) equated the study of cross-cultural regular-
ities with science and that of particularities with history, arguing that there
was no place for the study of particularities in a science of anthropology. He
also stressed, however, that it was necessary to determine empirically which
features were cross-culturally recurrent and which were not – an idea that un-
derlies the present study. Robert Dunnell (1978) made a similar point when he
argued that functional traits, which are affected by selection and therefore non-
random, have to be distinguished from stylistic ones, which are functionally
neutral and therefore have random or stochastic distributions. The problems
inherent in distinguishing between style and function have already been noted.
Roy Rappaport (1968) and Kent Flannery and Joyce Marcus (1976) have as-
signed a more proactive role to traditional beliefs, which they believe may play
a signiﬁcant role in regulating adaptive behaviour. The epiphenomenal role
of culture was further called into question by Ian Hodder’s (1982a) demon-
stration that material culture was not limited to reﬂecting social relations (also
Cannon 1989).
Drawing on ideas derived from Enlightenment philosophy, neoevolution-
ists emphasized similarities in all human behaviour and the unilinear nature
of cultural development throughout the world. Their approach encouraged
belief in the similarities of responses of societies that were at the same level

676
Discussion
of development. Marshall Sahlins and Elman Service (1960) formulated their
distinction between speciﬁc and general evolution in a similar vein. They ar-
gued that, while cultures necessarily adapted in diverse ways to various types of
environments, the resulting speciﬁc differences were eventually overwhelmed
by similarities in the successively more complex general adaptations that made
more advanced societies dominant over less advanced ones. Steward, with his
concept of multilinear evolution, appears to have advocated speciﬁc evolu-
tion, but in adopting Wittfogel’s idea that all early civilizations had evolved in
areas where irrigation was necessary he subjected cultural evolution to a uni-
linear straitjacket (Steward 1949; 1955: 178–209). It is now evident that early
civilizations did not develop in a single type of environment or as the result
of a particular agricultural practice such as extensive reliance on irrigation.
Because subsistence adaptation always occurred in relation to particular local
conditions, it had to be speciﬁc and was therefore highly variable.
Nor does much support remain for the suggestion that population pressure
was the main factor promoting the development of early civilizations. De-
spite claims to the contrary by Ester Boserup (1965) and Mark Cohen (1977),
population growth is not an independent variable but is inﬂuenced by nu-
merous economic, social, and cultural factors. Much remains to be learned
about relations between forms of government and population density. In New
Guinea, communities have traditionally tended to split when their population
rises above three hundred rather than grow larger and develop more elaborate
forms of government. This process continues in areas that have overall pop-
ulation densities that are as high as 135 persons per square kilometre (Forge
1972). There was great variation in population density in relation to the amount
of arable land in early civilizations.
The most important factor relating to agriculture that encouraged the de-
velopment of early civilizations appears to have been the investment of labour
in the long-term improvement of land, which created a need for protection
against predation. State support ensured the owners of the best agricultural
land that others could have access to it only on terms that they set (Linton
1933; 1939). Alternatively, where land was abundant but labour scarce, the
state was looked to as a power that could guarantee the contractual rights of
the afﬂuent to the labour of the poor. Kent Flannery (1972) has noted that trade
and many other factors promoted the development of early civilizations. The
emergence of states created conditions that encouraged population growth and
agricultural intensiﬁcation. These developments increased the dependence of
afﬂuent groups on the government’s capacity to maintain law and order.
The factors promoting the development of early civilizations thus appear to
have been less ecological than economic or political. Land and labour were of

Culture and Reason
677
less consequence in their own right than because they were regarded as forms
of property, and ownership of land became less important than appropriation
of the surpluses produced on that land.
As societies expanded, they required more complex hierarchical adminis-
trative structures. Kent Flannery (1972) has suggested that determining how
these structures worked is more important for the functional understanding
of early civilizations than discovering the varied and often idiosyncratic fac-
tors that encouraged the formation of speciﬁc large-scale political entities. In
addition, authorities had to be able to deploy force to protect the society as
a whole, uphold the rights of its more privileged members, and ensure that
ofﬁcials’ orders were carried out. Achieving these goals required the develop-
ment of armies, police forces, and law courts that served the interests of the
upper classes. City-state systems and territorial states constituted alternative
political structures for achieving those ends. These two varieties of political
organization exemplify the complex roles played by functional constraints in
shaping social organization.
More speciﬁc attention must be paid, however, to the correlation between
the development of decision-making hierarchies and increasing social and
economic inequality. It is generally assumed that, to be effective, authoritative
decision-making roles in early civilizations had to be associated with wealth
and high status. The accumulation of wealth for the personal beneﬁt of the
upper class cannot, however, be explained from a purely functional or rational
perspective. Instead, it appears to be rooted in higher-primate behaviour and
in a universal human tendency to interpret conspicuous consumption as evi-
dence of political power.
Chimpanzees combine a strong predisposition for sociability and member-
ship in groups with intense rivalries for positions of dominance and inﬂuence
within those groups. Alliance making, deceit, and betrayal characterize these
rivalries (Conroy 1990). The development of complex human societies under-
mined the highly effective social mechanisms that had been developed for
combating self-assertiveness and acquisitiveness in hunter-gatherer societies,
where generalized reciprocity had been important for survival. In complex
societies, leaders who controlled the public dissemination of information were
able to curb any public gossip and ridicule directed against them and sup-
press and punish their critics. The unprecedented isolation of rulers in their
houses and then their palaces made them still more immune to public criticism
(P. Wilson 1988). In these ways, individuals in positions of authority could pro-
tect and reinforce their power. Public deference was demanded from the vast
majority of people, and overt criticism of the upper classes was not tolerated.
Under these conditions, the lower classes lost any active role in governing

678
Discussion
society as a whole. Yet, while the upper classes were at least passively accepted
and economically supported in return for the regulatory beneﬁts they con-
ferred on society, they remained subject to covert public opinion, which could
become openly hostile if their control became ineffectual or their behaviour
grew too oppressive.
Steven Mithen (1996) has argued that human social behaviour is biologi-
cally grounded not in general intelligence but in speciﬁc forms of cerebration
that were already highly developed in humanity’s ancestors prior to their sep-
aration from the great apes. His modular view of human intelligence lacks
anatomical substantiation, and many neuroscientists emphasize the ﬂexibility
and adaptability of the modern human brain (Dubrovsky 1999). Yet some as-
pects of human behaviour do appear to be controlled by biological factors. The
human cortex, which is associated with the capacity to reason, is anatomically
linked to the limbic system, the seat of the emotions. Close connections be-
tween reason, will, and emotions are essential if reason is to promote effective
goal-oriented and social behaviour (E. Armstrong 1991). Tendencies towards
sociability and competitiveness seem likely to be genetically encoded in all
the higher primates. If this is so, a biologically based tendency toward indi-
vidual competitiveness, the overt expression of which had been held in check
by public opinion among hunter-gatherers, came to be expressed more openly
as societies grew more complex. As the state replaced public opinion as the
principal instrument for maintaining social order, mechanisms for reinforcing
social cooperation and solidarity of great antiquity were suppressed.
Egalitarian societies and states sought to promote different basic human
behavioural tendencies. Thus there is no basis for claiming that, because they
had temporal priority, egalitarian societies present human nature more accu-
rately than do hierarchical ones. Yet societies appear to have been shaped not
only by the adaptive requirements of their environments but also by aspects
of human nature that are a product of long-term biological evolution. Prac-
tical reason cannot be equated solely with ecological adaptation. The human
brain is not simply a rational calculating machine but a biological organ with its
own needs and its own biologically determined modes of operation (E. White
1993). Phylogenetic and evolutionary psychological approaches point to the
error of assuming that the inegalitarian behaviour that has emerged relatively
recently in the course of human history is entirely culturally determined, just
as information theory and functional analyses generally reveal that not every-
thing that characterizes societies at a particular stage of cultural development
is necessarily biologically determined.
Equally challenging to explain is why the upper classes everywhere lived
luxuriously. Wealth is essential to maintain supporters and ofﬁcials, and the

Culture and Reason
679
conspicuous display and consumption of resources is universally interpreted
as a sign of power. Yet this does not account for the enthusiasm with which the
upper class lavished wealth on itself. Although better nutrition, superior hous-
ing, and less physical labour had selective advantages for an upper-class family,
the luxury of upper-class lifestyles vastly transcended what was biologically re-
quired. Indeed, it may even have been counterproductive in terms of personal
health. While hierarchically organized decision-makers were essential to en-
sure the functioning of complex societies, if these leaders and their families
had lived frugal personal lives they would still, as administrative specialists,
have been able to make the decisions necessary to regulate their societies.
Luxurious lifestyles are unique to humans living in class societies, but they
are also universal in these societies. At most, other primates quarrel over the
possession of food. In the early stages of hominid evolution, prior to the devel-
opment of generalized reciprocity, competitive behaviour with respect to food
probably had a signiﬁcant selective advantage in periods of life-threatening
scarcity. In the course of human evolution, this behavior may have expanded
to include striving for all sorts of possessions whenever public opinion was
insufﬁcient to enforce generosity.
As societies came to be marked by increasing political inequality, the accu-
mulation of wealth invariably paralleled the acquisition of political power, and
conspicuous consumption was interpreted as evidence of power. Thus wealth
and status became mutually reinforcing. In early civilizations, political power
was both an important means of obtaining wealth and essential for protecting
it. Conversely, controlling wealth was necessary to maintain political power.
Yet there was little opportunity for economic and political interests to com-
pete (Eisenstadt 1963). Wealth alone could not confer high social status on
long-distance traders. Sociopolitical forces were clearly more important deter-
minants of early class societies than economic ones. Yet humans appear to opt
for wealth as well as political power whenever the opportunity arises. Under
these circumstances, culturally speciﬁc explanations of inequalities in wealth
appear to be epiphenomenal rationalizations of a universal human tendency.
This universality calls into question the relativist claim that the object of wants
is always particular and historically determined (Sahlins 1976: 152). Despite
the group-enforced equality of hunter-gatherer societies, the correlation be-
tween power, status, and wealth appears to be deeply rooted in the human
psyche.
Western individualism has encouraged an understanding of self-interest
as the pursuit of strictly personal goals. In many other societies, in contrast,
personal rewards, prestige, and well-being are believed to be derived from
working with and for others. Yet the checks on material accumulation that

680
Discussion
existed in small-scale societies were subverted in every early civilization, and
human beings displayed increasing personal acquisitiveness as well as a desire
for publicly acknowledged status and power. This suggests that there may
be signiﬁcant genetic limits to humans’ ability to sacriﬁce personal interest for
the common good and that whenever personal acquisitiveness is not effectively
controlled by public opinion it prevails over cultural conventions (Alexander
1987).
The development of analogous forms of behaviour as societies grew in-
creasingly complex was paralleled by the development of analogous beliefs.
The similar views held in early civilizations about relations between human
beings and the natural/supernatural partly represented a continuation of ideas
that were already shared by less complex societies. The same appears to hold,
with varying degrees of regularity, for ideas about the structure of the universe,
its functioning, the nature of souls, and healing. Yet all these understandings
were signiﬁcantly transformed in the hierarchical context of early civilizations.
Novel but similar beliefs about mutually supportive relations between human
societies and the supernatural arose through the development of analogous
concepts in each early civilization. Similar parallelisms characterized other
developments, including the upper classes’ cultivation of esoteric knowledge
related to the intentions of the gods, symbolizing the unity of the state through
a single person who was believed to be responsible for the functioning of all
aspects of society as well as the principal intermediary with the supernatu-
ral, and the belief that deities required human support to function properly.
Enlightenment philosophers and nineteenth-century evolutionary anthropol-
ogists attributed such similarities to ‘psychic unity’. Unfortunately, they treated
psychic unity as if it were an explanation rather than a phenomenon or a set of
phenomena to be explained.
Anthropologists still do not know enough about the reasons for widespread
uniformities in human understandings. This is at least partly because they have
too long accepted Emile Durkheim’s (1964 [1895]) dogmatic separation of the
social and the psychological and therefore paid insufﬁcient attention to the
role of psychological and biological factors in shaping human behaviour. Many
cultural anthropologists perfunctorily acknowledge that human needs, drives,
motives, desires, feelings, and sentiments are innate and universal. They also
accept that biological factors not only inﬂuence ecologically adaptive behaviour
but also account for the presence of art, music, and religious beliefs in all hu-
man societies. Boas and Malinowski both included psychological factors among
culture’s functional prerequisites, but because they believed that there were
many possible cultural solutions for the problems that each functional prereq-
uisite posed, they did not regard these prerequisites as signiﬁcantly inhibiting

Culture and Reason
681
cultural diversity. Neoevolutionary archaeologists accepted psychological pre-
dispositions as universals but discounted their importance in shaping human
behaviour by comparison with ecological considerations. Classical Marxists ac-
cepted the reality of psychological drives but, so as not to compromise their
millenarian ambitions to transform the human condition, denied that these
drives constituted a ﬁxed human nature (Geras 1983). Relativists regarded
psychological predispositions as subordinate to and controlled by cultural con-
ventions which alone guided human behaviour.
The idea that human behaviour must be explained without reference to
psychology encouraged belief in an intelligence that rationally adapted indi-
viduals and groups to their natural and social environments. Today, however,
it is increasingly acknowledged that certain abilities are neurologically and
hormonally grounded (Butterworth 1999; Gazzaniga 1992; 1998; Low 2000;
Mithen 1996). These claims are not to be confused with those of sociobiol-
ogy, which maintains that, as a result of natural selection, predispositions for
very speciﬁc forms of human behaviour become biologically embedded in the
human brain over periods as short as a few thousand years (E. Wilson 1978).
Given the accelerating rate of cultural change during the course of hominid de-
velopment, such a process would have had few adaptive advantages and many
disadvantages; hence it is difﬁcult to understand how it might have evolved
or persisted (Boyd and Richerson 1985: 199). Short-term biological encoding,
which is highly susceptible to regional evolutionary trends, also does not ac-
count for what appear to be the overwhelming universal similarities in human
nature.
The difﬁculties posed by sociobiology do not, however, rule out the possi-
bility that the biological basis of the human mind has been shaped by natural
selection acting over very long periods. The most important long-term chal-
lenge to which natural selection has adapted human beings does not appear to
have been the natural environment, which became increasingly varied as hu-
man beings expanded around the globe. Instead, it was living in small groups
within which individuals related to one another in both cooperative and com-
petitive ways. The human mind remains best equipped to make informed
decisions that relate to the activities of small groups rather than large ones and
to the immediate future rather than the long term. This suggests that individ-
uals are better adapted for pursuing immediate goals for themselves and their
families than for pursuing the long-term welfare of larger collectivities (Boyd
and Richerson 1985; Carrithers 1992).
Mithen (1996) has argued, on the basis of archaeological data and com-
parative primate ethology, that hominids’ capacities to manipulate technology
and analyse biological and physical phenomena developed far more recently

682
Discussion
than their capacity to manage social relations (Byrne and Whiten 1988). The
cognitive linking together of these specialized forms of thought, which may
have occurred between one hundred thousand and forty thousand years ago,
appears to have made human comprehension more ﬂexible and abstract. The
development of language, at least some aspects of which have a complex ge-
netic basis (Gopnik 1997), vastly increased the ability of humans to transmit
knowledge by inculcation. This form of learning is adaptively much more efﬁ-
cient than learning by demonstration or by trial and error. The development of
language not only accelerated the rate of cultural change but vastly altered and
expanded human awareness and self-awareness and enhanced human analyt-
ical abilities. This made it possible for humans to adapt ever more quickly to
varying ecological conditions and eventually, for better or worse, to dominate
the planetary ecosystem (Deacon 1997; Mellars and Gibson 1996; Noble and
Davidson 1996). Mithen claims that the interrelating of what were originally
specialized forms of cerebration also made possible the obsessive anthropo-
morphization that still characterizes human thought.
Recent cognitive research suggests that the human mind understands the
world through a complex web of metaphors that structures perception, action,
and social relations (Lakoff 1987; Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Tilley 1999). Thus
it appears that cognitive evolution has endowed the human mind with various
general and speciﬁc analytical capacities that predispose humans to attribute
analogous symbolic meanings to their perceptions of the natural and social
realms. The sun, because of its extreme brilliance, has often been used as a
symbol of supreme power, the snake, because it sheds its skin, as a symbol of
renewal, and a physically elevated position as an indication of superior social
rank (Hallpike 1979: 149–67; von Gernet 1992; 1993). The widespread myths
that identify kings or elites with strangers (Feeley-Harnik 1985; Gillespie 1989)
equate varying social status with ethnic differences, and Mary Helms (1998)
claims that this equation derives its legitimacy and authority from cosmolog-
ical beliefs. Concepts that in the past have been cited as examples of psychic
unity need to be studied in far greater detail not only from an anthropological
perspective but from the perspectives of evolutionary psychology and neuro-
science. Only then will anthropologists be in a position to understand why
many aspects of culture display varying degrees of cross-cultural unifor-
mity. Such an approach may eventually provide a reliable methodology for
distinguishing between cross-cultural uniformities resulting from the opera-
tion of similar psychological factors and similarities resulting from historical
connections.
It is misleading to deny emergent properties in society and culture in or-
der to support the erroneous positivist concept of a uniﬁed science. Yet the

Culture and Reason
683
psychological and biological bases of human cognition must be considered in
explaining human behaviour. This will require a determined effort to overcome
the extreme antireductionist biases of Durkheimian sociology and cultural an-
thropology. One beneﬁt of closer ties between the social sciences, on the one
hand, and psychology and biology, on the other, would be a better understand-
ing of those aspects of human behaviour that are inﬂuenced by long-term
human biological evolution. The present study suggests that such factors may
contribute in signiﬁcant ways to the shaping of human understanding and be-
haviour. This sort of interdisciplinary research might also advance the social
sciences’ still rudimentary understanding of the mechanisms that structuralists
claim pattern human thought.

29 Conclusion
T
he comparative study of early civilizations documents the capacity of
the human mind to generate an almost inﬁnite variety of beliefs and
ideas. Art styles, myths, and ecological knowledge differed radically from one
early civilization to another, and people’s lives were shaped and provided with
meaning by values and aspirations that were unique to each. These observa-
tions accord with the relativist view that every human group lives in its own
culturally constructed environment. While it is impossible to test Marshall
Sahlins’s (1976: 19) assertion that human beings live in meaningful cultural
schemes of their own devising that are never the only ones possible, there is
much evidence that makes this proposition appear plausible.
Cultural change does not, however, occur merely as the result of accidental
miscopying or alteration in the course of individual decodings of messages.
Culture resists random changes by striving to maintain cognitive structures and
psychological consistency. The relation between form and meaning is highly
complex. In some cases, while texts or icons remain the same, interpretations
of them alter signiﬁcantly over time. Conversely a series of highly varied or
rapidly changing texts or symbols may continue to express a single message
(Goodenough 1953–68; Marx and Engels 1964: 97–118; 287–347; Panofsky
1939). In these ways, cultural traditions can persist over long periods and
adapt to changing conditions.
Yet early civilizations also displayed a vast amount of cross-cultural unifor-
mity, especially in the sociopolitical and religious spheres. Subsistence patterns
were concerned with adaptation to local conditions and necessarily displayed
much variation. By contrast, early civilizations possessed one general form of
class structure, only two main forms of sociopolitical organization, and one set
of key religious beliefs. These ﬁndings are inconsistent with both the view that
early civilizations were shaped wholly by idiosyncratic factors and the view that
their similarities resulted only from ecological constraints.
684

Conclusion
685
Another type of functional constraint that was cross-culturally uniform
was the need for more formal and hierarchical systems of decision-making
as societies increased in scale. It appears, furthermore, that only a limited
number of sociopolitical arrangements had enough functional coherence to ex-
ist as viable systems – an observation that George P. Murdock (1949) ﬁrst made
with respect to kinship systems. Christopher Hallpike (1986) suggests than an
ever more limited range of institutions and value systems is able to survive as
societies grow larger and more likely to compete with one another. Isolated
early civilizations, which displayed two major political variants, fall midway
between highly variable small-scale societies and structurally even less variable
industrial civilizations. It has been suggested that the collapse of the Soviet
Union after fewer than seventy years of competition with capitalist societies
indicates that only a single general type of industrial economy has proved
competitively viable (Harris 1992). Only one sort of early civilization was
viable in any one region. Territorial states and city-states were not superseded
by each other but replaced by new and more complex forms of preindustrial
civilization.
Societies are altered in various ways by the need to adjust effectively to
changing ecological conditions. They are also reshaped by rational calculations
in the economic sphere, where competitive advantages are achieved by making
more efﬁcient use of available energy and resources. Contrary to the claims of
extreme relativists, human beings devise rational strategies to outmanoeuvre
competitors and seek to alter the rules of society in their own interest. While
relativists argue that self-interest is always culturally deﬁned such interests in
all early civilizations appear to have been based on competitive advantages in
controlling material resources and human labour.
Finally, the independent development of similar understandings not
only about practical matters but also with respect to religious beliefs and
symbolism is abundantly documented for early civilizations. Some of the
parallels appear to result from the operation of practical reason, while others
reﬂect little-understood tendencies of the human mind to produce particular
types of analogies.
Traditional rationalists, including the neoevolutionists of the 1960s, sought
to understand how human beings used a general capacity for rational
calculation to adapt to their environments. Yet, in addition to being capable
of rational calculation, the human brain provides the organic basis for human
drives, personality, and affective capacities. These drives and affects not only
motivate human behaviour but also constitute biological realities to which
culture must accommodate. Specialized analytical capacities that have devel-
oped in the course of human evolution may channel thought in particular

686
Discussion
directions. Consequently, anthropologists are discussing not so much Sahlins’s
‘practical reason’ as a more complex form of ‘human reason’ that provides
for the cognitive and psychological as well as the physical needs of human
beings. This view transcends the traditional dichotomies that Western thought
draws between body and intellect, matter and mind. For such an approach to
have any scientiﬁc value, however, anthropologists must shun subjective and
ethnocentric speculations, especially those of the Hegelian tradition which
seek to understand a timeless human spirit (Karlsson 1998: 188).
The background for understanding the biological component of human
behaviour is changing rapidly as a Lockean belief in general, calculative
reason gives way to the possibility of speciﬁc as well as general forms of intel-
ligence such as those associated with metaphorical thought or with particular
aspects of numeracy and language. What is needed is a better understanding,
derived from psychology and neuroscience, of how the human brain shapes
understanding and inﬂuences behaviour. Nothing about such an approach
undermines or calls into question a materialist and evolutionary (as opposed
to a narrowly ecological or environmental) approach to the understanding
of human behaviour. On the contrary, given what we know about biological
evolution, only a materialist and evolutionary approach is sustainable. Nor is
any challenge posed to viewing cultures as adaptive systems. The problem is to
understand how humans, as biological and behaviourally predisposed products
of long-term natural selection possessing both unique capacities for culture
and distinct cultural heritages, adapt to each other and to their environment.
Social scientists must cease analysing human behaviour without reference to
humans as biological entities. Evolution, both biological and cultural, is a pro-
cess that adapts humans with speciﬁc but as yet poorly understood biological,
social, and psychological predispositions and needs to the natural and social
environment in which they live.
The preoccupation of processual archaeology with rationalist ecological
adaptation represents an unacceptably simplistic understanding of the evo-
lutionary process. Humans adapt to their surroundings as beings with spe-
ciﬁc cognitive capacities, psychological predispositions, and hormonally based
drives, not just as entities equipped with the ability to calculate optimal ener-
getic relations with the environment. All these needs and capacities must be
considered as relevant for understanding human adaptation. Cognition is not
just instrumental or epiphenomenal but active in identifying human goals and
shapinghumanadaptation.Culturaltraditionsprovidetheunderstandingswith
whichspeciﬁcgroupscopewithlifeandattempttosolvenewproblems.Knowl-
edge concerning technology and economic matters is no less a cultural her-
itage from the past than are ideas about social organization or religious beliefs.

Conclusion
687
Nevertheless, instrumental reasoning, biologically deﬁned human needs, and
innate predispositions are more important in shaping or resisting changes in
human behaviour than postprocessual archaeologists or postmodernist anthro-
pologists acknowledge.
Cross-cultural regularities are not restricted to aspects of human behaviour
in which ecological concerns about the efﬁcient use of energy predominate.
A materialist approach must also explain cross-culturally similar patterns of
historically unrelated religious thought. Species-speciﬁc biological behaviour,
including speciﬁc analytical capacities of the human mind, may be neces-
sary to account for cross-cultural parallels of a symbolic nature. All the early
civilizations shared a considerable number of features that were the conver-
gent products of human needs and natural constraints transforming existing
knowledge and behaviour to speciﬁc ends. Yet this uniform cultural core (to
borrow Steward’s terminology) was accompanied by idiosyncratic features de-
rived from historical traditions that did not evolve convergently, among them
art styles, highly speciﬁc religious beliefs, and, most surprisingly, values and
personal aspirations.
The present study suggests that a broader spectrum of factors must be taken
into account to explain similarities and differences among early civilizations
than is fashionable in most current theorizing. There are no grounds for accept-
ing sociobiology’s claim that human behaviour becomes biologically grounded
in the short term, but it appears that human behaviour cannot be explained
purely in cultural and social terms. Human beings are products of biologi-
cal evolution operating over a very long period. Natural selection has shaped
the human capacity to think and communicate symbolically. Increasing ev-
idence indicates that these operations are grounded not only in a general
intelligence but also in various speciﬁc cognitive capacities that developed
separately over time. In addition, human beings have a broad set of needs,
desires, and emotions that is biologically grounded. Relativists argue that these
tendencies can be culturally managed in a vast number of ways, but this claim
does not appear to accord with the full range of cross-cultural uniformities that
characterize human behaviour. To explain such uniformities, it is necessary to
take account of biological and psychological, as well as social and cultural,
factors.
Social and cultural phenomena have their own emergent properties and can-
not wholly be explained in psychological or biological terms. Yet neither can
human behaviour or the nature of society and culture be understood without
judiciously taking account of the ﬁndings of evolutionary psychology and neu-
roscience. It would appear to be in these sciences that anthropologists must
seek explanations of certain cross-cultural uniformities in human behaviour,

688
Discussion
such as tendencies towards inequality in status and wealth. The failure of
social scientists to address these issues in the past has contributed to some of
the major disasters in utopian social engineering attempted during the twen-
tieth century, most notably in Stalinist Russia and Maoist China. Evolutionary
psychology and neuroscience remain underdeveloped, and the ﬁndings of
evolutionary psychology are strongly inﬂuenced by various social stereotypes
and activist agendas. Therefore they are not panaceas. Many cross-cultural
regularities can be explained functionally in terms of ecological or information
theory.YettheriftcreatedbyDurkheimianand,morerecently,anthropological
relativist preoccupations with purely social or cultural explanations needs to be
bridged to produce more holistic and convincing explanations of cross-cultural
similarities and differences in human behaviour.

