The Certainties of Naturalism




If one accepts that identification is a fundamental modality for the schematization of experience, one must also assume that the forms it takes are organized in accordance with systematic relationships that make it possible to throw light on not only the properties of its constituent parts but also those of the totality that results from their combination. Insofar as animism and totemism differ from each other without being opposed term for term, the two other ontological formulae that complete the schema of identification must possess structural characteristics that render them compatible with the first two, so that the coherence of the whole is assured by some simple rules of transformation. Seen from this point of view, the counterpart of animism is not totemism, as I had earlier supposed, but naturalism. For the naturalist schema reverses the formula of animism: on the one hand, articulating a discontinuity of interiorities and a continuity of physicalities and, on the other hand, reversing their hierarchical order, with the universal laws of matter and life providing naturalism with a paradigm for conceptualizing the place and role of the diversity of the cultural expressions of humanity.

When, in earlier works, I characterized naturalism as a straightforward belief in the self-evidence of nature, I was simply following a positive definition that goes back to the Greeks. According to this, certain things owe their existence and development to a principle that has nothing to do either with chance or with the will of humans: a principle that our philosophical tradition has successively qualified by the terms phusis and natura and subsequently by the various terms derived from these in European languages.1 This reductionist definition remained imprisoned within a conceptual genealogy internal to Western cosmology. It thereby forfeited the advantage of the use of contrastive features that were less welded to a historical situation that a systematic comparison with animism could have provided. So when Viveiros de Castro commented upon my incomplete distinction between naturalism and animism, he was quite right to emphasize that the fundamental opposition between those two modes of identification was essentially based on a symmetrical inversion. According to him, animism is “multinaturalist,” since it is founded upon the corporeal heterogeneity of classes of existing beings that, however, are endowed with identical souls and cultures. Meanwhile, naturalism is “multiculturalist” in that it uses the postulate of the oneness of nature to support recognition of the diversity of both individual and collective manifestations of subjectivity.2 One might question the use of the term “multinaturalism” in such a context, since the multiple natures of animism do not possess the same attributes as the one and only nature of naturalism: the former more or less evoke the ancient Aristotelian sense of a principle for the individuation of beings, including humans, whereas the latter, with its one and only nature, refers directly to the mute and impersonal ontological domain, the contours of which were definitively drawn by the mechanistic revolution. However, even if it might be preferable to formulate that opposition in more neutral terms, it still certainly remains relevant.

The notion that modern ontology is naturalist and that naturalism can be defined by the continuity of the physicality of the entities of the world and the discontinuity of their respective interiorities truly seems so well established by the histories of science and philosophy that it may seem hardly necessary to produce any circumstantial justification for it. That is all the more true as the origin of this great divide has already been by and large described in chapter 3. But let me briefly summarize the argument. For us, what differentiates humans from nonhumans is a reflective consciousness, subjectivity, an ability to signify, and mastery over symbols and the language by means of which we express those faculties, and furthermore the fact that human groups are reputed to distinguish themselves from one another by the particular manner in which they make use of those aptitudes by virtue of a kind of internal disposition that used to be called “the spirit of a people” but that we now prefer to call “culture.” For one does not need to profess an intransigent relativism in order to agree with the general opinion that when it comes to customs and mores, behavior varies according to the arbitrary conventions and signifying regimes by means of which humans like to particularize themselves collectively, despite belonging to the same species. However, since Descartes and above all Darwin, we have no hesitation in recognizing that the physical component of our humanity places us in a material continuum within which we do not appear to be unique creatures any more significant than any other organized being. To be sure, we no longer share with the animals a structure of springs and pneumatic devices in the manner of Vaucanson’s automata, for we are aware now that it is the molecular structure and metabolism inherited from our phylogeny that indubitably link us to the humblest of organisms, just as the laws of thermodynamics and chemistry link us to nonliving objects. As Bouvard and Pécuchet discover with a slight sense of humiliation, we must get used to the idea that our bodies “contain phosphorus as do matches, albumin as do egg whites, and hydrogen gas just as do streetlamps.” As for “consciousness,” a term whose use in the French language was popularized by Descartes, it continues to prosper as an emblematic sign of humanity, even if philosophy nowadays prefers the concept of a “theory of mind.”

Unlike the other modes of identification, so familiar are the ontological distinctions drawn by naturalism, even if they are not always apprehended reflectively, that it will not be necessary to examine them in detail for the benefit of readers of the kind that I imagine will be interested in a book such as this. Where the general principles of our shared cosmology are concerned, what I need to do is not so much supplement insufficient information, as I have tried to do in the cases of animism and totemism, but rather sift through the superabundant supply of knowledge in order to pick out the main guidelines. For naturalism has emerged from a climate of critical discussions and empirical investigations that has bestowed upon it the unique characteristic of constantly giving rise to heterodox points of view that call into question the distinctions that it draws between the singularity of human interiority and the universality of the material features ascribed to all existing beings. While the doctrinal corpus of our ontology does not require the in-depth examination that more exotic modes of identification do (at least within the framework of the objectives of this book), it is nevertheless indispensable that we evaluate its claims to hegemony in the face of alternative formulations produced from the same historical crucible—claims that appear to strip it of its robust simplicity and to challenge the system of oppositions upon which it is based.





An Irreducible Humanity?



First we need to recognize that, in the course of the last few centuries, plenty of critical minds have objected to the ontological privilege granted to humanity, calling into question primarily the ever unstable boundary by means of which we try to distinguish ourselves from animals. Among those who have criticized the attribution of an absolute singularity to humans thanks to their inner faculties, Montaigne is without doubt the most famous and the most eloquent in his indictment of our presumption toward other creatures. As Bayle observed, “An Apology for Raymond Sebond” is partly an “apology” for animals because, in it, Montaigne challenges the idea that the use of reason is humanity’s prerogative. He argues on the basis of his own observations and the testimony of the Ancients that animals differ from ourselves in neither their behavior, their technical abilities, their aptitude for learning, nor even their “discourse,” understood here as the faculty of reason. Just as we are, they are able to free themselves from the rule of instincts, for “there is, I say, no rational likelihood that beasts are forced to do by natural inclination the selfsame things which we do by choice and ingenuity. From similar effects we should conclude that there are similar faculties. Consequently, we should admit that animals employ the same method and the same reasoning as ourselves when we do anything.”3 Philosophers such as Descartes, Locke, and Leibniz, after Montaigne and often in opposition to him, maintained that the phrases pronounced by talking birds are certainly no indication of their humanity since those animals cannot adapt the impressions they receive from external objects to the signs that they imitate. Contrary to them, the author of the Essays is convinced that the facility with which blackbirds, crows, and parrots reproduce the human language shows that they have “an inward power of reasoning which makes them teachable—and willing to learn.”4 Like contemporary ethologists, he is struck by the ability to solve problems that animals manifest in their technical operations: “Why does the spider make her web denser in one place and slacker in another, using this knot here and that knot there, if she cannot reflect, think or reach conclusions?”5 So it is ridiculous to perpetuate any idea that humans possess an intellectual and moral supremacy over animals, given that both humans and animals are subject to the same natural constraints, and animals cope with them rather better in that they organize their little world in a more sensible and unprejudiced manner. In short, wisdom dictates that “we are neither above them nor below them…. Some difference there is: there are orders and degrees: but always beneath the countenance of Nature who is one and the same.”6

It has to be said, however, that Montaigne was an exceptional case on more than this particular count and that his judgments on animals, even before Descartes refuted them, were hardly shared by common opinion in his own day. In the very decade in which Montaigne’s Essays appeared, an author now long forgotten published a “defence and illustration” of the anthropology of the Bible, which was reprinted many times during the author’s lifetime, a fact that suggests that its influence was considerable. In his Suite de l’Académie française en laquelle il est traité de l’homme … (an address to the French Academy on the subject of man), Pierre de la Primaudaye opposes Montaigne’s arguments by reasserting that in the Creation man’s place is defined by the opposition between matter and soul.7 Actually, the adversary of this former adviser to Henri III was not so much Montaigne as the atheist wits of the court who claimed to follow Epicurus and trampled the mysteries of faith underfoot, brandishing the hammer of reason. Although La Primaudaye’s argument in support of the preeminence of man is essentially based on biblical exegesis, it constitutes a good synthesis of the orthodox view on this subject at the dawn of the classical period. The justification in Genesis could hardly have been more widely accepted: if man, and only he, is capable of intelligence and reason, that is because God created him last of all and in his own image, unlike anything created before him, in order that his faculties should enable him to know and glorify his creator. The exceptional status that this conferred upon man constituted “the true difference between him and the other animals, which are nothing but brute beasts.”8

However, La Primaudaye adds to the authority of the scriptures an outline of an ontology whose details are, in the present context, more interesting. In it, he first separates spiritual creatures such as angels from corporeal creatures, taking care to specify that all the latter, humans included, are linked by a physical continuity, for “the composition of man’s body consists of the four elements and all their qualities, just as do all the bodies of all other creatures under the sun.”9 The true difference within physical beings lies in whether or not they possess life and above all the nature of their respective souls. Among living creatures, four types of soul should be distinguished, corresponding to different regimes of existence that are characterized by increasing degrees of complexity: the “vegetative” souls of plants; the “perceptive” souls of lower animals such as sponges and oysters; the “cognitive” souls that confer upon those that possess them “a certain virtue and vigor such as thought and knowledge and memory, so that they know how to preserve their lives and how to behave and control themselves as is natural to them. This is the type of soul possessed by brute beasts.” Finally, a “rational” soul is peculiar to humans alone; “it has all the faculties of the earlier species but also something that is more excellent, for it participates in reason and intelligence.”10 Aristotle’s influence is patent, even though the dialectical subtlety of the De anima is lost in this summary typology from which all that emerges is an assertion that the material continuum between humans and other existing beings is accompanied by a discontinuity of internal faculties. All the same, one can see that Descartes, despite his rejection of Scholasticism, was not building on nothing when, a few decades later, he proclaimed an absolute separation between matter and spirit, between extension and intellect, and between everything mechanical and all that stems from understanding turned inward upon itself.

There can be no doubt that after Montaigne there was a scattered minority who may be described as “gradualists” and who persisted in challenging the concept adopted by the Moderns, namely that man had an exceptional place in Nature thanks to his internal dispositions. But we should exaggerate neither the volume of those dissident voices nor the scope of their opposition to the dominant naturalist ontology. Condillac is a case in point, despite the fact that he was repeatedly accused of having abolished the separation between animal sensation and human understanding by suggesting that the difference between the two was one of degree, not of nature. The Traité des animaux (Treatise on animals; 1755) does indeed seize upon the pretext of a refutation of Buffon’s mechanistic approach in order to develop a sensualist theory of animals’ thought that is inspired by Locke (Condillac was one of his most zealous disciples in France). Condillac declares that, to the extent that “beasts compare, judge, and have ideas and memory,” it is not possible to assimilate them to automata.11 So, given that animals and humans have the same needs, the same habits, and the same elementary knowledge and that both groups learn solely from experience, where does the difference between them lie? The break between them occurs with language, which enables humans to rise to the level of reflective thought, whereas animals are incapable of abstraction and unable to wonder about themselves. Man, in contrast, can compare himself to all that surrounds him: “he turns inward, into himself, then comes out again.” Thanks to language, he has access to introspection, inferences, and generalizations; his knowledge grows and, surpassing animals in the use and development of the capacities that they nevertheless share, he ends up by distancing himself from them.12

Although he is indubitably a gradualist and despite anticipating evolutionist theories of cognition in some respects, Condillac’s psychology does recognize the existence of an irreversible threshold in the development of internal faculties, a threshold that only humans have crossed. Besides, even if humans and animals do possess comparable faculties of feeling and thinking, the souls from which those faculties stem are not comparable: a human’s soul is immortal; an animal’s is mortal. This amounts to more than a passing tribute paid to theology by Abbé Condillac. It should be seen as a deep conviction that the origin of the unequal development of aptitudes must lie in a more fundamental ontological difference: “The faculties that we have been allotted … show that if we could penetrate the nature of those two substances [the souls of humans and those of animals], we should see that they are infinitely different. So our human soul is not of the same nature as that of an animal.”13 Clearly, it is not easy, even for an original mind, to shake off the influence exerted by the schemas of perception and thought peculiar to a dominant mode of identification.

Condillac’s ambivalence is symptomatic of an essential paradox of modern naturalism, which persists in regarding an animal either as the lowest common denominator of a universal image of humanity or else as the perfect counterexample that makes it possible to define the specific nature of that humanity. Faced with the combined evidence of, on the one hand, physical similarities and, on the other hand, differences in their respective dispositions and aptitudes, the opportunities that a naturalist ontology offers for comparative speculation are strictly limited. One can either underline the connection between humans and animals mediated by their biological attributes (if necessary, adding a more or less large dose of common internal faculties to make the transition more gradual), or else one can relegate that physical continuity to the background and lay the emphasis primarily on the exceptional nature of the internal attributes by which humans are distinguishable from other existing beings. In the West, it is the second of those two attitudes that has for a long time prevailed and that is still largely dominant when it comes to defining the essence of humanity. As Ingold rightly points out,14 philosophers have seldom asked, “What makes humans animals of a particular kind?,” the typical preferred question about naturalism being “What makes humans different in kind from animals?” In the first of those questions, humanity is a particular form of animality defined by membership in the Homo sapiens species; in the second it is an exclusive state, a self-referential principle, a moral condition. Even the greatest naturalists have not avoided such prejudices. In his Systema naturae (1735), Linnaeus positions the Homo genus within a general taxonomic filiation based on contrasting anatomical features, but he nevertheless separates humans from all other species with the injunction “Nosce te ipsum”: it is through reflective thought and by knowing the resources of one’s soul that one will seize upon the distinctive essence of one’s humanity.15

Hence the problem posed by an exact understanding of that old Western oxymoron: “human nature.” If beings are reputed to be split into two, with their bodies and appetites on the animal side and their moral condition on the side of divinity or transcendent principles, how can they have a nature of their own? Should we, like Condillac and contemporary ethologists, regard that nature as the culmination of a series of faculties and behavior patterns that is also present, and easier to observe, in nonhuman animals—that is, as truly the nature of our species, which guarantees the singularity of our genome? Or should we, like anthropologists, consider it to be a predisposition to pass beyond our animality thanks, not so much to our possession of a soul or mind, but rather to our ability to produce cultural variations unaffected by genetic factors? By underlining interspecific continuities in physicality, the first approach makes it hard to account for intraspecific discontinuities in public expressions of interiority (i.e., in cultures). Meanwhile, by seeing anthropos above all as something that animals do not appear to be, namely an inventor of differences, the second approach forgets that he is also Homo, a unique biological organism. So it is not hard to imagine the astonishment of a Jivaro, a Cree, or a Chewong when faced with this strange, shifting human figure. They might well say, “How can you not see that our bodies and behavior patterns are very different from those of other organisms, even if they are made up of identical substances? And how can you be sure that animals do not possess an interiority identical to our own, even if we never catch them talking? Why should reflective consciousness, intentionality, and a moral and civil sense be limited to the human species, when so many indications show us that that is not the case?” An Australian Aboriginal might be just as puzzled, albeit for other reasons. “Why attach such importance to the literality of things?” he might say. “Why concentrate on the superficial differences of forms and capacities between existing beings when it is far simpler to think, rather in the manner of that Greek philosopher whom you rate so highly, that the world has always been divided into a whole collection of physical prototypes and spiritual generators of specific qualities, all of them fertile sources that bring forth those great aggregates of humans and nonhumans that you call hybrids simply because your ontological classifications differ from ours?”





Animal Cultures and Languages?



It is also true that the naturalist ontology has evolved along with the progress made by the sciences and that, contrary to common opinion and certain ill-informed essayists, scholars are now less quick to affirm an obvious discontinuity in the interiorities of humans and nonhumans. That is particularly the case of ethologists such as Donald Griffin, who has no hesitation in attributing conscious and subjective thought to animals on the strength of his observation of their behavior, which seems to testify to action prompted by real planning. This is now reputed to be possible by virtue of the animals’ internal representation of their desired goals.16 Griffin also points out that, despite its incomparable adaptability, human language does not really differ from the communication systems used by the great apes and certain birds and that it is perfectly legitimate to call these means of exchanging messages “language.” Griffin is thus close to Condillac when, on the apparently more solid bases that evolutionary biology and cognitive ethology provide, he argues that there is a continuity of mental faculties between humans and animals, rejecting as an anthropocentric prejudice alien to scientific thought the idea that the two groups differ in their natures.17 However, such views are by no means universally accepted among the community of ethologists: a matter about which I shall have more to say later. For the moment, let me simply note that those views do at least have the merit of drawing attention to conflicts over the interpretation of modern ontology when this is confronted by possible empirical counterevidence and, in particular, to the foremost of those conflicts: the one in which naturalist monism clashes with culturalist dualism. For when contemporary continuists postulate mere differences of degree between the cognitive faculties of animals and those of humans, they always take as their comparative term for the process of evolution the figure representing humanity best known to psychologists, that is to say, a Western adult. And even if no scientist would these days dare to claim that peoples once called “primitive” represent an intermediary stage in between the great apes and ourselves, one cannot but be disturbed by the interest that evolutionary psychologists take—from afar, admittedly—in the present-day mental functions of hunter-gatherers, whom they implicitly assimilate to our Pleistocene ancestors and who, we are led to believe, must therefore be closer to nonhuman primates than any Stanford professor.18

When seen in the extremely long-term view of evolution, the cognitive differences between humans and animals are indeed only a matter of degree. And that is a legitimate view to support, provided one does not succumb to the pernicious form of ethnocentrism that involves extending the scale of gradations within Homo sapiens sapiens and scouring the Kalahari, the Canadian forests, or Amazonia for ethnographic examples that would illustrate a biobehavioral stage in cognitive adaptation, one as yet not too contaminated by “culture.” In short and to be frank, the suggestion would be that where ideas are simple and limited in number and where the norms are rudimentary, it should be easier to understand how behavior and choices are dictated by natural selection. The point is that, even while rightly denouncing such prejudices and reminding us that present-day hunter-gatherers have undergone several tens of millennia of historical transformations and, in consequence, cannot be treated as fossilized evidence of the earliest stages of hominization, ethnologists cannot help falling for the other dogma of naturalism, which is essential to their own disciplinary field: that of the absolute uniqueness of humanity, the only species capable of internally differentiating itself by means of culture. In other words, while the anthropocentrism of ethnologists leads them to neglect the continuity of physicalities between humans and all other organisms, the acknowledgment of this continuity by modern gradualists renders them incapable of apprehending the discontinuity of interiorities other than as a variable external factor labeled “culture,” the effects of which on cognitive aptitudes should be easier to evaluate among the least modern of human beings.

You may well say that this kind of dispute is by now on the way out, for it persists only at the level of spats between the rear guards of naturalist monism and culturalist dualism. And there is, indeed, no denying that the naturalist consensus amid which such altercations used to thrive nowadays seems somewhat undermined by a number of developments in the sciences, ethics, and law. Initially, it was probably under the influence of ethology, in particular that of the great apes, that modern ontology began to waver once one of its most generally recognized principles was called into question: namely the absolute uniqueness of humans as a species capable of producing cultural differences. Ethnologists do not, as yet, seem to have taken full measure of this revolution, despite the fact that it was to them that, in 1978, William Mc-Grew and Caroline Tutin addressed an iconoclastic article that was published in the prestigious British periodical of social anthropology Man. In it, they defined chimpanzees as cultural animals and called for a comparative ethnographical study of them. They argued that these animals that are so close to us genetically also satisfy most of the criteria by means of which we define culture: observation shows that new individual patterns of behavior appear in populations living in the wild, that they spread within the group and become durably implanted, and that they differ from other patterns of behavior present in other, quite distinct groups.19

This behavioral variability relates essentially to the techniques that Mc-Grew, a few years later, listed in a meticulous inventory in his classic work, Chimpanzee Material Culture. In this, he studies almost twenty instances of the use of tools. These range from fashioning probes for catching ants to cracking nuts with a hammerstone and anvil and also include the use of clubs and projectiles.20 But it was in 1999 that a decisive stage was reached in bringing matters up to date, when eight famous ethologists, including McGrew, published in Nature a synthesis devoted to chimpanzee cultures.21 This was a decisive step since being published in Nature amounts to the seal of orthodoxy where scientific results are concerned. And those results were by no means slender. On the basis of numerous independent observations carried out over an extended period of time and on groups of chimpanzees living far away from one another, the authors unambiguously show that different groups elaborate and transmit very different sets of techniques. Since these kinds of variations could apparently not be explained by the evolution of behavior adapting to ecological constraints, the authors were led to attribute distinctive cultures to the chimpanzees; in other words, they concluded that the latter were free to invent responses of their own to the needs of subsistence and a communal life.

This eruption of an animal species into the domain of culture, shattering though it was, was not unprecedented. Other examples of technical innovations and of a diffusion of new behavior patterns among animals have long been on record. Some even made it beyond the pages of scholarly publications and passed into folklore. One case in point is that of British tits, which, in some localities, took to opening the milk bottles left by milkmen on their customers’ doorsteps; another is that of the macaques of the little island of Koshima, in Japan, which wash their sweet potatoes before eating them, copying the example set by one particularly imaginative female. This phenomenon was soon classified by Japanese primatologists in the categories of “protoculture,” “preculture,” or “infrahuman culture.”22 But the Nature article goes further, recording a far wider range of distinctive behavioral traits and establishing beyond doubt the variability of the techniques that different groups of chimpanzees employ in order to accomplish the same task.

But does this mean that one of the defensive locks of naturalism has been blown now that it is recognized that humans are no longer the only animal species capable of inventing and transmitting practices that are unaffected by instinctive or environmental causes? That is by no means certain, for, according to naturalist ontology, the distinctiveness of humans rests primarily on their recognized ability to produce cultural peculiarities by using the internal faculties that characterize them. To cut naturalism down to size, it would be necessary to show that the chimpanzees draw upon psychic resources identical to our own when they engage in cultural activities. But on this point chimpanzee specialists have little to say. Behavioral ethology reveals observed variations in the technical systems of wild animals and provides detailed descriptions of the procedures by means of which they are passed from one individual to another. But it remains vague when it comes to the mental and neurophysiological conditions necessary for doing this, except for referring to a general aptitude for imitation, which, in the case of the great apes, may stem from an ability to manipulate the attention of other individuals.23 Meanwhile though, experimental psychologists engaged in comparing social learning among human children and captive chimpanzees challenge the very idea that the animals may be capable of imitation. They stress that children learning to use a tool make a representation of the aim of their instructor, whereas the chimpanzees are content to regulate their behavior by watching one another and then making successive readjustments in the course of repeated occurrences that prompt emulation.24

An intense debate is therefore ongoing between ethologists working in the field, who are inclined to ascribe to the animals they are observing mental properties that may account for their actions, and laboratory-bound ethologists, who claim that they find no trace of those hypothetical properties in the animals that they study. Perhaps the question is, after all, irresolvable, for the animals are not the same in the two cases, even if they do belong to the same species. To show that the behavior of wild chimpanzees is affected by cultural variations because their cognitive faculties are identical to our own, it would be necessary to have them perform, in a laboratory, various tasks that would make it possible to compare them systematically to humans. But behavioral ethologists point out, precisely, that a laboratory context is so particular, by reason of the interaction of the captive animals with the experimenters, that any results obtained in this way could hardly be generalized to cover chimpanzees in the wild. In short, recognition of the existence of “cultural” traditions among the chimpanzees is, in the short term, unlikely to threaten the central belief of naturalist ontology according to which humans are the only species that possesses the psychic equipment capable of engendering cultural differences.

However, that is not the end of the matter, for other branches of ethology also note disturbing similarities between the faculties of humans and those of animals and find them in a domain that closely concerns the dogma of discrimination on the grounds of interiority, since it involves the system for communicating internal states, which is what we call language, the conventional, intentional, and referential properties of which were for a long time considered by naturalist ontology to be the best distinctive sign of humanity. The fact is that many works on the semantics of animal communication seem to lead to the conclusion that humans should be denied exclusive possession of this precious attribute. The literature on this subject is both vast and riddled with controversy, so I shall limit myself to considering the data that is more or less generally accepted and shall exclude research into nonsonorous signals, such as the famous “bee-dance” and the tracking systems that animals leave for the guidance of their fellows.25 Ever since Peter Marler’s pioneering studies on the dialects of finches, it has been established beyond doubt that, first, the songs of certain birds are not stereotyped for the entire species but, on the contrary, manifest great individual and regional variations. The same point has been made for the sound signals of several species of terrestrial and marine mammals. In the case of birds and certain primates, we also know that their ability to conform to a repertory of vocalization that is specific to one particular dialect is something that is learned; in the case of singing birds, it is learned from an adult, usually the father. Furthermore, it now seems established that the sound signaling of certain birds adapts to circumstances (such as the presence or absence of a listener of the same species) and differs according to the messages to be transmitted: for instance, cries of alarm differ according to the type of predator located. This referential dimension has also been noted in the case of the cries emitted by vervet monkeys in Kenya.26 It is therefore possible that intentionality may be behind the sound signals emitted by certain species with regard to an external referent (such as the detection of either food or a predator) since such signals vary in the frequency of their production depending on whether a conspecific animal is likely or not likely to hear them. This would appear to be confirmed by cases of manifest deception in the cries signaling supplies of food among domesticated chickens and among rhesus macaque monkeys. In such cases the cheater is punished if its trick is discovered.27

Even if the sound signals of animals do not attain the semantic and syntactic complexity and richness of human language, it is thus hard to continue to claim that they are no more than simple instinctive expressions. Arbitrary variations and innovations within a species, learning by imitating, a stable correspondence between a vocal signal and what is signified, and the possible intentionality of a message combined with anticipation of the effects of its reception: all these are features that suggest that we should accord to the communication systems of certain animal species the status of at least very elementary language.

What interior resources are animals believed to call upon when they activate this ability to produce a limited symbolic system? Are they endowed with a mind that renders them capable of controlling their behavior and making interventions in their environment by means of representations that they can transmit to their fellows? Are we ready to accept that some of them may have an interiority comparable to our own, which would open up a considerable breach in the citadel of naturalism? The fact is that, unlike Griffin, most cognitive ethologists jib at attributing true conscious thought to animals, preferring to regard animal language as the product of a genetic predisposition encoded in the brain, which Marler calls learning instinct, the characteristics of which vary according to the species’ genome. He suggests that among songbirds, where these phenomena have been most fully studied, the capacity to recognize the sound signals of fellow conspecifics and the ability to learn a song are both innate and vary greatly from one species to another, while the phonological and syntactical characteristics that a subject selects in order to form its vocal repertory remain homogeneous within a single species.28 Animal language would thus proceed from a neurophysiological cause, gradually rendered specific through experience, so there is no need to explain it by introducing the mediation of complex representations, that is to say, propositional attitudes thanks to which the animal would objectivize its own internal state (its emotions, beliefs, and aims) and would interpret those of other organisms present in its environment. In short, recognition that animal species do possess the ability to produce individual and collective variations by means of a conventional and referential system for exchanging sound signals in no way results from the attribution to nonhumans of an interiority identical to that of humans. On the contrary, it is based on reducing their linguistic faculty to a fundamental physicality—that of the genome, which epigenesis would then modulate within strict limits. Naturalism is thus safe and sound: to concede to birds and monkeys the privilege of being distinctive thanks to language is in reality to revert to the idea of the universality of nature.





Mindless Humans?



Let us now return to humans and the distinctive interiority with which they are traditionally credited in the ontology of the Moderns. Do we still adhere to such a principle other than as a popular belief? Do humans still live, as in Descartes’s day, under the regime of a separation between a more or less immaterial mind and an objective physical and corporeal world—that is, a world whose properties are specified even before any knowledge of it is acquired? The overall answer is “yes,” even among scholars. All the same, there are exceptions that we need to examine so as to evaluate how they might contribute to a rejection of the naturalist mode of identification. One current of cognitive science strongly opposed to dualism rejects the idea that we could be acting in the world and ascribing many meanings to it simply because each one of us is granted at birth the privilege of occupying some kind of command center to control behavior patterns and the handling of perceptive information, in the same way as Turing’s computer did. One of the most novel attempts to bypass this standoff between a computational interior and an already-structured exterior is the theory of cognition as embodied action, which has been developed by Francisco Varela, Eleanor Rosch, and Evan Thompson.29 On the basis of the philosophical intuitions of Merleau-Ponty, these authors defend the thesis that cognition stems from the experience of a subject endowed with a body that must guide its actions in situations that are constantly changing because they are modified by its activities. The subject’s point of reference is no longer an autonomous mechanism dealing with information forthcoming from a world independent of perceptions. Instead, it is a whole combination of the subject’s sensorimotor mechanisms that are constantly modulated by the events that occur in an environment from which the subject is not separate and which provides it with the opportunity to interact in various ways. With the support of experimental illustrations, these authors declare that, far from being reducible to a representational interiority that gives form to passively received stimuli, “cognitive structures emerge from the kinds of recurrent sensorimotor patterns that enable action to be perceptually guided.”30 The mind, if it can still be called a mind in such circumstances, becomes a system of emergent properties that result from continuous retroaction between an organism and its environment. So it has lost any intrinsic interiority and become no more than an attribute or epiphenomenon of physicality.

The ecological theory of vision proposed by the neurophysiologist James Gibson is even more radical, since it leads to the total elimination of the mind as a supposed seat of the higher mental functions.31 In its classic form, the principle of “affordance” developed by Gibson has become familiar: the environment of animals, humans included, possesses properties that are irreducible to the physical world or to phenomenological experience since they stem from possibilities, or “affordances,” that an observer perceives there for engaging in action in accordance with his or her sensorimotor capacities. For a human or a sheep, for example, the edge of a cliff presents, on the one hand, the possibility of a walk along it and, on the other hand, a fall into the void, whereas for a vulture this spot might invite it to take off in flight. The fact that it is possible to engage in a variety of actions in this place is not an intrinsic property of cliffs themselves that might be studied by a geomorphologist. The particular attributes of these features of the landscape only become what they are for organisms that are able to make use of them. Gibson furthermore maintains that there exist enough invariances in the topology of the ambient light to make it possible to specify the properties of the environment (and these include “affordances”) without the mediation of any internal representations. Perception is thus immediate and consists in detecting those optical invariances and also the affordances that they reveal; and this happens independently of any action on the part of the animal, since affordances are always there, ready to be perceived. Such a redefinition of perception in its turn implies a redefinition of the operations of the mind, to the extent that the extraction and abstraction of optical invariances by any organism stem from both perception and from knowledge, the latter being simply an extension of the former. It is thus no longer necessary to invoke an intellect in order to account for processes such as memory, thought, inference, judgment, and anticipation. As Gibson remarks, “I am convinced that none of them can ever be understood as an operation of the mind.”32 So it’s goodbye to that mysterious interiority! Away with those strict distinctions between human animals and nonhuman ones! Gone is the structural coupling of a sensorimotor mechanism and the environment! All that remain are optical regularities awaiting actualization by a suitable receptor.

With this ecological theory of perception of his, Gibson offers a powerful and coherent alternative to the form of cognitive realism that has for several centuries constituted the virtually unchallenged epistemological regime of modern naturalism. He does not set up an autonomous subject endowed with a mind capable of processing sensorial information extracted from an objective world by means of representations that are a combination of innate dispositions and culturally acquired abilities. Instead, he invites us to regard knowledge as a schooling of attention undertaken by an organism engaged in the daily realization of tasks whose successful accomplishment requires only a continually enriched ability to detect the most striking aspects of its environment and to adjust to them increasingly well. It is not hard to understand the fascination that this program has exerted on authors such as Ingold and Berque, confronted as they are, in the societies that they study, by modes of relating to the environment whose local formulations hardly fit in with the classic dualism of the world and the mind, subjects and objects, intellectual activity and sensation.33 Although Gibson himself has remained evasive with regard to the social and cultural implications of his ecological theory of perception, this theory does make it possible to envisage a very different way of apprehending human sociability. It can be seen no longer as a structuring of experience made possible by a filtering of sensible data by means of a system of collective representations, but as a state that existed prior to any cultural objectivization and that is based on the practical engagement of bodies which can detect the same affordances and which, on that account, can react in similar fashion in any given environment.

Theories of knowledge that postulate bodies plugged directly into the environment thus seem to topple the entire edifice of naturalism. A mind is no longer a requisite for human action and thought; cultures are no longer seen as substantive and well-differentiated blocks of normative representations and patterns of behavior waiting to be inculcated into individuals; and animals can be raised to the dignity of subjects since they, like us, are organisms whose sensorimotor faculties offer them the possibility of understanding the world. In short, that distinctive interiority completely disappears, giving way to a harmonious continuity of physicalities. However, this effacement of ontological discrimination that is based on the criterion of the mind leads to a new exclusion, for it concerns only one category of existing beings, those lucky enough to have at their disposition a body capable of perception and movement. Inanimate nonhumans remain pure objects even if, like computers, they can execute mental operations similar to ours. By making thought the product of an interaction between perception and action that is gradually laid down in a body involved in a specific Umwelt, anti-mentalists deny computers any ontological affinity with humans (or animals): not because they lack intentionality or consciousness of the self, which is the classic argument developed by the philosophy of mind, but because they are, as it were, purely minds, and it is the body, not some neuronal or electronic processor, that is home to the kind of memory of the experience of self that constitutes subjectivity. Even robots capable of modulating their actions following an autonomous learning period find no favor in their eyes, for their mechanism is inspired by connectionist models of the mind. And, as Ingold writes, connectionism “is still grounded in the Cartesian ontology that is basic to the entire project of cognitive science—an ontology that divorces the activity of the mind from that of the body in this world.”34 Having been eliminated as a factor of ontological exclusion at the heart of complex organisms, interiority thus resurfaces as a default attribute of a class of existing beings. The “mock-mind” that computers possess will never make them comparable to humans, precisely because humans do not have minds, at least not in the form of a computing mechanism that is independent from a body. It is thus the sham interiority that is ascribed to certain nonhumans that tips them into radical otherness, and it is in the name of that interiority, which can no longer separate us from animals since neither they nor we possess it, that new ontological distinctions are invented.

Beneath its iconoclastic appearance, the new phenomenology of perception thus renders visible, as in a negative image, traits characteristic of the naturalist ontology that it claims to undermine. Behind an apparent continuity of physicalities (between humans and animals) that is no longer broken by any discrimination on the grounds of a mind that is now abolished lurks a new and contradictory discontinuity of interiorities between, on the one hand, machines that possess interiorities because human artifice so designed them and, on the other, human and nonhuman animals, which, given their intrinsic vitality, can dispense with interiorities altogether. A comparison with the animist mode of identification is most instructive at this point. When an Achuar or a Cree says that an artifact or an inorganic element in the environment has a “soul,” what he means by this is that those entities possess an intentionality of their own that is of the same nature as that of humans and so does not stem from the type of molecular substratum in which it is lodged nor from the type of process through which it eventually comes into existence. Differences of form and behavior are recognized, but they do not constitute sufficient criteria for excluding a blowpipe or a mountain from the advantage of a shared interiority. In contrast, when one says that an animal resembles us because it thinks with its body but that a computer, even if it speaks and plays chess, does not resemble us because its parody of interiority is not lubricated by vitality, what returns to the forefront of the argument is a distinction between an objectivized physicality (a machine) and a subjectivizing physicality (a body). In other words, whatever the anti-cognitivists may claim, what we have here is the barely readjusted topography of the extremely dualist distribution of existing beings between subjects and objects.

At the opposite extreme from theories of embodied or ecological cognition, a tendency fueled by recent developments in the neurosciences has likewise challenged the naturalist schema of an autonomous human interiority. It does so by dissolving that interiority into the internal properties of physicality. However, the material substrata in the two cases differ, for now thought is no longer the result of a link between a sensorimotor apparatus and an environment but is the product of the activity of the brain, an organ long associated with the higher mental functions. Ever since the earliest hesitant pronouncements of phrenology, there has certainly been nothing new about the idea that mental states may be reducible to the mechanisms of cerebral activity or, more generally, of the central nervous system. But the progress made by neurobiology and the attention that psychologists and philosophers pay to it have, over recent years, made it possible to envisage this hypothesis with greater lucidity and wariness than in the days of Gall and Broca. Most biologists do express doubt regarding the possibility of an absolute reductionism that would make it possible to fuse into a universal theory any explanation of the behavior of all physical entities, humans included. Those adopting an intermediate position, traditionally known as “physicalist,” are content to postulate that all elements of reality, including mental states, stem from material processes or states that it is possible to study experimentally. Thus, to cite Jean-Pierre Changeux, “To consider mental processes as physical events is not to take an ideological stand but simply to adopt the most reasonable and, what is more important, the most generative working hypothesis.”35 It is true that if one accepts the proposition that there can be no causal efficacy between events of any kind without there being some physical relation between them, then the mental event that consists in the formation of a representation could not come about without the help of a suitable material instrument, in this case the brain. The idea of a separation between mental activity and neuronal activity becomes obsolete: if mental phenomena intervene causally in the behavior of an individual in whom they are lodged, which is hard to deny, those mental phenomena must possess a physical dimension that can be described in molecular and physicochemical terms. Clearly, despite the abyss that seems to separate them from Gibson, the physicalists believe no more than he does in the existence of an immaterial interiority that produces mental representations. To quote Changeux again: “What is the point of speaking of ‘mind’ or ‘spirit’?”36

All the same, even when they subscribe to conflicting theories, philosophers, even Monist ones, are more prudent on this point than neurophysiologists. Donald Davidson, whose analyses have been so influential among supporters of a materialistic theory of mind, thus maintains that physical reality and mental reality possess heterogeneous properties: physical reality can be objectivized by a causally self-contained theory, whereas mental reality cannot, in that an explanation of the formation of mental states depends upon imputing to the observed subject preexisting characteristics, such as the fact that he holds as true the propositions that he produces and that they are indeed true. Davidson calls this methodological necessity “the principle of charity.” Because the contents of the thoughts of others are always interpreted on the basis of their principle of rationality and coherence, no data independent of those interpretative norms can provide the theory with a fixed point, since those norms come to constitute the data to be interpreted. That is why Davidson supports a thesis of occasional physicalism according to which a mental event is indeed identical to a physical event, just as Changeux maintains, but only in isolated instances, without it ever being possible to be sure that that coincidence is reproduced in a series of repeated occurrences, which would justify the formulation of a law. So it is claimed that a mental event “supervenes” upon a cerebral one to the extent that the former is determined by the latter, even though its properties remain irreducible to those of the physical event upon which it supervenes.37

Although this notion of “supervenience” is borrowed from Aristotle, it seems too contradictory to serve as the basis of a satisfactory philosophical interpretation of a thought being determined by the brain. As Vincent Descombes has pointed out, the supervening element is added to something that it cannot complete, so it oscillates between two statuses, “that of something additional and that of something superfluous.”38 At the very most, one may interpret this as Quine does, in a minimal fashion, as a supervenience of mental differences upon physical differences, which is a complicated way of translating the idea that every mental difference corresponds to a physical difference. But whereas a physical difference may be measured, it is not always possible to measure a mental difference, for mental states are of a different nature from physical ones, given that they do not succeed one another in the same fashion. To be sure, cerebral imaging makes it possible to correlate the production of certain statements and the resolution of certain problems with the activation of certain parts of the brain, but this is not possible in the case of many ordinary mental states that cannot be divided into separate temporal units and that philosophers of mind call qualia. I feel happy this morning because the weather is fine and I have received some good news (at least, this is how I interpret my state). But when did this state start and when does it end? Is it continuous or discontinuous? At what point is it present in my consciousness, and at what point is it no longer present? This is a mental event that one hopes will be frequent and that may influence my behavior in a causal fashion, yet it would be very difficult to make it correspond to a neuronal event, even occasionally and in accordance with the principle of supervenience. In short, even if we grant physicalist explanations the benefit of the doubt, there seems to be still a long way to go before those explanations will be capable of equating all the properties of human interiority with neural mechanisms.

However, that is not the point here. In no way is my purpose to pass judgment on contemporary theories of cognition at an empirical, philosophical, or epistemological level. Rather, it is to examine to what extent those theories could undermine the foundations of modern naturalist ontology. And, as we have seen, physicalism still falls short of achieving such an objective. In the strategy that it adopts in order to do away with the distinctive interiority of humans (and solely of humans, for most materialist philosophers of mind are, like Davidson, not prepared to concede thought to animals),39 physicalism nevertheless manifests a trait that is characteristic of the naturalist ontology. The latter takes as its starting point the principle that the specificity of humans stems from the fact that they can differentiate themselves from one another, both as individuals and as groups, thanks to an immaterial faculty that is internal to each subject although partly modulated by the values and representations peculiar to each culture. The only way to challenge the individual and collective existence of this interiority, which has so long eluded direct observation, is therefore to de-singularize the mind by reducing it to the universal material properties of the brain, in other words to dissolve interiority in a complementary thesis of naturalism according to which differences in physicality are differences of degree, not of nature. Hence, the role played in this task, both in psychology and in the neurosciences, by techniques of functional cerebral imaging that make it possible to map the brain’s activities becomes increasingly important. If it is reducible to cerebral operations, human interiority sheds much of its mystery and density since it is now possible, by at last making it partly visible, to strip it of the major attribute that justified its hypothetical existence. Nevertheless, positron emission tomography and functional magnetic resonance imaging are still not able to allow us to see in vivo such obstinate remains of interiority as consciousness of the self, the individuation of meanings, and how a cultural representation affects a propositional judgment. So it seems that the mind can still look forward to a number of days of serenity before it unveils its physical nature completely to the inquisitorial gaze of ideography.





The Rights of Nature?



It is in quite different domains that naturalist ontology may run the most serious risks of being whittled away, namely the domains of moral philosophy and law. The discontinuity between humans and other existing beings is occasioned in modern ideology by the concept of a doubly subjective interiority: consciousness of the self produces subjectivity, then subjectivity makes moral autonomy possible, and moral autonomy is the foundation for responsibility and freedom, which are the attributes of a subject in the sense of an individual with rights and duties to the community of his or her peers. Plants and animals, which are traditionally defined as lacking those properties, are therefore excluded from civic life. Because they lack the status of a subject it is not possible to enter into political or economic relations with them.40 But this subordination of nonhumans to the decrees of an imperialistic humanity is increasingly being challenged by moral and legal theorists working toward an environmental ethic liberated from the prejudices of Kantian humanism.

It is mainly in the United States, Australia, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries that, since the 1970s, a new strand of moral thought on the relations between humans and their natural environment has emerged. France and the Latin nations have essentially distanced themselves from this movement, which they treat with a mixture of irony and suspicion, regarding it, at best, as an insult to reason and technological progress and, at worst, as a reactionary attempt to undermine the universality of the ideals of the Enlightenment and the inalienable rights attached to the person of a human.41 I will not attempt, here, to disentangle the complex reasons that in certain countries have favored the emergence of a truly moral approach to the duties of humans toward the whole collectivity of living entities and the rights that this collectivity might intrinsically possess. Protestantism, with its combined values of individual responsibility and community ethics, has no doubt played a role here, as has the very particular function played in the formation of national consciousness in the United States and Germany by a variety of identifications with nature in the wild, which may strengthen an inclination to regard the simple life, in contact with an environment that is innocent of affectation, as the best antidote to the artifices of a society that is forgetful of the virtues of Gemeinschaft. At this point, let us be content simply to recognize that environmental ethics prosper above all in countries where Anglo-Saxon Puritanism has prevailed and in the northern regions of Europe, which, in the nineteenth century, saw the emergence of diverse variants of the Naturphilosophie to which the land of Descartes and Comte has remained obdurately impermeable.

But in truth environmental philosophies derive their inspiration from a variety of very different sources. It has become customary to distinguish within them between, on the one hand, extensionist ethics that propose to extend to a greater or lesser range of nonhumans the benefit of moral consideration that used to be attached solely to humans and, on the other, holistic ethics in which the emphasis is placed on the responsibilities of humans in the preservation of a balance between ecosystemic communities, which is seen as an imperative in itself—that is to say, quite apart from the status and future of the entities that compose those communities.42

Extensionist ethics are somewhat anthropocentric, although not all to the same degree. Thus, Peter Singer includes in the domain of the application of practical morality a large number of nonhumans on the grounds that they, like humans, are capable of feeling pleasure and pain and so have interests of their own that should be taken into account.43 The rights that stem from this situation should be comparable to some of those that protect humans—notably respect for life and the proscription of cruelty—even if the origin of those rights does not stem from a specifically human attribute that could be extended to animals. Singer’s ethics is based on the utilitarian doctrine of Bentham: if one accepts that it is in the interest of all sensitive beings to protect themselves from suffering and perpetuate themselves in life, then to recognize that interest only in the case of humans constitutes “speciesism,” an attitude analogous to racism in that it establishes unfounded discriminations between classes of existing beings that all have the same properties. However, in the course of time Singer has moved toward a position that is definitely more anthropocentric and eventually asserts that the life of certain sensitive beings is intrinsically more valuable on account of the fact that they are endowed with faculties that are clearly derived from those that naturalism imputes to humans, such as consciousness of self, a capacity to think and project oneself into the future, and the ability to communicate complex information. This affects only a very small number of animals, chimpanzees among them, which thus become invested with the status of persons by reason of their proximity to humans with regard to their interiority. The logical and strongly contested corollary to this position is that humans who lose such faculties as a result of serious cerebral lesions or malformations may not fully rate as persons and therefore have no automatic right to life.44

Although Singer’s ethics is presented as a radical criticism of the anthropocentric thesis that reserves the juridical rights of the status of a person solely for the human species, it cannot be denied that it does not fundamentally call into question the basic principles of the naturalist ontology. In fact, it exploits all its possibilities, since the “patho-centric” argument for extending the right to life to sensitive beings rests upon stressing a similarity in the physical dimension of existing beings at least in the case of organisms endowed with a central nervous system, while the extension of the status of a person only to certain animals is based on the fact that these share with “normal” humans an interiority of the same nature. The ontological boundaries have certainly slipped a bit, giving rise to crucial and passionate debates over what it is that justifies the right to existence for humans and nonhumans. However, this movement has developed in predictable directions that are set out by the guidelines of naturalism: a physical continuity, on the one hand, and a discontinuity in the mental faculties, on the other. So the animals excluded from the restricted circle of persons remain confined to an inferior position, given that they are not recognized to possess the quality of autonomous subjects. They may be objects of moral concern on the part of humans, but they do not possess rights that they could defend. As for plants and abiotic elements in the environment, since they lack sensibility they remain condemned to the mechanical and impersonal fate that naturalism used to reserve for all nonhumans.

The ethics of the animal condition developed by Tom Regan is definitely more inspired by anthropocentricity than that of Singer. It nevertheless distances itself more vigorously from the ontological conventions of naturalism. Regan sets out from an overtly individualist position: the sources of morality and rights are to be found only in individuals—that is, in beings that possess an inherent value in that they are true “subjects-of-a-life” and not simply the objects of the moral consideration of humans, which is always tainted by a condescending commiseration. To be recognized as a moral agent, it is necessary to possess, if not the reason required to understand the law and the freedom to regulate one’s behavior with reference to it (as modern theories of law insist), at least a set of abilities that testify to an autonomy of action and a form of intentionality: consciousness of the self, an ability to act in accordance with the aims that one sets oneself, and the possibility of forming representations.45 Regan, who is more generous than most ethologists, imputes such attributes to a small number of mammals, in particular primates, which thus become fully juridical subjects, not simply beneficiaries of the protective rights conceded to them by sympathetic humans.

To be sure, just as for Singer, it is by virtue of the internal properties that they are believed to possess in common with humans that these animals can switch categories in this way. But the new status that they acquire by virtue of their own merits opens a more serious breach in the naturalistic mode of identification since they are finally recognized to possess the quality of a subject, just like humans, and this is an intrinsic distinctive characteristic. That being said, this reordering of ontological boundaries is far from rendering this extended variant of naturalism proposed by Regan comparable in every way to the distribution of properties produced by animism. That is because, in the first place, an interiority similar to that of humans is imputed to a few animals only, by reason of indications that suggest convincingly that they do indeed possess one, rather than, as in the case of animism, on account of a principle according to which, given that subjectivity is not always discernible from its empirical effects, there is no valid reason to deny it to plants and artifacts. Second, it is because the interiority that Regan attributes to great apes does not make them into collective subjects since, for him, only individuals can give rise to rights, unlike animism’s tendency to regard all kinds of classes of existing beings as communities sui generis, organized according to principles analogous to those that govern humans. And, finally, it is also because here physicality does not play a disjunctive role; only interiority does so, in contrast to the distinctions that animism establishes between collectives of subjects by reason of their anatomical equipment and the behavior patterns that this induces. Even Regan’s extensionism would probably seem absurd in the eyes of a Makuna or a Montagnais. Regan insists that certain animals should be protected for what they are, namely subjects, but at the same time accepts that, to claim their rights, they need representation. The Montagnais or the Makuna have long accepted that most animals are subjects, but it is by very reason of this essential autonomy that it becomes absurd to infringe upon it by involving oneself at all costs in their defense. Clearly, the misunderstandings between, on the one hand, associations bent on protecting wild fauna and, on the other, the autochthonous hunters of Amazonia and the subarctic are not about to be dissipated.

In contrast, holistic ethical systems seem closer to animism, for they lay the emphasis not on individuals or species endowed with particular properties but on the need to preserve the common good and not inconsiderately upset the relations of interdependence that unite all the organic and abiotic components of an environment. All that matters is the connection of all the parts to the whole, for the only value and significance of each element in that whole lie in the position that it occupies in the economy of vital exchanges. However, on account of their greater disruptive capacity, humans are invested with a decisive moral responsibility in the maintenance of ecological balances. It is a role that they can fulfill only if they understand their position in the chain of life. And such understanding of those interactions can be attained only by humbly observing nature and endeavoring to identify with the obscure teleonomy that animates each of the actors in the great terrestrial community.

This is an endeavor exemplified by Aldo Leopold, the great inspirational figure behind holistic environmental philosophy, as expressed in his rightly famous Sand County Almanach, published posthumously in 1947.46 Leopold was a forestry engineer trained at Yale and an ecologist well versed in the management of natural resources. Furthermore, ever since adolescence he had also been a hunter and had never suffered from any guilty conscience on that account. It was as an experienced hunter, rather than as a philosopher or a moralist, that he apprehended the complexities of the environment and tried to shape his own concept of it. It finds expression in an allusive, even allegorical style, in the course of reminiscences evoking forty years of his intimate and diverse experiences of nature in America. One fundamental guiding theme runs through these reminiscences: knowing how to hunt is knowing how to find one’s game, and knowing how to find it is knowing how to adopt the point of view of the animal that one is seeking, perceiving things as that animal does and putting oneself in its place. In short, it involves abandoning a superior vantage point in order to seize, from within, upon this tangled web of destinies and desires that weaves together the world in motion. Such an attitude is reminiscent of the manner in which Amerindian hunting communities envisage the metamorphoses that mark relations between humans and nonhumans, such as exchanges of viewpoints in the course of which each party, modifying the observational position imposed by its body, endeavors to slip into the skin of the other in order to see things from its point of view.

All the same, we should not push this analogy too far, for the technical and cognitive needs peculiar to solitary hunting support it only partially. The fact is that Leopold’s “land ethic” in no sense calls into question the ontological distributions of naturalism, which it, on the contrary, accepts without a qualm. To be sure, in order for humans to form a fitting idea of their place and responsibility in synecological interactions, it may be useful for them unpretentiously to imagine the aims and lifestyle of the other components in this superorganism that they help to animate. Hence, there is an educational need to—as Leopold puts it—“think like a mountain,” the better to evaluate the balance between wolves, deer, and vegetation to be respected on its slopes; or to imagine the odyssey of an atom carried through the cycle of its successive incorporations by a kind of inchoate intentionality.47 But all this is a matter of experiencing salutary thoughts of a kind to give substance and a live urgency to abstract ecological learning; in no sense does it constitute a profession of animist faith. Even if the poetic license taken by his formulations may sometimes prompt interpretations that are ambiguous, Leopold never does impute to nonhumans an interiority analogous to that of humans, for the awareness of a future with which he sometimes credits them is nothing but a metaphor for the general teleonomy of nature, which, he believes, reverberates within each one of them. Above all, he never ascribes to animals or to plants any ability to lead the existence of a species characterized by cultural conventions, since, for him, the latter are strictly the prerogative of humans. Leopold in effect adheres without argument to the usual version of the naturalist schema, together with its essential dualism: “Wilderness is the raw material out of which man has hammered the artefact called civilization…. [The wilderness] was very diverse and the resulting artifacts are very diverse…. The rich diversity of the world’s cultures reflects a corresponding diversity in the wilds that gave them birth.”48 Nothing much new there, clearly.

No doubt we should not expect a forestry engineer of the early twentieth century, however perceptive and original in his thinking, to detach himself totally from the mental frameworks within which he was trained. It is true that Leopold’s followers have managed to disengage themselves from the misleading symmetries of dualism and of partitioned finalisms to which their mentor sometimes succumbed. But they then reverted to the more robust certainties of the natural sciences and derived a model for moral action from the laws of ecological interdependence. The most interesting of them, John Baird Callicott, defends a vision of ecosystemic solidarity that Durkheim would not have disowned.49 Although he rejects the idea that the biotic community may be regarded as a society, the properties that he imputes to it put one very much in mind of the conditions for the exercise of organic solidarity, in particular the fact that the unity of the whole exists independently from the individuals who compose it and whose belonging to that whole implies contractual obligations vis-à-vis its members, on account of the system of functions that they fulfill. The ecosystem comes to transcend its elements and these, both human and nonhuman (and herein lies the great difference from Durkheim), are stripped of any ontological substance and so become mere cogs in a network of relations in a constant state of reorganization. Nature and culture lose their raison d’être in such a cosmology, which is no longer biocentric or anthropocentric. Instead, it is ecocentric, that is, subject to the regulatory mechanisms of energy in the environment. That being said, some process of evaluation must take place in order for the totality to behave in a moral fashion and preserve its systemic integrity, or at least the ability to regenerate itself, to the possible detriment of one or other of its components. What are needed are thus skilled agents capable of conferring a value upon that which intrinsically has none. And it comes as no surprise to find that these are recruited solely from among humans, preferably those who are well versed in the natural sciences. Inevitably, one gets a sense of déjà vu: human subjects who possess a rational interiority and a moral conscience and who recognize the essential principle of physical continuity and the material interdependence of all entities in the world assume the mission of preserving that continuity and that interdependence, often in the face of opposition from their fellows; and they do all this in the superior interest of all, which they alone are capable of discerning and representing. That could be an excellent definition of naturalist ontology seen from the point of view of all its positive practical consequences.

The point of my critical analysis should not be misunderstood. Some people, myself among them, may see in an ecocentric ethics such as that favored by Callicott a philosophical foundation solid enough for humans to engage in a less conflictual coexistence with nonhumans and to endeavor in this way to erase the devastating effects of our lack of concern and our voracity for the global environment, for which we are mainly responsible, given that our means of acting upon it bear no comparison to those of other actors in the terrestrial community. However, that is not the concern of the present book. My ambition in examining the ontological consequences of a variety of environmental ethics was simply to measure the possible differences between them in relation to the habitual norms of naturalism in order to assess how likely they are to subvert those norms. However, there is no avoiding the fact that, no more than the categorial shifts effected by ethology and the cognitive sciences, have those introduced by environmental philosophies really endangered the typical organization of naturalism. At least, the variations that I have noted are not of a kind to suggest the emergence of an utterly new mode of identification or even of one comparable to those already encountered.

All the same, the very existence of such variations and their increasing numbers over the past decades in themselves suggest that the naturalist schema can no longer be taken for granted (which is why a book such as this one has now become possible) and that a phase of ontological recomposition may be beginning, the results of which are as yet unpredictable. It is suggested that proof of this is provided by recent evolutions in the law, a domain that no doubt does testify more faithfully than any philosophical or ethical treatises to a mutation in the principles that govern our statuses, our practices, and our relations with the world. A thousand leagues away from the arguments between the partisans of animal liberation and the defenders of Kantian anthropocentrism, the jurist Jean-Pierre Marguénaud has recently shown that, in French law at least, domestic animals, tamed ones, and those kept in captivity already possess intrinsic rights just as moral persons do, given that the law recognizes interests of their own, that is, interests distinct from those of whoever is their master, and it also provides them with the technical possibility of a voice to represent their cause.50 Alongside crimes and offenses against persons, against property, and against the state, the new penal code has created a new category of infractions, those against domesticated animals, thereby showing that, although not yet defined fully as persons, these are already no longer considered as goods, that is, as things. This intermediate status is probably destined to evolve in penal law into a more clearly defined personification, for there is nothing to prevent non–wild animals from being invested with a juridical personality in the same way as any moral persons or corporate bodies recognized to have interests of their own and the means to defend them. As for organs that might legally represent the distinct interests of what Marguénaud calls an “animal person,” even if they run contrary to those of their master, many such organs have already sprung up in the shape of animal-protection associations. Without the nonspecialist public realizing it and in anticipation of the establishment of the necessary jurisprudence, dogs, cats, cows (whether mad or not), budgerigars, and the chimpanzees in our zoos would now appear, like us, to be able to assert their rights to life and well-being; and this is no longer by virtue of the humanitarian reasons used to justify the former Grammont law of 1850, namely, the public scandal that could be caused by their mistreatment. Rather, it is because they have become, if not quite legal subjects, at least quasi persons whose prerogatives are clearly derived from those that we ourselves are recognized to possess. The concession of a legal personality to animals that are dependents of humans certainly does not call naturalist ontology into question, since the discontinuity of moral faculties remains unchallenged. Nevertheless, the extension of the status of a subject to a few nonhumans at least shows that there was nothing “natural” about the discrimination of which they used to be the objects.

Naturalism’s supreme cunning ploy and the purpose of the term that I use for it are to make it seem to be “natural”: partly because the divisions that it authorizes between the world’s various entities are presented as spontaneous self-evidence in the eyes of those who use them as the principle for their schematization of experience (as is also the case with other modes of identification), but above all because the undeniable character of those self-evidences stems from the fact that they are said to be founded upon nature. This is an irrefutable argument when it comes to disqualifying rival ontologies. That is how it is that the naturalist formula turns out to be a total inversion of the animist formula: in animism, the universality of the condition of a moral subject and the relations between humans and nonhumans that this authorizes override the physical heterogeneity of the various classes of existing beings; in contrast, in naturalism, human society and its cultural contingencies are subordinated to the universality of the laws of nature. Darwin proposed the canonical version of this incorporation of culture in nature in The Descent of Man when he sought to extend to human societies the theory of descent modified by natural selection by suggesting that the latter had affected not only organic variations but also social instincts, in particular the obligation to be of assistance, otherwise known as altruism.51 A number of divergent interpretations of this inclusion of the cultural properties of humanity in the history of nature have certainly been proposed. In the cases of sociobiology and social Darwinism in the mode of Spencer, this exegesis has been restrictive and reductionist, but under the pen of Patrick Tort, it takes on a more liberal and subtle character, for in Darwin he detects “a reversive effect of evolution,” that is to say, a specific effect of natural selection when it is applied to humans: here, it favors a form of social life “whose progressive advance to what we call ‘civilization’ tends increasingly, through the interplay of morality and institutions, to exclude eliminatory types of behavior.”52 But never mind those variations, since the general idea that culture can only be understood in reference to nature has spread far beyond its Darwinian formulation and has been converted into a basic principle of naturalist ontology. (The anthropological effects of this have been briefly examined in chapter 3.) And if the opposite idea of a “cultural construction of nature” is currently enjoying a degree of favor, it is at the price of an offhand ignorance of the regressive paradox that such a notion implies: to construct nature within culture, there has to be a precultural nature that can be adapted to such a construction; there has to be a brute fact that is imaginable without the meanings and laws that convert it into a social reality; there has to be a precondition fated stubbornly to reemerge every time that it is believed that, by reversing the values of the dualist schema, it is possible to reduce it to a conventional representation.53 For if nature became completely cultural, there would be no reason for it to exist, nor for the culture by means of which this process is supposed to be accomplished, for the disappearance of the object to be mediated presupposes the pointlessness of any mediating agent. Whether nature is natura naturans or natura naturata, it thus reaffirms a contrario its dominance and culture’s subordination.





9





The Dizzying Prospects of Analogy




Naturalism and animism are all-inclusive hierarchical schemas that are the polar opposites of each other. In the one, the universality of physicality extends its system to cover the contingencies of interiority; in the other, the generalization of interiority becomes a means of attenuating the effect of differences of physicality. Totemism, in contrast, appears as a symmetrical schema characterized by a double continuity of both interiorities and physicalities, the logical complement to which can only be another symmetrical schema, but one in which a double series of differences are regarded as equivalent. I have called this “analogism.” By this I mean a mode of identification that divides up the whole collection of existing beings into a multiplicity of essences, forms, and substances separated by small distinctions and sometimes arranged on a graduated scale so that it becomes possible to recompose the system of initial contrasts into a dense network of analogies that link together the intrinsic properties of the entities that are distinguished in it. This way of distributing the differences and correspondences detectable on the world’s surface is very common. For example, it finds expression in the correlations between microcosms and macrocosms that are established by Chinese geomancy and divination, in the idea, common in Africa, that social disorders are capable of provoking climatic catastrophes, and also in the medical theory of signatures that bases the etiology and therapy of illnesses upon the apparent resemblances between, on the one hand, substances or natural objects and, on the other, symptoms and parts of the human body. What is immediately striking in such systems is the inventiveness deployed in order to track, for practical purposes, all the similarities and resonances that observation offers for inference: the quest for well-being or for the causes of misfortune is based on the hypothesis that the qualities, movements, and structural modifications of certain existing beings exert an influence on the destiny of humans or are themselves influenced by the behavior of those humans. This obsession with analogy becomes a dominant characteristic that is affirmed with a vigor that becomes increasingly manic the more its effects in daily life are reputed to be crucial. That is why the label “analogical” seemed to me the best suited to designate this schema.

However, analogy here is no more than a result or a consequence. It becomes possible and thinkable only if the terms that it compares are initially distinct and if the ability to detect similarities between things and thereby partially to remove their isolation is applied to single items. By bringing together through an operation of thought that which was previously separate, any resemblance certainly suspends the difference for a moment, but only to create a new one, this time in the relation of objects to themselves, for they become alien to their earlier identity as soon as they intermingle in the mirror of correspondence and imitation. In short, analogy is a hermeneutic dream of plenitude that arises out of a sense of dissatisfaction. Noting that the general segmentation of the world’s components is based on a scale of small differences, it nurtures the hope of weaving these slightly heterogeneous elements into a web of meaningful affinities and attractions that gives the appearance of constituting a continuity. All the same, the ordinary state of the world is one of differences infinitely multiplied, while resemblance is the hoped-for means of making that world intelligible and bearable.





The Chain of Being



An early sketch of what might constitute an analogical ontology is provided by the concept of a world plan and structure that was close to hegemonic in Europe throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It is generally known as “the great chain of being.” Working back to trace the genesis of this remarkable configuration, Arthur Lovejoy detects its origin in Plato, in what he calls “the principle of plenitude.” He suggests that this results from a tension between, on the one hand, the infinite multiplicity of eternal Ideas that form immutable archetypes of which every material and immaterial entity is simply a lesser copy and, on the other, the synoptic unity conferred upon one of those Ideas in particular, that of the Good, upon which the existence of the world is founded and which showers its perfection upon all the entities that the world contains.1 Thanks to this dynamic essence, no potentiality of being, however insignificant, can fail to be realized. The cosmos is thus better—that is to say, closer to the ideal of the Beautiful, the Good, and the True—the greater the quantity and diversity of the distinct things that it contains. To this cosmos saturated a priori with all conceivable beings, Aristotle adds the rigorous hierarchies of his natural history: the genera are fixed, the species are indivisible, and living creatures are arranged in accordance with the degree of their perfection, each in its place in a scala naturae that also takes account of the differences in the functions of the types of souls with which each organism is endowed. Plotinus and the Neo-Platonic philosophers then produced the full formulation of this ontological and cosmological schema of the chain of being that was to govern the Weltanschauung of the West right down to the early seventeenth century. It was composed “of an infinite number of links ranging in hierarchical order from the meagerest kind of existence, which barely escaped non-existence, through ‘every possible’ grade up to the ens perfectissimum … every one of them differing from that immediately above and that immediately below it by the ‘least possible’ degree of difference.”2

The theory of the chain of being presents a particular intellectual problem that is probably typical of analogism: namely, how do the continuous and the discontinuous fit together? When seen in the full scope of its development, the hierarchy of world entities seems continuous, for each element finds its place in the series because it possesses a degree of perfection that is scarcely greater than that of the element that it succeeds and is likewise scarcely less great than that of the element that it precedes. Through this contiguity that tolerates no gap or break, a general solidarity is established throughout the chain, from top to bottom and from bottom to top. However, the difference between each ontological link, which is certainly infinitesimal in relation to its immediate neighbors, turns out to be ever greater when one compares a link to others more distant from it. It thus introduces between them an essential inequality that unquestionably implies discontinuity. As time passed and depending on personal inclinations or the pressure that orthodox doctrines exerted, emphasis was laid either on the difference in nature that confers upon each thing its unique identity or on the connection that links all things so intimately that it becomes impossible precisely to determine the borders that separate them.

In Neo-Platonic philosophy and medieval theology it is the theme of multiplicity that appears to dominate. In Plotinus, for example, the generative world soul that, through its emanations, creates the chain of being has one essential property, that of creating otherness; for if the universe is at peace with itself, even if its parts are often in conflict, it is because this conforms with reason, and the unity of reason stems from the contraries that it encompasses. Reason makes things different from one another, in fact as different as possible: “So by making one thing different from another in the highest degree, it will necessarily make the opposites and will be complete if it makes itself not only into different things but into opposite things.”3 While rejecting Plotinus’s theory of an immanence of the prime mover in the order that it creates—which is hardly compatible with the attributes of the Christian God—Saint Augustine nevertheless does pick up on the thesis of the diversity of ordered things. All things would not exist if they were all equal (non essent omnia, si essent aequalia), and from the point of view of the divine plan, the whole that they form is the only perfect one.4 This insistence on the differences between the entities of the world is crucial for medieval theology, for it makes it possible to explain the existence of bad things. If everything proceeds from a perfect creative intention that is benevolent and that transcends God’s works absolutely, how can we explain the imperfection, evil, and suffering of which our world provides so many examples? Did God really will the existence of the lion that devours the lamb? Yes, says Saint Thomas, for in its infinite wisdom, divine rationality willed that each species should act in accordance with its nature and that relations between them all should balance out so that not one of them becomes predominant: “The diversity and inequality of created things are not the result of chance but of the intention of God Himself, who wills to give the creature such perfection as it is possible for it to have.”5 It takes all kinds to make a world; so it is necessary that there should be differences between existing beings, so that they are able to deploy themselves within the ordered plenitude of all possible diversities.

In later conceptions of the chain of being, those of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it was, on the contrary, the idea of continuity that seems to have predominated, above all in Leibniz but also in Spinoza. To be sure, the God of Leibniz, even more than that of the medieval philosophers, fills the world with as many things as possible: “Among the infinite combinations of possible series, that one actually exists by which the most of essence and of possibility is brought into existence.”6 However, the multiple monads are interconnected far more intimately than in the gradations of a linear chain. They are organized in the manner of a trellis in which every node, “a perpetual living mirror of the universe,” expresses and synthesizes as one whole all the relations existing between every point in that whole. In this cosmology, in which every position is a point where a multitude of influences meet, the force of the principle of continuity is so strong that all the kinds of natural beings “are so closely linked one to another that it is impossible for the senses or the imagination to determine precisely the point at which one ends and the next begins.”7 Albeit expressed with less vigor and less visionary originality, this preponderance of an emphasis on harmonious unity is also present in Locke, Bolingbroke, Buffon, and Kant. This testifies to a robust optimism with regard to the general quality of the world plan and also indicates a new ontology in which the recently introduced clash between human nature and nature alien to man was mitigated by the recognition of a material continuity between existing beings. In fact, from the early seventeenth century onward, the scale of beings gradually lost its analogical dimension and soon was employed only as a familiar metaphor in the service of naturalist ontology. It was a handy formulation of the principle of the continuity of physicalities that the knowing subject probably needed in order to affirm the uniqueness of his mind without doubt or remorse.

The Renaissance was probably the period in which analogism shone the most brightly in Europe, before fading into an underground existence from which it surfaces from time to time as a reducer of uncertainties. It is to the great surprise of positivists that it does this in the ancient guises of astrology, numerology, alternative medicines, and all the techniques for decoding and making use of similarities that remind naturalism how fragile it is and how lacking in ancient roots. As Foucault writes, “Up to the end of the sixteenth century, resemblance played a constructive role in the knowledge of western culture.”8 His pages devoted to modes of deciphering the “prose of the world” in The Order of Things are so well known that we need not now dwell upon the forms taken by that resemblance. Let us simply note some of their characteristics that seem likely also to be at work in any analogical system, even if only as tentative tendencies.

In the elusive world of analogism, resemblance becomes the only means of introducing order, for this is a priori a chaotic and inflated world, since it contains an infinite number of different things, each in a particular place and each at the heart of an idiosyncratic network. In order to reduce this dizzying atomist perspective, the links of similarity that justify repeatedly moving along certain meaningful paths need to be identified. Such links may be metaphorical if they present a similarity between terms, or metonymic if they concern a similarity in relations. Among the former group of links are those that establish a connection in space, by means of which things that are placed in a relationship of proximity, of “convenientia,” are united by their immediate closeness; in this group, imitation likewise plays a part, for it likens dispersed things because they appear to be mirror images of one another, albeit usually on different scales. Metonymic links include, in the first place, analogy in the strict sense, which applies to similarities among, not things themselves, but the relations that they maintain. Analogy is a flexible and polyvalent means of producing resemblances that is likely to make use not only of symmetry but of various forms of inversion, encompassment, and division. To this may be added links of attraction or sympathy, that is, action at a distance, which is also metonymic at least in the sense that it brings together in a sui generis relationship the previously separate relations that each thing had with its neighboring things. Furthermore, this network of resemblances should be discernible from tangible signs, so that the theory of signatures, far from being confined to the prehistory of Western medicine, is bound to manifest its pleasing imaginativeness everywhere in an analogical mode of identification. It does so in particular thanks to lists that indicate marks that are visible on the surface of things and that thus make it possible to reduce the multiplicity of appearances to occult properties, many of which can be organized into polar opposites of sameness and difference. Finally, the same applies to the exceptional emphasis placed on relations between the macrocosm and the microcosm, which was certainly particularly noticeable during the Renaissance, in its Neo-Platonic form, but the purpose of which may be presumed to be identical in all analogical systems, and for the same reasons as those identified by Foucault in connection with the epistemē of the sixteenth century. The obsession with correspondences between humans and the cosmos made it possible to establish one privileged creature as the seat of a denser focus of such correspondences, which checked both the proliferations of signs at that level and also their limitless reverberation within a closed world. This seemed to guarantee that an ordered system of knowledge and a restorative practice were possible, that in the unremitting flood of similarities, a guiding map was available.

Marcel Granet explains that, in ancient China, “society, man, and the world formed the object of an all-encompassing knowledge constituted solely by the use of analogy.”9 And it is indeed hard not to regard the way that this civilization accounted for its experience of things as a fine illustration of the analogical mode of identification, carried to a very high level of subtlety and refinement by several millennia of learned speculation. We shall nevertheless not linger over this exemplary case, for to do justice to its complexity and to the unity of the whole system that emerges from it would require following up too many lines of thought to cope with here. Let us simply note that Chinese philosophy most fully reveals what appears to be a central feature of any analogical ontology, namely the difficulty of distinguishing in practice among the components of existing beings, between that which stems from interiority and that which stems from physicality. This is expressed by the aphorism found in a treatise more or less contemporary with Aristotle, the Xi ci: “The wu (beings) are made up of jing and qi.”10 By wu, we should understand each of the types of things both animate and inanimate, collectively known as the “Ten Thousand Things” (wan wu), the exact number of which, however, calculated on the basis of the sixty-four hexagrams used in divination, would actually be 11,520, and these would correspond to the same number of particular situations, states, and emblems. Each wu is constituted by emanations from Heaven, which is ruled by Breath (qi), and from Earth, which produces nurturing essences (jing), so that every “nature” (xing) results from a more or less harmonious and balanced combination and dosage of heterogeneous elements that proceed from Water, Fire, Wood, Metal, and Earth. In short, the manner of being, personality, temperament, idiosyncrasy—in other words, the xing of an existing being—are not produced by a dynamic opposition between mind and matter but express the distinctions that are established between the states of elements and the proportions of their respective mixtures. This immeasurable multiplication of the elementary parts that make up the world is reflected within each one of those parts (including human beings, who are each fragmented into numerous components that are themselves repeated in successive interlocking situations). This seems to be a distinctive property of an analogical ontology and the surest means of identifying it. Intentionality and corporeality seldom surface as autonomous entities, for they are distributed in chains of pairings that bring the material and the immaterial together at every level in the respective scales of the microcosm and the macrocosm. So my earlier definition of analogism as a combination of the differences of interiorities and the differences of physicalities should not be taken altogether literally, so indefinite do the contours of those two groups seem to be. Rather, we should regard it as an approximate way of describing this teeming host of more or less harmonious singularities, which fragments the self-evidence of the physical and the moral, the better to ensure their union.





A Mexican Ontology



Sidestepping China and the formidable erudition required to study it, our inquiry into analogism now takes us to the central plateau of Mexico. My choice is no doubt justified by my firmer ethnographic acquaintance with this region of the Americas but is also prompted by less contingent reasons. To select the Han civilization as the principal illustration of an analogical ontology, or indeed India, which, I suspect, would exhibit similar properties, would be to risk reducing this mode of identification to an “oriental” paradigm coextensive with a vast and hypothetical domain of Asiatic “high cultures.” This would be a lazy way of suggesting a kind of unity (even if a reminder of our own ancient “chain of being” should suffice to dispel the idea of any such geographic exclusiveness). We have delved into the lowlands of South America and the northern zone of North America to find numerous examples of animism. Now let us turn to Mesoamerica (though Andean America would have served equally well). This will, by contrast, present an opportunity to make the point that ontological schemas are distributed all over the world in accordance with peoples’ preferences for this or that way of organizing their behavior in the world and vis-à-vis others, not because these schemas are the emanations of great cultural clusters or are products of rashly reconstructed diffusions of ideas. Certain ideological themes certainly are present in much of Native America, but they are tacked on as nuances or enrichments of more elementary modes of identification whose contrasting structures are for the most part unconnected with any common substratum. The Mexico of the Conquest furthermore presents a rare case of an analogical system of knowledge that has been transmitted to us mostly by observers who were themselves already immersed in an analogical way of thinking, that of sixteenth-century Europe, to which, whatever one might say, the Aztecs must have seemed less mysterious than they do to modern researchers. The analogical ontology is, moreover, so common in every latitude of the world that it seems preferable to investigate the details of one of its actualizations in order to pick out unvarying relations that are useful for comparison rather than to construct an abstract type on the basis of disparate facts.

Although they were distributed among a multitude of city-states, chiefdoms, and principalities all more or less politically dependent on the huge town of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, the Nahua peoples who occupied the central plateau of Mexico at the time of the Conquest presented a remarkable homogeneity in their conceptions of a universe in which the macrocosm and the microcosm were closely integrated. Of these two domains of existence, one remained relatively unknown for a long time, for although the Aztec cosmology has been the subject of many publications, only more recently have the Nahua theories of the body and the person received the systematic attention that they deserve, thanks to the study devoted to them by Alfredo López Austin.11 López Austin’s work is based on philological analyses of sources written in the Nahuatl language, on a critical use of sixteenth-century Spanish ethnography, in particular the admirable General History of the Things of New Spain by the Franciscan brother Bernardino de Sahagún, and on the ethnology of the modern Nahuas. It constitutes an unprecedented summation of the ontology of the ancient Mexicans, and I shall be drawing heavily upon it in the present work.

The Nahuas recognized the existence of four principal components in a human person (tonacayo, tonalli, teyolia, and ihiyotl), which we shall need to examine closely for, apart from the first of them, it is hard to find simple translations for these terms. Tonacayo, “all our flesh,” was a term commonly used to designate the body as a substantial reality that formed a totality on its own. It was used to refer not only to humans but also to plants, maize in particular. López Austin defines the three other components as “animist centers,” that is, the centers of an organism that govern life, movement, individuation, and psychic functions, both in humans and in nonhumans.

The most individualized element of an existing being appears to be its tonalli. In humans this is situated in the head and it spreads its influence throughout the body (by means of the blood, according to present-day Nahuas). Tonalli is an impalpable emanation that sometimes materializes in breath, and when it happens to absent itself from the body, it adopts an invisible shape identical to that of the body in which it lodges. But it cannot remain for long without a protective envelope, and so, if it is a human tonalli, it takes refuge in an animal or a plant. Tonalli may be translated as “irradiation,” but depending on the context, it may also mean “the destiny of a person according to the day of its birth” or “something that is a property peculiar to one person in particular.”12 This is a force or essence made manifest in the world in the form of heat or light, but it is unique for each person, depending on the sign that corresponds to the day of his or her birth and the name, which is kept secret, that he or she will in consequence be given. Tonalli is not present at birth but has to be incorporated in a ceremony featuring a ritual bath, which completes the person of the newborn child and defines the framework for his or her future achievements.

This identity marker, which has every appearance of a simple astrological predestination, nevertheless also functions as a principle of animation and a mental faculty. It provides vigor, determination, and the capacity to grow; it regulates the body temperature and makes consciousness of the self possible. Tonalli may temporarily leave the body (at times of drunkenness, sickness, dreaming, or sexual intercourse) or abandon it forever, which is a symptom of imminent death, for life without tonalli is possible for only a short space of time. Nahua sources mention tonalli above all in reference to humans, but it is certainly not a human prerogative: gods, plants, animals, and even inanimate objects also possess it. Modern equivalents to tonalli among Mexico’s non-Nahua indigenous groups possess analogous characteristics. The šũti (soul) of the Otomi of the Sierra Madre and the sombra (shadow) of numerous Mesoamerican communities are likewise liable to detach themselves from the body, creating a perilous situation since they thereby expose themselves to the risk of being captured by a sorcerer.13 For the Tzotzil, who speak a Mayan language, each and every thing possesses a ch’ulel, which is “the intangible replica of its material form and qualities”: among humans, this principle of individuation absents itself during sexual intercourse, dreaming, and drunkenness and can then enter into communication with the ch’ulel of other existing beings. Above all, and to the extent that ch’ulel, like tonalli, is diffused throughout the entire organism, elements of the body that become separate from it (such as nail parings and hair) continue to maintain an intrinsic link with it, while at the same time being infused with a ch’ulul of their own.14 Finally, we should note that every individual has a specific tonalli. It sometimes happens that two persons receive similar tonallis and destinies if they are born on the same day and under the influence of the same planet. Such an accidental link might lead to an amicable and ritualized affinity. On the other hand, identical tonallis were incompatible in marriage (for they devoured each other), so it was important to consult specialists before any matrimonial union in order to ascertain that the respective tonallis of the future spouses were definitely not the same.

Teyolia is situated in the heart but should not be confused with it. As one of the Nahua informers of Brother Alfonso de Molina told him: “When one is dying, something resembling a person … issues from the mouth and goes there [with the supreme gods]…. The heart which leaves is what makes one alive and once gone, the dead body remains. The heart does not go away, only that which keeps one alive here.”15 Teyolia, which can be broken down into /yolia/ (that which animates) and /te/ (a possessive suffix), is in effect the part of the person that goes off into the world of the dead; and this concept was very soon assimilated to anima, the Christian soul, both by the Spaniards and by the Hispanicized Nahuas. Unlike tonalli, teyolia never leaves the body during life. It is apparently lodged in the embryo by the protective deities of the calpulli, the localized descent group to which the newborn child will be attached. This is the component of the human person that, through its permanence and properties, seems to correspond most closely to an idea of interiority: it is the source of sensibility, memory, “states of soul,” and the formation of ideas (“to think” was “to make something inside alive”).16 But teyolia also controls feelings in that these reflect a lasting temperament, which is expressed in a specific kind of behavior that is identified with the type of “heart” received at birth. Depending on the type of teyolia with which an individual is endowed, he or she is said to have a heart that is “white,” “hard,” “sweet,” “bitter,” “sad,” “raw,” or “cold.” For example, a “bitter” heart predisposes one to effort, sadness, and regret, and it immunizes one against attacks from sorcery. As with tonalli, every human is endowed with a teyolia that is very individualized, for there are a great number of varieties of this component. But that being said, possession of a teyolia is no more the privilege of humans than is possession of a tonalli: animals, plants, and even mountains, towns, and lakes were all provided with one. Nowadays the Mayas of the highlands and the Totonacs even attribute one to crosses and to houses. This confirms that a human heart is only a hypostasis, or even a metaphor, for a teyolia. It is not the substantial incarnation of a faculty.

In a human body, the ihiyotl is linked with the liver and the bile, but here again the organ is simply the means of localizing a function, since inorganic entities also have ihiyotls. Ihiyotl can have the meaning of “breath” and was commonly used to designate the face. It is described as an extremely dense luminous gas that emanates from a human, an animal, or an object and acts as an attractive force and seat of influence over all that surrounds it. Ihiyotl, which is present as early as the embryonic stage of life and survives after death in the form of a dangerous exhalation, engenders and channels the feelings that are directed toward any object (desire, anger, appetite, a desire to harm), and it must be constantly revitalized by the air that one breathes and the food that one ingests. The ihiyotl of humans combines the register of emotions that prompt action and that of the civic virtues associated with such actions; as a “face,” it is peculiar to each individual, for the Nahuas maintain that a physiognomy reflects the idiosyncratic qualities that are recognized by the collectivity and are emblematic of the various statuses that are reflected in the social hierarchy: fame, a good reputation, humility, splendor, experience, dignity.

If one wished at all costs to distribute the Nahua components of existing beings between the categories of interiority and physicality, the solution most respectful of the facts would probably be to place tonalli and teyolia under the heading of immateriality, while the tonacayo body, the ihiyotl, and the assignation of these to one particular place would define the material aspect of an individual. Although they refer to organs in living beings, tonalli and teyolia are insubstantial. The former is an irradiation that cannot survive for long without a protective envelope; the latter is a principle of animation that may call to mind the Christian soul. Both express or render possible functions peculiar to interiority: consciousness of the self, sensitivity, thought, an individual essence, and vital energy. Meanwhile, tonacayo is totally substantial since its very name derives from “flesh” (nacatl), here understood as matter that constitutes certain organisms by which humans are nourished. Ihiyotl is harder to classify. In its ordinary form it is certainly not material as a part of the anatomy is, but it is much more concrete than tonalli and teyolia. It is a vaporous exhalation similar to an aura and recognizable from the disagreeable odor that it emits after birth and death. The Chortis of Guatemala, a group belonging to the Maya linguistic family, confirm the rank stench of hijillo (the Hispanicized version of ihiyotl) and claim that it is so dense that one can sometimes make out its outline.17 Ihiyotl moreover helps to model the physicality of individuals in a characteristic fashion, revealing the temperament’s dominant traits in a person’s physiognomy and bearing. As for the topographical aspect, considered as an ontological attribute, this follows from the fact that every existing being must occupy a place appropriate to its identity, in both physical space and social space. This is well illustrated by the meaning of the term “misfortune” (aompayotl); literally, it is “the condition of something outside of its place.”18 It is worth noting that the physical determination of the entities of the world by the position that is assigned to them also appears in ancient China, where space was considered, not simply as an extension resulting from the juxtaposition of homogeneous parts, but as a collection of concrete sites that served to classify beings and things from the point of view of action.19 In fact, this way of using position in space as an additional means of particularizing each existing thing seems to be a common feature of most analogical systems.

All the same, the distribution of the components of a person in accordance with whether they are mainly material or mainly immaterial is not what is important here. The dominant feature of Nahua ontology, as of any analogical system, is the grouping within every existing entity of a plurality of aspects the right coordination of which is believed to be necessary for the stabilization of that entity’s individual identity, for the exercise of its faculties and dispositions, and for the development of a mode of being in conformity with its “nature.” The great diversity of types of tonacayo, tonalli, teyolia, and ihiyotl and the virtually infinite variants rendered possible by combinations of these types thus make each entity in the world, whether human or nonhuman, quasi-unique. Among the ancient Nahuas, this obsessive differentiation found expression in the constant attention paid to the disparities between humans according to their age, their sex, the color of their skin, their odor, their degrees of vigor and heat, their conformity to the canons of physical normality, and their vulnerability to danger and the attacks of sorcerers or malevolent deities: all of these constituted characteristic signs peculiar to the constituents of each entity and the way in which they were assembled. The scale of differences was just as marked in other existing beings, as was manifested by their gradational distribution along a continuum that stretched from hot to cold, in which there was a specified place for—in addition to humans—plants, animals, minerals, heavenly bodies, foodstuffs, illnesses, deities, and many other things besides. This, in short, was a system of universal classification that is still strong in Mesoamerica and to which we shall return.

At first sight, Nahua analogism seems close to animism. Animals, plants, stones, and mountains are all endowed with “animist centers” analogous to those of human beings. There are existing beings of every kind whose interiorities communicate with one another in dreams: for example, trees from which one begs forgiveness before felling them and which are honored once felled.20 Is such a world, humming with conscious life and saturated with objects credited with intentionality, really distinct from the world of the Indians of Amazonia and Canada? The first point to note is that the ancient Nahuas and likewise the present-day Tzotzil attribute interiorities more liberally than the Jivaros or the Cree do. For the former pair, all visible and invisible entities in the environment possess at least one of the components that assure humans of subjectivity, memory, vital force, and volition. Furthermore, every existing being is different from every other on account of the plurality of its components and the diverse modes of their combination. This is at odds with the unity of the internal faculties that animist ontologies ascribe to humans and to certain nonhumans. In an analogical regime, humans and animals do not share the same culture, the same ethics, and the same institutions. By taking multiple precautions, humans manage to cohabit with plants, deities, houses, grottoes, lakes, and a whole mass of multifaceted neighbors within a closed universe in which each entity, anchored at a particular spot, pursues the ends that destiny has fixed for it in accordance with the dispositions that it has been allotted. Each entity is, willy-nilly, connected to every other entity by a tangle of correspondences over which it has no control. In contrast to the freedom of action that animism allows to existing beings endowed with similar interiorities, analogical worlds are burdened by the weight of destiny. Given that every entity is made up of a multiplicity of components in an unstable equilibrium, their tendencies to roam are thereby facilitated. So the transmigration of souls, reincarnation, metempsychosis, and, above all, possession all constitute unequivocal signs of analogical ontologies. Indeed, the invasion of an alien interiority into an existing being and the former’s temporary or definitive domination over the autochthonous interiority—the minimal definition of possession—appear to be unknown in animist systems. True, it is sometimes said that certain Amerindian or Siberian shamans are invaded by their “auxiliary spirits,” but this is a way of conveying the shaman’s deliberate communication with alter egos that are invited to help him and whose actions he controls. It does not involve the total alienation of an individual by a power that changes his or her identity.

The Nahuas provide many examples of this effacement of personality that is characteristic of possession. Its effects often proved disastrous: certain bouts of madness, for instance, were imputed to an invasion of the demented person by the minor deities of rain. In such a case, the victim was said to be aacqui, “one who has suffered an intrusion.” Meanwhile, the teyolia of cihualpipiltin, women who had died in childbirth, which accompanied the sun in its cycle, “became manifest” in its victims by provoking paralyses.21 However, possession might also be sought for its beneficial consequences. When someone drank pulque, the alcohol made from the agave, one of the four hundred rabbit deities (centzontotochtin) that resided in the beverage invaded the body of the drinker. If he had reached the required age for partaking of pulque (fifty-two years) and if he used it in moderation and for valid ritual reasons, then the deity would bestow strength and beauty upon him. Otherwise, the deity would take offense and propel the contravener into a demeaning pattern of behavior. Such possession was extremely individualized, for the same rabbit deity would always seize upon the same drinker and transmit into his drunkenness the characteristics of its own personality: gay, melancholic, or aggressive.22 Exactly the same thing would happen if one ingested psychotropic substances such as peyotl or hallucinogenic mushrooms, all of which were inhabited by deities, which by this means took possession of the bodies of humans, there to reside for a short period. This is strikingly different from analogous practices in animist Amazonia. Here, the ingestion of hallucinatory substances such as ayahuasca (Banisteriopsis sp.) is in no sense supposed to introduce an alien interiority that would then establish a hold over the one already present. On the contrary, it serves to free the interiority from its physical receptacle by increasing its acuity and clairvoyance and eventually making it possible for it to be free of the body and so be able to interact with its fellows without constraint.

The wandering among other bodies that is undertaken by the components of a person is well documented by the early Nahuas and offers us the opportunity to reflect a little on the typically Mesoamerican phenomenon known as “Nagualism.” So many different factors have been intermingled in the use of this term and over such a long period (all the founding fathers of anthropology make abundant use of it) that a preliminary clarification seems called for. The word nagual (or nahual) designates all or some of the following things: (1) an animal double whose life cycle runs parallel to that of a human, since it is born and dies at the same time as that human and everything that affects the integrity of one of them also affects the other; (2) the zodiacal sign under which a child is born (and the day of its birth), which determines the child’s particular character and attributes; (3) sorcerers reputed to be able to change themselves into an animal or a ball of fire, usually with the intention of doing harm; (4) the animal into which a sorcerer is incorporated; and, finally, (5) a component of a human person. Upon reexamining the “Nagualism” file, George Foster has established that the ability to be embodied in an animal, which was ascribed to the Nagual sorcerers of Mexico and Guatemala, was totally independent of any belief in an exclusive link established at birth between a human and an animal—a belief that the Nahuas of the central plateau do indeed not appear to have held.23 It thus seems preferable to reserve the word nagual (and “Nagualism”) for a sorcerer able to turn himself into an animal and to apply the term tona to a human’s animal alter ego, for the latter is a term that is in current use in many regions of Mesoamerica.

What exactly are the mechanisms mobilized in these processes of ontological embodiment and pairing that appear to efface the boundaries between humans and animals? A tona (or wayjel among the Tzotzil) is a wild animal that is born on the same day and under the same sign as a human and with which that human shares temperamental characteristics: among the Tzotzil, if the animal is a jaguar the person will be stubborn, willful, violent, and cantankerous; if the animal is a hummingbird, the person will instead be patient, gentle, and understanding.24 Such a connection with a plant is more rare and ambiguous: among the Teenek of Huasteca, for example, young trees are chosen by healers to serve as godfathers to children, their mission being in general to protect them without their realizing it, although in this instance there is no coincidence between the dates of birth nor any correspondence between the character imputed to the tree and those imputed to the child.25 Although their destinies run parallel, no explicit relation exists between a human and his tona, so in most cases the identity of the tona is not known and there is always the risk that the human may harm it and thereby do himself damage. As Jacques Galinier writes on the subject of the Otomi, “everyone knows that he can accidentally kill his [animal] companion when hunting in the bush, and thus bring about his own death.”26 All the same, a tona is not really an anonymous double in the sense of a moral and biographical counterpart that capricious deities or ancestors choose for a human in order to make his existence more unpredictable. For the common destiny that unites them regardless of their own respective wills rests upon the fact that as soon as he is born, a fraction of the human—part of his tonalli according to López Austin—installs itself in his animal alter ego, where it remains until death.27 Neither projection of a personality on to “virgin wax” nor materialization of twinned attributes, the tona is at once different from and similar to its human twin, since it provides a receptacle for a fragment of delocalized interiority that eludes any conscious control (for this is purely a matter of destiny) even as it continues to influence the individual from which it proceeds.

As for the term nagual, it goes beyond the figure of a sorcerer with the ability to change into an animal, although that is the illustration most frequently offered. Among the early Nahuas, as in much of present-day Mesoamerica, deities, the dead, and animals are likewise able to adopt an animal form (in the last case that of an animal of a different species), not by changing their own appearances but simply by infiltrating the body of another entity. No metamorphosis is involved. Rather, according to López Austin, we should consider nagualism “a kind of possession that men, gods, the dead and animals effect by sending one of their animistic entities, ihiyotl or nahualli to take cover in various beings, animals predominantly, or by placing themselves directly inside their victims’ bodies.”28 This being so, a nagual (or nahualli) is at once a being that can separate itself from its ihiyotl and provide it with another being to serve as its envelope, the ihiyotl itself, and also the being that takes in the ihiyotl of another.

This helps to explain why “tonalism” and “Nagualism” have so often been confused, even in indigenous formulations. Both cases involve the exportation of one component of an existing being into another existing being and their fates becoming so closely linked that anything that concerns the one will produce consequences for the other. But there are also differences between the two. In the one case the element exported is tonalli, and in the other it is ihiyotl; as for the link that is established, in the one case it is involuntary and permanent, and in the other transitory and intentional; the receiver is in the one case a particular animal, and in the other a random entity. The qualities required for shifting a part of oneself are also different, since all humans unknowingly externalize part of their tonalli into an animal, whereas only experts can consciously transport their ihiyotl into another being. However, these differences between the two modes of exteriorization count for very little in comparison to the major contrast that they both present with regard to the metamorphosis that is at work in animist ontologies. If Nagualism involves the introduction of a foreign element of a generally physical nature (ihiyotl) into an independent entity while tonalism involves the introduction of an element of interiority (tonalli), then there is certainly either a lasting or a transitory coexistence of ontological principles of different origins within one and the same existing entity. This amplifies the effect of multiplicity already engendered in normal circumstances by the huge number of combinations between the many different kinds of components that make up individuals. In metamorphosis, in contrast, the interiorities of both humans and nonhumans, identical in their dispositions, remain constant, unitary, and autonomous; only their corporeal envelopes change, in accordance with the point of view from which they are apprehended. To lodge a part of oneself in an animal that one thereby takes over, as a Mexican nagual does, is not the same as assuming an animal appearance or one perceived as such, as an Amazonian shaman does. The Mexican nagual decomposes and disperses the elements of his person as he wills; an Amazonian shaman retains the stable identity of his interiority.

A world of singularities patched together from disparate materials in permanent circulation, constantly threatened with collapse on account of the bewildering plurality of its inhabitants, requires powerful mechanisms for pairing off, structuring, and classifying for it to become representable or, indeed, simply livable for those who inhabit it. And it is here that analogy serves as a compensatory procedure of integration, making it possible to create chains of solidarity and links of continuity leading in every direction. All the levels of the cosmos, the visible and invisible parts and ingredients of humans, plants, and animals and the relations between family members, social strata, occupations, specializations, atmospheric phenomena, foodstuffs, medicaments, deities, celestial bodies, illnesses, temporal divisions, sites, and cardinal points: for the early Nahuas, all these elements were interconnected by a thick web of correspondences and mutual influences, as they still are for many of the peoples of Mesoamerica. No doubt the full extent and structure of this knowledge, about which Mexicanists have written many volumes, were accessible only to a small group of specialists who were extremely knowledgeable about divination, astrology, and medicine, but even ordinary people, the macehualtin, must have possessed scraps of knowledge that were useful for carrying out the rituals of daily life and sufficient for them to sense the density of the relations between the constituents of the universe. That is certainly what is suggested by the ethnography of present-day Indian communities, which confirms that ordinary folk possess knowledge in this domain that is quite solid, even if not always as precise as that of the recognized experts: healers, visionaries, hechiceros (bewitchers), and midwives.

Whether found in Renaissance Europe, in China, or among the Nahuas of the period of the Conquest, this web of intercommunicating signs is often reduced by analysts to the classic formula of a correspondence between the macrocosm and the microcosm. But this conceptual device is not an easy one to handle. This is because it is universal if taken at its highest degree of generality: everywhere analogies are drawn (and are well attested in vocabulary) between parts of the human body, parts of plants and animals, and elements of the inorganic environment; everywhere houses are apprehended as a microcosm intermediate between the human body, of which it forms an extension, and the world, which it reproduces in miniature; everywhere links are found, sometimes of a very allusive nature, between, on the one hand, functions, dysfunctions, and biological substances and, on the other, climatic or seasonal events and cycles. In short, our body offers such a rich and immediately available reservoir of anatomical and physiological particularities that it would have been surprising if people all over the world had not made the most of it to construct networks of analogies and metaphors that in some cases reach right up to the sky. However, only analogical ontologies have managed to systematize these straggling chains of meaning into ordered and interdependent sets that for the most part are designed to be effective practically: ways to cope with misfortune, the orientation of buildings, calendars, predestination, eschatology, divinatory systems, the compatibility of marriage partners, good government—everything is interconnected in a web so dense and so charged with consequence that it becomes impossible to tell whether it is man who reflects the universe or the universe that takes man as its model. Chains of transitive causality so long and so luxuriant are seldom to be found in animist or totemic ontologies, and in present-day naturalism they appear only as incomplete fragments, nostalgic survivals from an enchanted epoch on which horoscope watchers, adepts of alternative medicines, and the followers of New Age sects all tend to draw.

So it cannot be said that analogism has established man at the intersection of all the lines of meaning that connect things. As Foucault says when speaking of the Renaissance, the macrocosm-microcosm correspondence is really a superficial effect. But the privileged position that analogism grants to the human being, as a hermeneutic standard, makes it possible to reduce the proliferation of resemblances by means of an interpretative guide that can be mastered since it is founded on the properties imputed to a human person. It should be added that the ecology of an organism constituted by many wandering elements that cohabit in a more or less harmonious fashion must surely evoke the image of a world in miniature—better, at least, than the simpler combinations used by other ontologies. There is nevertheless nothing anthropomorphic about analogical systems: despite the preponderant epistemic position filled by humans, the diversity of the parts that compose the systems is so great and their structure so complex that one single creature could not possibly constitute an overall model.

Another way of imparting order and meaning to a world full of singularities is to distribute these into great inclusive structures that stretch between two poles. In this way, the teeming mass of attributes can be contained by an operation of classification into a simplified nomenclature of perceptible qualities. Two such nomenclatures are very common: that which opposes the hot and the cold and, sometimes combined with this, that which opposes the dry and the wet. In fact, these perhaps constitute the most obvious indications of an analogical ontology. The early Nahuas made use only of the former, but they employed it regularly and exhaustively in order to divide all existing things into two classes. On the side of the hot they placed the celestial world, light, the masculine, what is above, strength, fire, the eagle, the day, the number 13, life, and so on. On the side of the cold they lined up the chthonic world, darkness, the feminine, what is below, weakness, water, the ocelot, night, the number 9, death, and so on. This duality is still very much present in Mesoamerica, where it continues to order the whole mass of visible and invisible entities: plants, animals, minerals, celestial bodies, days of the week, months, spirits, foodstuffs, physiological states; everything can be reduced to the polarity of the hot and the cold.

As can be seen from the nature of the elements classified, assignation to the one or the other class depends not on its actual temperature but on the properties attributed to it and the associations that its situation and function suggest. The hot and the cold, subjective and contrastive qualities par excellence, here serve as abstract and conventional rubrics under which to classify, not empirical indicators of a material state, but pairs of contraries. According to the Mayan people of Yucatan, for example, the heat of an oven transmits a “cold” quality to food because of the analogies with the underworld that it suggests, whereas foodstuffs cooked on a comal, an earthenware plate placed directly on a fire, acquire a “hot” quality in keeping with that of the sky.29 Although it is a dichotomy, the polarity between the hot and the cold also allows for gradations, in particular in the domain of medicine, where it is a matter of restoring the equilibrium of organisms either by heating or by cooling them by suitable means, usually treatments based on plants. Most plants are said to be either hot or cold, but some plants can change between hot and cold depending on the use to which they are put. A case in point is found among the Tzotzil, who sometimes classify a small number of plants both as sik (cold) and as k’ixim (hot).30 Finally, there are also certain entities that intrinsically combine the two qualities. For the Totonacs of the Sierra de Puebla, one such is maize.31 The degrees of heat or cold imputed to things and states thus function as highly polyvalent parameters that make it possible both to structure the world in a taxonomy of the same and the different and also to define relative positions that suit the circumstances, so as to indicate what kind of action should be taken.

The authentically Mesoamerican character of the polarity of the hot and the cold is not universally recognized, and an important polemic has developed around this subject, about which a few words should be said. The perplexing coincidence between this pair of concepts and its homologue in the ancient European theory of the humors, in which it likewise plays a preponderant part, led Foster to maintain, in a well-known article, that the dichotomous classification based on the hot and the cold was a legacy from Hippocratic medicine, which was transmitted to the New World by the Spaniards.32 This thesis was soon adopted by a number of Mexicanists and helped decisively to stimulate a whole flood of studies on the part played by Iberian grafts in the formation of the great cultural and social melting pot of New Spain. This is an area of study that had certainly long been neglected, but the present vogue for it sometimes causes one to forget that the Indians of Mesoamerica have kept plenty of features of their pre-Columbian past very much alive. There can be no doubt that several centuries of colonial domination brought about notable changes in indigenous systems of thought, some of which made an impact even as early as the first decades of contact, in particular among the Mexican elite, who constituted the principal source of information for Sahagún and his associates. That being said, however, the arguments that support the idea of a pre-Hispanic origin for the hot/cold opposition seem more convincing than those suggesting that it is an imported belief. Without going into the details of this polemic, we may follow López Austin, an outspoken partisan of the autochthony of this polarity, in particular when he points out that it is curious that one part only of the theory of the humors crossed the Atlantic Ocean, for the complementary opposition between the dry and the wet, which is central to the European doctrine of the four elements, has made very little impact in Mesoamerica. It is also reasonable to follow him when he notes that the earliest sources written in Nahuatl mention classifications according to the hot and the cold that are not directly related to questions of health, and this was at a time when Spanish medicine had not yet established its influence. And we should also follow him when he emphasizes that the field structured by this pair of concepts extended much further than that of medicine at the time of the Conquest, as it still does today,33 for more or less everything can be included in it. Furthermore, we should note that the crucial importance ascribed to the hot/cold polarity in other regions of the world where the Hippocratic influence is either out of the question (China, the Ayurvedic system in India) or is possible but unlikely (West Africa) tends likewise to favor an independent origin in the case of Mesoamerica.34

If we accept that the great inclusive classifications based on pairs of perceptible qualities are one of the most typical features of analogical ontologies, then the controversy over the origin of the hot/cold polarity will seem quite beside the point. In truth, what we have here is no more than a partial coincidence (given that the dry/wet dichotomy never became established in native Mesoamerica) between two modes of classification that are similar, since they both developed in comparable analogical contexts, but are geographically separate. The structural convergence of the autochthonous nomenclature and part of the European nomenclature thus does not pose a major problem.35 We know that the Europeans were scandalized by some aspects of early Mexican civilization that went too far against the teaching of the Gospels. However, they manifested no surprise when faced with Mexican divinatory and medical techniques but rather stressed the resemblances to their own practice. As one commentator on the Codex Borgia forthrightly wrote: “Everything was well organized and in agreement and they used the same methods as astrologers and doctors employ among ourselves.”36 And if the conquerors did sometimes dismiss certain aspects of indigenous medicine, that was certainly and with good reason not because of its use of the hot/cold opposition as an etiological and pathological indicator but because some of the therapeutic applications that resulted were contrary to Hippocratic orthodoxy.37 So these were no more than squabbles between experts who shared the same principles of qualitative physiology and who, as in the medical treatises of the Renaissance, voiced their disagreements chiefly on the subject of the clinical consequences to be drawn from this or that case.

Just as one everywhere comes across rough versions of correspondences between the macrocosm and the microcosm, there is probably nowhere in the world where human beings have not from time to time been tempted to classify things according to whether they are said to be hot or cold, or dry or wet. However, inserted into circumstantial statements and nomenclatures, as they are, those oppositions do not turn into vast all-inclusive and explanatory systems of the kind to which analogical ontologies have recourse for ordering the multiplicity of entities with which they people the world. It is remarkable that there is no trace of a general hot/cold polarity in totemic Australia, nor in Siberia, subarctic America, or indigenous Amazonia, which are the animist regions par excellence.38 Naturalism still retains a few traces of it in popular taxonomies that are a tenacious legacy from the ancient theory of the humors, which sometimes even infiltrates scholarly thought. According to Bachelard, it is to just such a survival that we owe the word “calories,” which translates the nutritive value of foodstuffs.39 Rather than regard the hot/cold or dry/wet opposition as a universal invariant, we would do better to regard it as a handy mechanism for the reduction of singularities. It is, to be sure, based on universally recognized salient qualities, but it takes the form of an all-encompassing classificatory system only when the level of ontological diversification is such that specialized nomenclatures are no longer able to set reality in order for the benefit of both thought and action and when a more general principle becomes necessary to ensure the integration of a whole range of classificatory mechanisms.





Echoes of Africa



Perhaps we need to complement this example of Mexican analogism coinciding with that of sixteenth-century Europe with a brief counterpoint from another part of the world. This provides an opportunity to turn to Africa, a continent so far barely mentioned in the present work. A memory evoked by the Malian anthropologist Amadou Hampaté Ba will explain the reasons for this choice: “Every time my own mother wished to talk to me, she would first summon my wife or my sister and tell her, ‘I wish to talk to my son Amadou but I would like, first, to know which of the Amadous that inhabit him is there at the moment.’”40

The part of West Africa that corresponds roughly to the Mandé-Voltaic region (Mali, Burkina Faso, the eastern fringes of Senegal, and the northern part of the Ivory Coast) is dominated by a concept of a human person that is remarkably close to that of the Indians of Mexico: each individual is made up of a multiplicity of mobile components whose combinations, all different, produce particular identities. The example of the Bambara, studied by Hampaté Ba, could not be clearer. There are two terms for a person: maa, the person itself, and maaya, “the person’s persons,” that is to say, the various aspects of maa present within the person. Hence, the Bambara have a traditional saying “The persons of a person are many within the person.”41 This state of affairs had its origin when the demiurge Maa-nala, having created beings none of which could communicate with him, took a tiny portion from every existing being and mixed all those fragments together to create a hybrid being, a human that contained a scrap of each and every entity in the universe. The psychic and moral attributes of each of the persons cohabiting in an individual are reflected in his or her face, the signs being distributed among the forehead, the eyebrows, the eyes, the ears, the mouth, the nose, and the chin.42

Among the Samo of Burkina, Françoise Héritier found a similar multiplicity of components within a person. According to her, every human contains the following components: a body, mɛ, the flesh of which is bestowed by the mother; blood, miya, received from the father; breath, sisi, carried around by the “blood of the heart”; vital energy, nyìni, diffused by the “blood of the body,” of which every living being contains its own portion and which is made manifest by heat and sweat (tàtáre); a psychic personality, yí:ri (understanding, consciousness of the self, memory, imagination), which is totally idiosyncratic but may in some cases be a reincarnation of some ancestor; a “double,” mɛrɛ, an immortal essence that is absolutely specific to each individual and is partially recognizable from the characteristics of the individual’s shadow (nysile) and with which plants, animals, and certain inorganic elements such as clay and iron are also endowed; an “individual destiny,” lɛpɛrɛ, which is partly conditioned by that of the mother and which determines length of life; also, finally, other unique attributes such as a name or even a “surreal homonym,” tõma, that is derived from a bush genie’s approval and that is identified by a diviner at the child’s birth.43 Every existing being thus appears as a particular combination of very diverse material and immaterial elements that confer upon it an identity of its own. Humans are the product of a more complex combination than those of other entities in the world, which leads Héritier to define a Samo individual as a “layering” of elemental components.44

However, in this region of Africa, it is the Dogon who have carried the diversification of a being’s components the furthest. Germaine Dieterlen tells us that, for them, every human is made up of a body, gódu; eight “souls,” kikinu (a contraction of kindu kindu); eight “clavicle seeds”; a great number of parcels of “vital force,” ɲàma; as well as an animal double.45 The eight kikinu souls are divided into four “body souls,” which are themselves divided into two pairs of twinned souls, one of each sex (the kikinu sáy, or “intelligent souls,” associated with mental faculties, which are spread throughout the body and are capable of detaching themselves from it; and the kikinu búmonɛ, or “crawling souls,” which are reflections of the former that manifest themselves in the individual’s shadow and seldom leave the body); and four “sex souls,” which are, as it were, doubles of the “body souls” and which serve procreative functions and are themselves also divided into two pairs of twinned souls of opposite sexes. The eight kikinu souls of each human being are altogether peculiar to him or her and are not transmitted to his or her descendants. A child receives a specific group of these at the very beginning of its life in the womb and retains them to the day of its death. They are conferred by Nommo, the master of water and the genitor of humanity, and are the product of stocks of kikinu located in the water, in particular in sacred “family” ponds that are allocated to every extended lineage. As for the two clavicles, these contain symbols of the eight primordial seeds, four to each clavicle, that were engendered by the Creator right at the start of the genesis (small millet, white millet, shadow millet, female millet, the bean, sorrel, rice, and the Digitaria), the whole collection being likened to a miniature barn that makes it possible for an individual to profit from the energy, ɲàma, of the cultivated plants that he consumes. The contents of the clavicles and the way that they are organized vary for each person in accordance with his or her sex, tribe, caste, function, and so on. Furthermore, the position of the seeds within the bone changes each time the carrier changes status in consequence of the numerous rites of passage to which he submits and also every time that he takes part in a collective ceremony. Finally, the vital force, ɲàma, is placed under the direct control of the kikinu souls. According to Marcel Griaule, it may be defined as “an energy that is present, impersonal, unconscious, distributed among all animals, vegetables, supernatural beings, and natural things and that tends to preserve the vehicle to which it is assigned temporarily (in the case of mortal beings) or eternally (in immortal beings).”46 However, the ɲàma of a human is not an undifferentiated fluid. It is formed from a combination of eighty particles from a variety of provenances. That combination is specific to each individual and links him or her to ancestors, both direct and indirect. Under the aegis of the male kikinu of the “body,” forty ɲàma are grouped. These are headed by that of the father, and under the aegis of the female kikinu of the “body,” forty others are headed by that of the mother. These two groups are established in the clavicles, and each day a new pair of ɲàma particles stemming from the two sets come to watch over the person, totally occupying his or her body in a cycle that alternates every forty days. On top of all this, every human acquires supplementary portions of ɲàma that are provided by the powers which that individual worships. These are portions that do not mix in with the initial stock. An individual is thus the depository of a multitude of ɲàma of diverse origins that maintain his relations with a whole crowd of beings that have transmitted portions of vital force to him, “each one of them helping to ensure his spiritual integrity and thus maintain the balance of his physical strength.”47 In short, not only does each Dogon form a composite and absolutely unique alloy of a prodigious quantity of both material and immaterial components, a veritable world in miniature, with its own ecology and laws of compatibility and incompatibility; but, moreover, the constant mobility of his constitutive parts turns him every day into a being different from the one of the day before.

In the African examples considered, qualities similar to those of humans are certainly attributed more parsimoniously to nonhumans than in the case of Mesoamerica, where almost all existing beings are credited with components that are similar to those of humans, albeit organized differently in each case. All the same, we are still a long way from the ontological partitioning of naturalism, with its strict segregations between humans credited with an interiority and the generic mass of natural beings without consciousness or free will. We should remember that, among the Dogon of Tireli, certain trees like to move around at night in order to hold discussions, as do stones situated near cemeteries.48 Furthermore, as we have seen, ɲàma, the general principle of animation and identity, is distributed liberally among both humans and most nonhumans. The Bolo of Mali and Burkina entertain a similar notion, that of nyama. It is recognized by all the peoples of the Mandé region and takes the form of a life-force that bathes the whole universe and is condensed in all kinds of entities, humans, animals, and also spirits.49 Among the Samo, mɛrɛ is a stable and eternal essence that carries the identity of a human or a nonhuman and that survives as a principle of individuation even after the physical disappearance of the entity that it individuated. Thus, the death of a human causes all his constitutive elements to disappear, with the exception of the mɛrɛ, which goes off to begin a new life in the village of the dead and, to this end, re-creates an entirely new person with new components. When this existence in the world of the dead comes to an end, the process is repeated in a second “life of the dead,” after which the mɛrɛ of the deceased passes into a big tree that itself possesses a mɛrɛ.

As among the Mexicans, the constitutive elements of beings are extremely mobile, constantly recomposing and partly located outside their physical envelope. That is the case of the Samo mɛrɛ, which wanders about from one physicality to another, where it sometimes coexists with the mɛrɛ of other organisms. Among the Dogon, this is even more striking. One of the “body souls,” the female “intelligent” soul (kikinu sáy) of a man, will sometimes take up its abode in the water of the family pond, as will the male kikinu sáy of a woman; one of the “crawling souls” (kikinu búmonɛ) of a man may inhabit the sanctuary of his ancestral cult, while the other one will settle in the clan’s prohibited animal. Every rite of passage (name giving, male circumcision, female circumcision, marriage, or funeral) will provoke a displacement of one or several of the individual’s components, as will participation in some collective ceremony. Furthermore, every human possesses an animal double born at the same time and of the species associated with his family. According to Ogotemmêli, Griaule’s famous informant, when the eight human ancestors of the Dogon were created, eight animals were born in the sky at the same moment and each human-animal pair shared a common soul. In the same way as with Mexican tona, “the animal is like the human’s twin …; it is certainly distinct from him, born somewhere else and apparently with a heterogeneous form, but it is of the same essence.”50 Every animal twin itself has a twin of another species, as does the latter, and so on, with the series extending gradually all the way to plants, so that every human being who is a member of one of the primordial ancestors’ eight lineages finds himself linked in a chain with nonhuman individuals, a chain whose appearance was triggered by his own birth and that encompasses one-eighth of all the living beings in the world.

As in Mesoamerica, vast networks thus connect every human to a multiplicity of existing beings, through the intermediary of a limited number of common elements, forming veritable chains of beings that incorporate every singularity in an interlacing of mirrored causes and attributes controlled by the ancestors. The Dogon have no doubt carried this obsession with correspondences between macrocosm and microcosm to extremes and with a coherence so meticulous (and so meticulously reported by Griaule and his collaborators) that it may well seem doubtful whether any of them, Ogotemmêli included, were able to form an overall view of this world, bogged down as it is in countless filaments of analogies and meaningful echoes, and whether it is possible for anyone to make all his actions conform with the precepts that govern the good functioning of this overpopulated cosmology. But what the Dogon have carried to extremes is also present in the rest of the Mandé-Voltaic region. Among the Bambara, for example, a body is regarded as “a sanctuary in which all beings are to be found in interrelation”; and among the Samo, an individual is a “contingent concretization at a crossroads, at the intersection of lines both surreal and real, which themselves straddle two worlds, that of the Universe and that of Humanity.”51 It is not hard to see how very incongruous it would be to say such a thing of the Jivaros, the Naskapi, or the Chewong, whose ontological organization conforms to a reassuring duality and who connect with nonhumans simply through daily intercourse with the interiorities present in social life, not through multiple interconnecting branches of the various strata that constitute their person, which link them with this or that sector of the cosmos. On the other hand, one may speak in almost the same terms of the ontology of the Mexicans or the Chinese, and for the very same reasons. This region of Africa is part of the great analogical archipelago that is scattered across the surface of the earth in a multitude of islands and islets. No diffusionary network could possibly account for the uniformity of such a structure.





Pairings, Hierarchy, and Sacrifice



Let me rapidly summarize the properties of the mode of identification that confers their distinctive character upon the inhabitants of this archipelago. Interiority and physicality are here fragmented, in every being, into multiple components that are mobile and partly extracorporeal, the unstable and haphazard grouping of which produces a permanent flux of singularities. At the heart of this gigantic collection of unique existing beings, humans constitute a privileged cohort, for their persons offer a reduced and therefore manageable model of the relations and processes that govern the mechanics of the world. Hence, there is a constant concern to preserve an ever precarious balance between the constitutive parts of individuals, a concern that finds expression especially in systematic recourse to theories relating to the dosage and compatibility of humors and physiological substances, and also in an ever-present fear of being invaded by an intrusive and alienating identity or of seeing an essential element in one’s own identity disappear. Hence, there is also a need to keep workable and efficient channels of communication open between all the parts of all beings and to maintain the many circumstances and influences that ensure their stability and proper functioning. The weight of these dependencies makes it essential to pay obsessive attention to a whole sheaf of prohibitions and prescriptions. So constraining are these that aid is usually required from specialists who are well versed both in the interpretation of signs and the correct execution of rituals and also in developing particular techniques for reading the future, such as astrology and divination. To find one’s way through the forest of singularities, one needs a whole battery of symbols and emblems to make it possible to code all this diversity in a hermeneutic grid. To this end, semiautomatic systems for computing and combining, along with certain artifacts, many of which may be found in our ethnographic museums, are pressed into service. They are used to clarify an overcomplex cosmos by plotting all its points of connection and major lines of force in manageable configurations.

Analogism thus uses analogy to cement together a world rendered fragile by the multiplicity of its parts; and it does so in an admirably systematic fashion. The interplay of connectivity among places and contiguity among times makes it possible to arrange things in classes based on their position in a particular site and in a particular series. This provokes an unparalleled proliferation of spatial coordinates and divisions of time: cardinal points, quarters, strict topographic segregations, calendars, and—above all—long cycles of genealogy. It is especially by means of these long-drawn-out lines of filiation that the great skein of intergenerational solidarities can be woven. It is a convenient way of justifying the permanence of groups of attributes and prerogatives that continue to be transmitted even with the passing of time; and it accounts both for the preponderant place that ancestors frequently occupy in this mode of identification and also for the fearful reverence that surrounds them. All this stands in total contrast to animism and totemism, from which these cumbersome ancestral figures are absent. As we have seen, great dual classifications (or quadripartite ones produced by doubling the duality) are in general use because these offer the most economical solution for the arrangement of existing beings in accordance with the qualities ascribed to them, and for adding on all the hidden similarities that they conceal behind their phenomenal diversity. Analogism is also very different from the totemic dualisms that are common in Australia. The latter set up primitive classes of intangible properties to which are attached a variable number of entities that express them, whereas binary classifications of the hot/cold type are simply a way of organizing elements according to the predicates one attributes to them. In the former case, the class comes first and specifies the ontological characteristics of what it should contain; in the latter case, the class is no more than a powerful taxonomic tool used to subsume qualities recognized to be possessed by entities whose ontological composition remains independent of the indicators used to list them under one or another rubric.

Another expedient way of managing such a flux of singularities is to set them in a hierarchical order. The model of the chain of being is thus by and large transposable to all analogical ontologies, although the criteria for the hierarchical levels may vary considerably. The difference where animism and totemism are concerned is a matter of scale, for in these the distinctions between collections of structurally equivalent entities are set out solely on a horizontal plane and not in these superpositions of castes, classes, and functions, these accumulations of powers and divinities, with which analogical civilizations, with their sprouting polytheisms, have made us so familiar. The trouble is that overlong hierarchies become hard to handle: so there is a call for mechanisms by which to structure their linear gradations and for ways to diminish the range of the discontinuities that are involved. We may place in this category the organizational schemas brought to our attention by Louis Dumont in his analyses of the hierarchy of castes and varnas in India: for example, within each subdivision of the hierarchy, the principles that govern its general structure are repeated. In such a hierarchy, at the level of the units that compose it, each caste reproduces the global model of distribution of which it is itself a result.52 Dumont calls this holism, by which he means a system of values that subordinates the place of each existing being in the hierarchy, and the cohesion of that hierarchy itself, to a totality that transcends its parts. But holism is not so much a characteristic by which nonmodern societies as a whole are differentiated from modern individualism; rather, it is a means employed solely by analogical ontologies to make it possible to manage such a mass of singularities. The same applies to the reversals of dominance that, in China, accompany changes in levels: the left, rather than the right, is preeminent in the upper part of the body and of the cosmos, while the right is preeminent over the left in the lower part.53 Thanks to the interplay of rules founded upon analogy, reversion, and pairing, a universe that is fractured by multiple discontinuities becomes intelligible in all its connections, and provided total deference is observed toward ritual obligations and the prescriptions of etiquette, this universe becomes habitable for one and all, with no confusions of place or status.

One last pairing mechanism needs to be mentioned, if only as a hypothesis, for which I beg the reader’s indulgence. It is impossible not to notice that sacrifice is present in regions dominated by analogical ontologies (in particular Brahmanic India, West Africa, ancient China, where it was above all associated with political functions, the Andean zone, and pre-Columbian Mexico), whereas it is virtually unknown in totemic Australia and the regions that are, par excellence, animist, namely Amazonia and subarctic America. Of course, one could point out that, with the exception of dogs in North America, stock raising is absent or has been introduced only recently in those regions. Without domesticated animals to immolate, sacrifice becomes impossible.54 However, to invoke such a practical reason would merely be to shift the question, for it would then be necessary to explain why there should be an incompatibility between animal domestication and animist and totemic ontologies. (This is a problem that will be addressed in part V of this book.) Besides, in such cases it would theoretically be possible to sacrifice humans; for it is probably fair to generalize the precept of Vedic India according to which the only genuine victim is the person offering the sacrifice, for it is he who initiates the rite and expects to be affected by it. The animals are merely substitutes for him, ones that can be replaced by other things for this function.

Nor, in the absence of domesticated animals, would there be anything to prevent the ritual slaughter of wild animals captured for this purpose and then partially socialized within the village sphere. Such a period of familiarization would render them altogether suitable to represent the humans who have fed and taken care of them just as they do with domesticated animals raised as livestock. Indeed, such cases are not unknown in the animist world. The Cashibo of Peruvian Amazonia regularly organize a great ceremony in the course of which they slaughter a tamed tapir, the flesh of which is then consumed in a feast that brings several local groups together. The family that raised the tapir sings its praises and laments it disappearance, adopting all the signs of mourning usually reserved for a deceased human relative. The “Bear festival” held by the Ghiliak (or Nivkx) of the Amur River valley and Sakhalin Island was based on an analogous principle: a bear captured when young and carefully tended for several years was ritually slaughtered and then eaten in a collective banquet in which, as a sign of respect and affection, a portion of its own flesh was offered to its remains.55 But in neither of these two typically animist societies was the killing of the animal anything like a sacrifice: the bear or tapir was not a victim consecrated to some deity that needed to be conciliated; the ceremony was not expected to produce any benefit, certainly no change of status for those who had raised or slaughtered the animal. Moreover, finally, that animal could not be replaced in the festival by a substitute, not even by one of the same species.

The characteristic feature of a sacrifice is precisely the fact that it establishes a link between two terms initially unconnected, the purpose of the operation being, to cite Lévi-Strauss’s definition, “to establish a relation, not of resemblance but of contiguity, by means of a series of successive identifications. These can be made in either direction, depending on whether the sacrifice is expiatory or represents a rite of communion: thus, either of the persons offering the sacrifice [the sacrificant], or of the sacrificer with the victim, or of the sacralized victim with the deity; or in the reverse order.”56 Such a chain of mediations would be as pointless and incongruous in the case of the tapir or the bear, both of which were reputed to possess an interiority resembling that of humans and so would be treated as persons, killed with consideration, and not considered replaceable by another entity. They had no role that linked them to any (in this case nonexistent) transcendent power. On the other hand, making use of sacrifice to forge such a relationship of contiguity between initially separate entities may well seem necessary in an analogical ontology, in which all existing beings are singularities between which links need to be established. Just as one cannot leave out any links in the chain of being without compromising its structural integrity, so too the link between two distant and heterogeneous entities such as a sacrificer and a deity can only be constructed by a mechanism of gradual and transitive identifications between the intermediate elements.

But in this case why put the sacrificial victim to death, for this would seem, in spectacular fashion, to break the connection that one was seeking to establish by means of these cascading identifications? Here too, Lévi-Strauss comes up with an ingenious answer: once the relation between the sacrificant and the deity is assured by the consecration of the victim, that victim’s destruction at the hands of humans interrupts the continuity previously established, filling whoever the sacrifice is destined for with a desire to renew contact by dispensing the hoped-for favor. The abolition of the term connecting the “human reservoir” and the “divine reservoir” thus creates a brutal gap in contiguity, and this void prompts an appeal that is believed to initiate some compensatory reestablishment of contiguity.57 This is a beguiling interpretation. But it is perhaps excessive to speak here of “reservoirs,” as if it were a matter of two perfectly autonomous domains that need to be linked by some conduit. On the contrary, the effectiveness imputed to the practice of sacrifice stems from the fact that the victim is presented as a composite package of diverse properties some of which are identical to those of the sacrificant (e.g., it is endowed with life and has been socialized within a human community). Other properties are identical to those of the deity (e.g., it can take on the aspect of its body, be descended from it, contribute to its subsistence). And yet others are identical to those of substitutes that may replace it (e.g., it is looked after by humans and may be eaten). And it is precisely this decomposition of the victim’s attributes, against the background of a general splitting of existing beings into a mass of components, that allows it to serve as a link thanks to each actor in the rite identifying with at least one of its properties. Moreover, there are many cases of sacrifice, in Africa in particular, where the beneficiary of the rite is not a person but a concrete or abstract entity with only incidental links with the sacrificant, whether the latter be an individual or a group. In some cases, indeed, it is not a matter of bringing about or consolidating some kind of status or of procuring some advantage but rather that of dissolving an earlier relationship, as in the sacrifice that the Nuer offer up in cases of incest: whether the sacrificial victim is a cucumber, a goat, or an ox, it is always cut in two lengthwise. This operation is called bakene rual, “the separation of incest into two,” the purpose of which is to dissociate two groups of relatives that an undesirable, potentially lethal relationship had brought together.58 Sacrifice could thus be interpreted as a means of action developed within the context of analogical ontologies in order to set up an operational continuity between intrinsically different singularities. It is a means of action that, to this end, makes use of a serial mechanism of connections and disconnections that functions either as an attractor (to establish a connection with something else) or as a separator (to break a connection that already exists at a different level and that one seeks to destroy).





10





Terms, Relations, Categories




Now that we have completed this tour of ontologies, both exotic and familiar, we can define and enrich the table of modes of identification with more precision. Depending on what characteristics humans discern in existing beings, judging on the basis of their idea of the physical and spiritual properties of their own persons, continuities and discontinuities of varying proportions are established between the entities of the world, classifications based on identity and similarity come to seem self-evident, and frontiers emerge, consigning different categories of beings to separate regimes of existence. The distribution of the four combinations of resemblances and differences is organized on the basis of two vertical axes. One is characterized by wide dichotomous separations, by the preeminence of continuity over discontinuity and by the inversion of the poles of hierarchical inclusion. In animism, the continuity of interiorities between humans and nonhumans that share the same “culture” takes on a universal value (in contrast to the particular and the relative introduced by differences in forms and biological equipment). Meanwhile, in naturalism it is the continuity of physicalities within the unified field of nature that plays this role (in contrast to the particular and the relative introduced by cultural differences). The other axis favors chromatic continuities and, in a paired symmetry, juxtaposes a system of resemblances tending toward identity (totemism) and a system of gradual differences tending toward continuity (analogism) (fig. 2).

It might reasonably be objected that the world and its ways are far too complex to be reduced to this kind of combination of elements. But we should remember that modes of identification are not cultural models or locally dominant forms of habitus. Rather, they are schemas for integrating experience, which make it possible to structure, in a selective fashion, the flux of perceptions and relations. They do this by noting resemblances and differences between things on the basis of the same resources that every human carries within himself or herself: namely a body and intentionality. Given that the principles that govern such schemas are ex hypothesi universal, they cannot be exclusive, and we may suppose that they coexist potentially in all human beings. One or another of the modes of identification certainly becomes dominant in this or that historical situation and is consequently preferred and mobilized both in practical activities and in classificatory judgments, although this does not prevent the three other modes from sometimes infiltrating the formation of a representation, the organization of a course of action, or even the definition of a field of customs. Thus, most Europeans—and I am no exception—are spontaneously naturalists by virtue of their education, both formal and informal. But that does not prevent some of them, in certain circumstances, from treating their cat as though it has a soul, from believing that the orbit of Jupiter will affect what they do the next day, or even from identifying with one particular place and its human and nonhuman inhabitants so closely that the rest of the world seems to them to be of an entirely different nature from that of the community to which they are attached. This does not mean to say that they have become animist, analogical, or totemic, for the institutions that provide the framework for their existence and the automatic behavior patterns acquired over the passing of time are sufficiently inhibiting to prevent such episodic slippages into other schemas from eventually endowing them with an ontological grid that is completely distinct from that which dominates their own environment.





FIGURE 2. The distribution of existing beings according to interiority and physicality



It might also be objected that those two major axes of identification are not of the same nature. The first one combines resemblances and differences by reversing the fields in which they are manifest, whereas the second juxtaposes a pairing of resemblances and a pairing of differences: in totemism all discontinuity seems to disappear; in analogism all continuity does. However, that is just an effect of a skewing of the perspective adopted for defining the modes of identification on the basis of some abstract individual that objectivizes regularities in the world thanks to the attributes that one detects in oneself. Seen from this point of view, the original identification framework of an Australian Aboriginal is certainly his totemic class, characterized by an internal continuity of physical and moral properties that is shared by a group composed of both humans and nonhumans, all derived from one and the same prototype. This framework is not viable on its own, however. For a social life to flourish, what are needed are other totemic groups that are similar but each of which is founded on collections of different properties. These units become complementary at the level of the combination that they form within a tribe or even a wider community. An aspiration toward a homogeneous togetherness, peopled by hybrids unconcerned about some of their apparent dissimilarities, can only become plausible and functional if each of those members of the collective assumes a position in contrast to the rest in such a way that a flux of signs, persons, and values can circulate among them in accordance with a code to which they all adhere. It is at this point that discontinuity recovers its rights, as a condition for totemic segments to become integrated and to form a system by playing on their intrinsic differences (fig. 3).





FIGURE 3. The relation between continuity and discontinuity in totemism



The same applies to analogism, but in reverse. Its initial state is certainly a general fragmentation of existing beings and their components. But that accumulation of discontinuities may be seen as a preliminary state of affairs that is logically necessary for the vast movement of recomposition destined to reverse the disjunctive effects of the initial atomism. A world saturated with singularities is almost inconceivable and is in any case extremely inhospitable; so among its premises analogism must include the possibility of modifying that infinitely teeming mass of ontological differences by means of a reassuring continuity that is ceaselessly woven together by correspondences and analogies between its disparate elements (fig. 4).





FIGURE 4. The relation between continuity and discontinuity in analogism





Encompassments and Symmetries



So far, we have been envisaging the classes of entities carved out by modes of identification solely from the point of view of their intrinsic characteristics. However, from their properties and the contrastive positions that they occupy it is also possible to infer some of the relationships that they may establish between one another. In the animist schema, for example, the physical differences between the various categories of existing entities in no way prevent their respective members from establishing intersubjective relations with one another. The fact is that the ostensible heterogeneity of humans and nonhumans that is defined by their specific forms and patterns of behavior comes to be largely wiped out by the symmetrical links that those entities are able to establish by calling upon the resources of their interiorities. When a man treats an animal as an affine or a ceremonial friend, he expects his attitude to be appreciated by the nonhuman person at whom it is directed and that this person will respond in accordance with the same conventions. As a result of the imputation of human behavior to nonhumans, which is made possible by the resemblance of their interiorities, a large part of what we call “nature” is annexed into the sphere of social life. This constitutes a movement of hierarchical encompassment in which the fact of sharing a mutual relationship counts for more than the physical difference between the terms thus brought together. It is true that the monkey and the bear are different from me by reason of their physical equipment, but that does not stop us from maintaining a personal relationship at another level. This accounts for the fine unanimity with which ethnographers of Amerindian, Asiatic, or Melanesian animist societies all emphasize the relational character of the cosmologies that they describe, and also the fact that individual identities consider themselves defined above all by their contrastive positions. In this mode of identification, relations count for more than terms.

In naturalism, quite the reverse attitude prevails. From the point of view of their physicality, all existing beings depend on the same physicochemical elemental mechanisms, and furthermore, many of them can be fitted into a long evolutionary series of phylogenetic continuities. The universality of nature encompasses them all in a network of common causalities in which they vary from one another only in the degree of complexity of their molecular and systemic organization. All the entities in the world resemble one another in that, whatever their differences of form, behavior, and internal organization, none elude the jurisdiction of the laws of matter. Such entities may be found in the collections of specimens displayed in museums of natural history. They constitute huge ontological inventories arranged according to the rules of systematic classification, which form a cosmos in miniature in which each kingdom, every side branch, each order, each family, each genus can lie at rest there, all together, in their drawers, glass cases, and bottles, protected from the hazards that synecological interactions introduce into the real world. Within those repertories of decontextualized beings, no relations take place, apart from one of general inclusion in the classificatory system. However, in most of those museums there are also a few rooms set aside for ethnography: humans and their artifacts (both classified as primitive) have a niche of their own, flouting the initial unifying ambition that aimed to assemble all existing beings within one and the same taxonomic regime. For great confusion reigns in these ambiguous places where classifications of all kinds—racial, linguistic, cultural, technological, geographical, and stylistic—overlap and intertwine and where culture and its products indicate their resistance to being set into an order dictated by the natural sciences. It is here that dissimilarities start to proliferate—first, between nonhumans and humans, the latter being particularized by their minds, with their ability to create a limitless flux of objects, relations, and signs and, second, between humans themselves, with their kaleidoscope of institutions, symbols, and techniques. Humans constitute a strange species whose members are hardly distinguishable physically and are without question included in nature’s great register, yet turn out to be differentiated in so many ways once one examines how they make use of the world and give it meaning. This singularity of theirs means that no relations are transferable; none provides a model that can be generalized to include both humans and nonhumans, for none does any more than cover a circumscribed field of interactions within a circumscribed segment of existing beings. Gift giving, links in the food chain, justice, parasitism, servitude, symbiosis, hierarchy: everything is diversified, nothing is common to all humans. So in this mode of identification, in contrast to animism, what takes precedence, given the heterogeneity of relations, is the material continuity of its terms.

Unlike the hierarchical encompassing tendencies peculiar to both animism and naturalism, the totemic schema is perfectly symmetrical. All the human and nonhuman entities included within the same class of existing beings share a collection of identical attributes that stem from both their interiorities and their physicalities. Morphological differences are not considered a sufficient criterion for making ontological discriminations within any particular class. The human and the nonhuman members of each totemic group also share a relationship in common—a relationship of origin, of kinship, of similarity, or simply of inherence—and all the groups are situated together in a relationship of equivalence since they constitute homologous elements in the more widely encompassing collective constituted by their juxtaposition at the level of a tribe. Here there is no trace of that incipient ontological duality that animism introduced with its distinction between different physicalities and that naturalism turns into a dogma with its distinction between different interiorities. Nature and culture are completely beside the point, as can be seen from the periphrases that ethnographers of Aboriginal Australia must resort to when it comes to describing an order that is at once “social and natural” (Merlan), the “identity” of humans and other natural species (Elkin), or Dreaming as “a culture but also as nature” (Glowczewski). Those expressions all indicate the semantic difficulty of situating totemism within the old dualist polarity. Lévi-Strauss made his own contribution to that collection of circumlocutions when he described certain totemic organizations as presenting “a socio-natural image that is unique but fragmented.”1 Seen solely from the point of view of each class and not from that of the general system that they all form together, Australian totemism is thus a balanced structure characterized by a double identity, that of both its terms and its relationships—a structure that echoes the double ontological identity of interiorities and physicalities. Whereas animism ensures the preeminence of relations over terms, and naturalism that of terms over relations, Australian totemism places interdependent relations and terms on an equal footing. This is a source of perplexity to anthropologists and probably accounts for their oscillation between two antithetical explanations for the phenomenon: one favors the identity of terms (the “participatory” interpretation), and the other emphasizes the homology of relationships (this is the Boasian or Lévi-Straussian classificatory explanation).

Analogism too plays on symmetry, but a symmetry of differences, not resemblances. Existing beings are all particularized and are formed from dissimilar components that both muddle and extend the subjective duality of the body and intentionality: for interiority is often partially externalized, while physicality is invested with spiritual properties. All the same, no more than weak ontological differences separate these countless singularities, while multiple pairing devices are designed to link them in a web of correspondences that plays on certain qualities that they appear to manifest: they are adjacent in space, one seems an imitation of another, or they are mutually attractive. They are certainly all intrinsically different, but it is possible, indeed necessary, to detect points that they share in common. This is where the paradox of analogism lies: it postulates a difference of principle between different terms that in other ways resemble each other. However, the paths that analogy may follow are numerous, so numerous that it is always possible to find several possible avenues or chains of correspondences that link two entities. Relations, like the things that they bring together, are thus extremely varied although several may be applied to the very same existing beings. The combination of these two systems of differences between terms that resemble each other and between relations that bear on the same terms is what confers upon the analogical mode of identification its strange and beguiling ambivalence: the cosmologies that it renders possible are so perfectly integrated and coherent that they border upon a totalitarian order while allowing each of their inhabitants a large measure of hermeneutic liberty. Here too, as in totemism, terms and relations are interdependent, but on the vaster scale of a whole iridescent world, all of whose reflections are relentlessly noted in the vain and magnificent hope of rendering it perfectly meaningful.

The four modes of identification thus imply different connections between terms and relations that one is likely to see resurfacing in the concrete cosmological and sociological objectivations for which each of these modes provides a schematic principle. To describe these arrangements in a synthetic fashion, we may resort to the handy distinction between metaphor and metonymy that Roman Jakobson proposes: metaphor is a connection of internal similarity between terms (which appeals to one’s ability to select and substitute words in the organization of a meaning); metonymy is a connection of external similarity between relations (which brings into play one’s ability to combine linguistic units in a referential relationship).2 In animism, the absence of metaphorical resemblances between existing beings (by reason of their differences of physicality) is compensated for by metonymy (by reason of the relations that they establish). In naturalism, however, it is the absence of metonymic resemblances (the heterogeneity of relations) that is compensated for by a metaphorical link (by reason of the material continuity). However, in both totemism and analogism, metaphor and metonymy are mutually supportive, although in different ways. The similarity between the components of a totemic class provides the basis for the relationship that characterizes these classes as a whole (with the same series of differential gaps). Metaphor at the level of the classes is thus the condition for metonymy at the level of the system. As for analogism, it endeavors to find relations between terms considered to be dissimilar and multiplies dissimilar relations in order to discover a similarity between terms. An absence of metaphor leads to metonymy and an absence of metonymy leads to metaphor (fig. 5).





FIGURE 5. The distribution of existing beings according to terms and relations





Differences, Resemblances, Classifications



The modes of identification also differ from one another from the point of view of the classificatory mechanisms that they mobilize. In the field of ethnosciences, it has become customary to oppose categorization according to attributes to categorization by prototypes, as if the use of the one were incompatible with the use of the other. The former method was in vogue around the mid-twentieth century, with its “componential analysis” that consisted in breaking down the terms of a nomenclature into matrices of contrasting features that were assumed to be used in assessing attributions. The latter became the dominant hypothesis with Eleanor Rosch’s work on the categorization of colors and that of Brent Berlin on ethnobiological taxonomies, two domains in which it is conjectured that classifications are constructed around typical representatives, or “natural prototypes,” which provide the basis for a class because they are the most salient at the perceptive level.3 But, rather than regard those two cognitive mechanisms as mutually exclusive, it is more reasonable to suppose that we use them alternately, depending on the objects to be classified and along with other classificatory schemas such as spatial contiguity, origins, and spheres of activity. Thus, in folk taxonomies of plants, inclusion within a class always seems to be based on a prototypical classification: in French, the common oak, Quercus pedunculata, is the prototype for the taxon chêne (oak), for it is perceived as a better example of this class than the English oak (Q. robur), the holm oak, the dwarf oak, and the cork oak, all of which are subsumed into it with a descriptive adjective, the better to distinguish one from another. But in certain contexts plants are grouped together according to habitat (reeds accompany willows, osiers, and alders and all the other plants of wet zones) or according to provenance (the olive, the vine, the fig, the cypress, and the umbrella pine, all of which are features of the Mediterranean landscape) or according to use (vegetables, fruits, medicinal herbs, decorative plants, etc.); some are objectivizable by a lexeme of their own, but for the most part these groupings are not marked at a linguistic level.

Furthermore, different criteria may overlap, provided they are not too numerous, and this produces a classification according to attributes. Such is the case with, for example, the French taxon agrume (citrus fruit), despite the fact that it is hard to see to which prototype it might correspond: there is no reason why the orange or the lemon should be said to constitute better examples of this class than the grapefruit, the mandarin, or the citron. Nevertheless, agrume may be defined in a contrastive fashion within the semantic field of fruit by a taste—acidity (which contributes to the etymology of the French term but does not exhaust its meanings), by a provenance (the Mediterranean region), by a habitat (an orchard), by a temporality (winter ripening), or even by a dominant hue (yellow/orange). Many of those criteria are necessary in order to specify the taxon, possibly even when they are not automatically present in one’s mind as one decides on where to classify the object. It is true that the result is not altogether identical to the contrastive matrices of componential analyses since, unlike components, contrasts remain implicit: it is fair to assume that acid is here opposed to sweet, Mediterranean to northern, the orchard to a field, winter to summer. All the same, in the wider sense, this is classification by attributes; and it is very common.

The animist schema seems to rely chiefly on prototypical generalization. Unlike the way that ethnobiological classifications work, here the prototype is characterized not by a form or appearance but by a condition or state. It is humanity, a composite package of affects, intentionality, reflective consciousness, linguistic and technical aptitudes, and the ability to invent arbitrary norms, that provides the ontological model by means of which to evaluate and classify existing beings: and it is a human with his overwhelming interiority, not a human as a biological species, that constitutes the best example of the class of persons into which nonhumans are incorporated by virtue of their assumed identity. Of course, at the level of perception, such a prototype is counterintuitive, a fact that seems to undermine the very definition of such an object: after all, on the face of it, what do I have in common with a bear, a toucan, or a manioc plant, apart from that somewhat vague predicate, life? But this is because we customarily ascribe an exaggerated importance to the perceptive dimension of a prototype and tend to overlook other less ostensible dimensions. To credit a monkey or a sweet potato with an interiority identical to my own, all that is required is for me to replace a salient perceptive feature by a salient psychological trait that is glimpsed sporadically: the kind that one senses in dreams or when we succumb to the urge to impute intentionality to nonhumans, as we all sometimes do. Such a substitution is, in any case, neither complete nor definitive but is simply a matter of context. Just as we all do, the Achuar, the Makuna, and the Naskapi make use of inclusive taxonomies of plants and animals that are based on a prototypical generalization of some salient perceptible feature; but that certainly does not prevent them, in certain situations, from apprehending plants or animals on the basis of the model of interiority of which they are themselves the prototype.

The totemic mode of identification also appears to be governed by generalization from a prototype. The repeated use of the very term “prototype” by ethnologists of Australia in itself indicates its relevance to an understanding of the way in which a totemic group is structured. No doubt it will be agreed that in this case the prototype is even more abstract than that used by animism, for it does not exist as a phenomenal object. In totemism, the prototype under which a class of humans and nonhumans is subsumed is not, strictly speaking, the Dream-being that has engendered the model of this class, nor is it the principal totem from which the class takes its specific name. Rather, it is the core of physical and moral properties that identify each of its members, one of which—usually the one after which the class and the totem are named—synthesizes the characteristics of all the rest. To borrow Brandenstein’s terminology once again, all the human and nonhuman members of a totemic class can be “round,” that is to say, “large,” “choleric,” “primary,” “broad-faced,” and so on or, alternatively, “flat,” that is to say, “small,” “phlegmatic,” “secondary,” “narrow-faced,” and so on. It might be objected that this constitutes a list of qualities and so seems more like a classification by attributes. But what we need to remember is that, in a classification by attributes, those attributes are contrastive. And indeed they are so at the level of the complete totemic system, but not at the level of the class itself, which for us is the starting point for the process of identification, since each attribute expresses a complementary characteristic derived from the initial prototype that confers coherence upon this class. And, above all, we need to remember that attributes are decomposable, just as an inventory is. The point is that totemic identification does not proceed first by listing common properties, even though those may be stated when the circumstances demand it. Instead, totemic identification presupposes massive and unthinking adhesion to the fact that this or that existing being is identical to me because we both come from the same ontological mold, in other words because we are materializations of the same generative model. It is only on that condition that it is possible to say, as Spencer and Gillen’s informant did, that a kangaroo is “just the same” as himself. Here again, the prototype is counterintuitive because it pays no attention to differences in form; nevertheless, it is prodigiously normative given that its very abstraction makes it impossible for experience to invalidate it. From this point of view, it is similar to certain ideal notions that are in common use, such as “all God’s creatures” or “the humanist culture.”

As for the analogical mode of identification, this mode does classify according to attributes and, indeed, excels at doing so. Every existing being is decomposable into a multitude of elements and characteristics that may be paired with others opposed to them, so that a table of correspondences is always at the same time a table of contrasts. Consider, for example, the correspondences established by the Hong fan, probably the most ancient Chinese treatise, between the elements, the human faculties, and the celestial signs: the five phases (Water, Fire, Wood, Metal, and Earth) certainly constitute a field of contrasts, but each is connected with one of the human activities (gesture, speech, sight, hearing, and will) and with one of the celestial signs (the rain, the yang, the hot, the cold, and the wind), and these constitute two other semantic fields that are correlated contrastively.4 Furthermore, this is a rudimentary nomenclature, so Chinese ritualists and philosophers had no compunction in extending it by adding other series of elements. The fact is that the repertory of analogies and contrasts is in principle limitless for anyone seeking to make the most of all the correlations in the world. It seems reasonable to suppose that such a type of knowledge, if it truly strives for exhaustiveness, will not for long be able to do without the help of writing or at least of some graphic means in order to increase the columns in the tables of attributes without unduly taxing the memory.

The naturalist mode of identification also operates according to a classification by attributes, one that, in truth, is extremely elementary: humans are what they are because they have a physicality plus an interiority; and nonhumans are what they are because they have a physicality minus an interiority. Many refinements may of course be added to this contrastive opposition whose persuasive force stems from its very simplicity; but most of them relate to physicality. Once man was separated from the rest of the world by his moral faculties, he had to be reinserted into the general economy of nature by means of the elements shared in common with other existing beings, that is, his anatomy, his physiology, and his functions. So it is that the place that he occupies in the huge, branching taxonomies of a Buffon or a Linnaeus is determined, as for all organisms, by successive dichotomies of contrastive features that specify his physical attributes in relation to those of his closest nonhuman neighbors. Actually, even within the human species, distinctions were conceived above all in terms of physical variations in the eighteenth century, a period when it was deemed that nothing should elude the taxonomic efficacy of classification according to differences. Blumenbach, for instance, classified humans into five races that differed from one another in their skin color, the nature of their hair, and the shape of their faces. This is an example of a system of classification by attributes that posterity has not seen fit to abandon: in the United States, some of its categories are still accorded an official status (the famous “Caucasian,” “African,” and “American Indian” types). Of course, there had long existed tables of national characteristics—a Spaniard was proud, an Italian was disposed to love, and so on—but without any scientific pretensions, even if Buffon probably was influenced by them when he mentioned “what is natural” (le naturel) among his criteria for the differences between races. It was only with the first babblings of anthropology that people also became intent on methodically classifying human institutions into contrastive typologies that embraced the world’s entire surface. At this point, opposed pairs that were less superficial and were hierarchized in terms of evolution came to the fore: oppositions between classificatory kinship and descriptive kinship, between consanguineous families and gens, or between gentilitial organizations and state societies. It is as if naturalism, established by a break between humans and nonhumans on the basis solely of a difference of interiority, then endeavored to wipe out all memory of its crude ontological origins by producing a multiplicity of classifications according to more diversified criteria that made it possible to restore humans to the sphere of natural history and to distinguish between humans by varying degrees of interiority. Naturalistic thinking harbors a predilection for classifications expressed in tables of attributes, as can be seen from the classifications of the sciences that take the form of those great charts of retroactive authentication produced, for example, by Comte and Ampère; and as can also be seen from the present book, as its readers will no doubt already have noticed.




