PART FOUR



The Ways of the World



’Tis said that the views of nature held by any people determine all their institutions.



RALPH WALDO EMERSON, English Traits





11





The Institution of Collectives




Modes of identification are polyvalent, for the assumption is that they relate to universal dispositions. They come to have a public existence in the form of ontologies that favor one or another of them as the principle according to which the regime of existing beings is organized. Each of those ontologies, in its turn, prefigures the kind of collective that is particularly suited to assembling within a common destiny the various types of beings that it distinguishes and also to expressing their properties in practical life. Understood in this way, a collective corresponds in part, but only in part, to what we call a social system.1 If we pay serious attention to the very diverse ideas that peoples, in the course of history, have forged concerning their institutions, we are bound to notice that they seldom result in isolating the social domain as a separate regime of existence, with precepts that govern solely the sphere of human activities. In fact, not until naturalism reached maturity did a body of specialized disciplines take as their object the social domain and in consequence undertake to detect and objectivize that domain of practice in every part of the world and with scant regard for local concepts, just as if its frontiers and content were everywhere identical to those that we Westerners fixed for it. And even when local “sociological theories” were taken into consideration, they were in many cases so truncated that all that remained was whatever concerned the government of human beings. Concepts of kinship, of power, of the division of labor, of status hierarchies: all these were seen against the background of the political philosophy and sociology of the Moderns; and, set against that standard, they immediately became incongruous. So anthropology set out to justify them with copious explanations that it felt obliged to provide in order to explain the unity of social dispositions that was masked by the apparent differences in the ways that they were institutionally expressed. However, far from being the presupposed basis from which everything else stems, sociality on the contrary results from the ontological work of assembling together and distributing subjects and objects to which every mode of identification leads. So sociality is not an explanation but, rather, what needs to be explained. If this is accepted and if it is recognized that, until recently, most of humanity did not make hard and fast distinctions between the natural and the social and did not think that the treatment of humans and that of nonhumans stemmed from entirely separate mechanisms, then we should regard the different modes of social and cosmic organization as a matter of distributing existing entities into different collectives: what or who gets to be ranked alongside what or who, and in what way, and for what purpose?





A Collective for Every Species



The animist mode of identification distributes humans and nonhumans into as many “social” species as there are different forms and behavior patterns, so that the species endowed with an interiority analogous to that of humans are reputed to live within collectives whose structures and properties are identical to those of human collectives. They are fully complete societies with chiefs, shamans, rituals, houses, techniques, and artifacts, societies that come together, coalesce, quarrel, provide for their own subsistence, marry in accordance with the rules, and lead a communal life that, as described by humans, would appear to be covered by all the habitual rubrics of an ethnological monograph. Here, the term “species” does not extend solely to humans, animals, and plants, for practically all existing beings have a social life. As Waldemar Bogoras notes in his study of the Chukchees of eastern Siberia: “Even the shadows on the wall constitute definite tribes and have their own country, where they live in huts and subsist by hunting.”2 Throughout the territories where animism prevails, the members of each tribe/species thus share the same appearance, the same habitat, and the same feeding and sexual behavior and are, in principle, endogamous. Admittedly, unions between different species are not unknown, above all in myths, but they require, precisely, that one of the sexual partners should shed the attributes of his or her species so as to be regarded as just the same as his or her partner.

It may also happen that a member of a tribe/species enjoys a kind of extra affiliation to another tribe/species. This is so in particular in the case of shamans, who, par excellence, are able to pass between human collectives and animal collectives. Thus, among the Wari’ of Brazil, a man becomes a shaman when an animal spirit (jami karawa) implants in him elements of its own food that it carries distributed throughout its own body; these generally consist of roucou pods, seeds, or fruits. By means of this action, which comes down to establishing a relationship of commensality, the animal spirit forms a strong link with the human, one that makes it possible for the latter to mobilize the assistance of the corresponding species. These jami karawa look like ordinary animals but are invisible to ordinary people. Their bodies are inhabited by a spirit in human form that a shaman, for his part, is able to recognize, beneath the features of some Wari’, at least in the case of the representative of the species that has chosen him. Following that transplantation of nourishment, the jami karawa becomes the shaman’s friend and his potential father-in-law, since the man, after his death, will turn into an animal of the same species as his companion and will marry one of his daughters. The link thus created forbids the shaman to kill and eat any animals of the species that has chosen him and that, in return, makes it possible for him to intercede with them when an illness that they have sent strikes down a human in his own community.3 Among the Huaorani of Ecuadorian Amazonia, it is, on the contrary, the animals that ask to be integrated into a human collective, not the humans who are invited to become affiliated with an animal collective: shamans (meñera, literally “parents of jaguars”) are chosen to be adoptive fathers by a jaguar spirit that manifests its intention in the course of dreams and thereafter regularly visits its new family at night, expressing itself through the mouth of the shaman.4 In both cases, the fact of being incorporated in another tribe/species as a kind of honorary citizen in no way suspends the man’s membership in his original tribe/species, nor does it at all imply that he loses the attributes of form and behavior that go with it.

Animist “nature” and “supernature” are thus peopled with social collectives with which humans establish relations that conform with the norms supposed to be shared by all, for when this happens, humans and nonhumans are not content simply to exchange perspectives. They also, and above all, exchange signs, which sometimes leads to an exchange of bodies or, at the very least, indications that, in their interactions, they understand each other. Those signs cannot be interpreted by either side unless they are underwritten by institutions that legitimate them and make them meaningful, thereby ensuring that misunderstandings in the communications between the two species are kept to a minimum. It is specifically as a son that the Huaorani jaguar asks to be adopted, not as a son-in-law; it is as a father-in-law that a Wari’ jaguar chooses a shaman, not as a father; and it is as a brother-in-law, not a brother, that a woolly monkey presents itself to an Achuar hunter. Each of these registers is expressed in statements reputed to be intelligible to both interlocutors, not only because they are formulated in a common language but also because both conform to a system of attitudes and obligations that is shared by the members of both the related collectives.

What is the model according to which these isomorphic social collectives are conceived? Clearly, the model is that of a human society, or at least that of the particular society that ascribes its own internal organization, system of values, and mode of life to the collectives of the nonhuman persons with which it interacts. However, that is not the obvious answer to everyone, certainly not to authors who criticize its implicit sociocentrism. Ingold, in particular, has reacted strongly against the idea that hunter-gatherers may rely on their experience of relations between humans when they seek a conceptual model for their relations with nonhumans. He claims that “actions that in the sphere of human relations would be regarded as instances of practical involvement with the world come to be seen in the sphere of relations with the nonhuman environment, as instances of its metaphorical construction.”5 Ingold formulates this remark in a critical review of an article by Nurit Bird-David in which the latter develops the hypothesis that hunter-gatherers conceive their environment not as a neutral place that provides means of subsistence but as an entity that, like a parent, is careful to feed its children, with no thought of any reciprocation. Bird-David suggests that this perception of the environment may thus be governed by an unconscious metaphor, “forest is as parent,” which, as it happens, is something that the Nayaka of Tamil Nadu and the BaMbuti Pygmies of the Congo do indeed say explicitly.6 Ingold, however, objects that in such a case one cannot speak of a metaphor: for the hunter-gatherers, there is not one world of society and another of nature, with the former projected on to the latter as an organizing principle. Rather, there is a single world within which humans are seen as “person-organisms” that maintain relations with all other existing beings indiscriminately. No absolute demarcation lines can be drawn between these implied different spheres. At the very most, one may isolate contextually delimited segments within a single field of relations. So the relations that govern interactions with plants and animals cannot be apprehended as metaphors of those that structure interactions between humans.

Ingold’s criticism is certainly relevant and also applies to some interpretations of the societies that I call “animist.” So I should at this point make it clear that the use that these societies make of categories borrowed from the field of relations between humans in order to qualify relations with nonhumans (or between nonhumans) does not in any sense stem from any metaphorical projection. As Ingold notes, such an interpretation would only lead back to a distinction between nature and society that is alien to local practices. In animist collectives, social categories serve simply as handy labels that make it possible to characterize a relationship, regardless of the ontological status of the terms that it links together. Within the limited number of relationships that it is possible to enter into with existing beings, each human group selects ones to which it ascribes a regulating function in its interactions with the world. Now, the ethnography of animist societies shows clearly that these polyvalent relations are systematically formulated in the language of the relations instituted between humans, not in that of relations between nonhumans. In Amazonia, in subarctic America, and in northern Siberia, the links that bind animals or spirits together and those that bind them to humans are always qualified by a vocabulary drawn from the register of sociability between humans: friendship, marriage alliances, the authority of elders over the young, adoption, rivalry between tribes, and deference shown to the elderly. With regard to the metaphorical interpretation, Ingold points out that one might just as well say that “a parent is as the forest” as say that “the forest is as a parent.” And that is quite true, except that that is not what is usually said (except, precisely, in metaphorical speech) any more than one says that humans are to the forest as plant parasites are to their hosts or as plants are to the earth that makes them grow.7

While it is fair enough to criticize the sociocentrism of anthropologists, it is absurd to blame the populations that they study for it. The fact is, though, that in animist societies there are no examples in which the relations between human beings are specified by expressions that denote relations between nonhumans, except in rare cases in which the two types of relations coincide perfectly because of the similarity of the actions that they involve. For instance, the vocabulary of warfare sometimes calls upon a terminology that evokes the behavior of predatory animals. Nor, as a general rule, does one find in these societies specific terms that designate ecological relationships between nonhuman organisms such as parasitism or symbiosis, despite these being easily observable. The absence of such terms is noticeable even where, in practice, such relationships are certainly known and are frequently exploited in myths for their contrastive properties and their analogical benefits. But in such myths they will not be specifically named, for the mere mention of the plants or animals that they concern suffices to evoke them by metonymy.8 In short, in the animist world, relations between nonhumans or between humans and nonhumans are characterized as relations between humans, rather than the reverse.

It is true that to define affinity, friendship, and respect as typical human behavior could be seen as anthropocentric prejudice that might cause one to apprehend common terms and expressions that designate codified attitudes as if, originally, they had applied solely to the domain of human realities. But could one not assume that their semantic configuration right from the start included relations with nonhumans so that its use in their domain should not be seen as an extension of its original field of application? In truth, that seems doubtful, since the altogether concrete relations between humans by means of which interactions between humans and nonhumans are described appear to be used as such (i.e., with their fully human implications) neither in the relations that humans maintain with plants nor in the relations that nonhumans establish between one another.

Let us see how all this works out among the Achuar. They distinguish between three major types of relations between humans and nonhumans. The first is the maternal relationship between women and the plants (mainly manioc) that they cultivate; the second is the relationship of affinity established between men and the animals that they hunt; and the third is the relationship between humans and tamed animals living in the home—animals saved at an early age when their parents were hunted and killed or young birds that were removed from their nests. As regards the first of those relationships, it is true that maternal behavior is also detectable among nonhumans. All the same, the maternal link that Achuar women establish with their manioc and that they maintain with a ceaseless flow of incantations addressed to the souls of their leafy children is quite different from the kind of bond that they establish with their human children or that they can observe elsewhere in their environment: they do not give birth to the seedlings, even if they behave as though they do when they propagate them by means of cuttings; nor do they breast-feed them, but on the contrary they protect themselves from the plants’ vampire-like inclinations, for it is said that the manioc sucks the blood of those who touch its leaves; nor do they eat their human offspring, whereas they do consume their plant-children, in fact they even use the latter to feed to the former. So the two relationships are not literally equivalent. The one, a woman’s relationship with her human children, sets the general atmosphere that justifies describing the other as a maternal attitude, that is to say, a compound of solicitude and firmness, in equal measure. As for the relationship of affinity, typically that which links brothers-in-law, this is nowhere to be found among nonhumans: a hunter has no sexual relations with the females of the species of which he is a generic brother-in-law; nor is he feudally subservient to the spirit masters of his prey in the way that he is beholden to his own father-in-law. Furthermore, however attentively he observes the woolly monkeys and toucans that he hunts, he will never discover grounds for inferring that they practice an exchange of sisters (as it is said that they do), which the Achuar recommend for themselves. Here again, it is the atmosphere of affinity between men, which is a compound of rivalry, bargaining, and real or potential hostility, that sets the tone for a hunter’s relations with his prey.

The taming of animals is a special case. This very common relationship that is established when an animal is turned into a family member does not solely involve wild animals that have been acclimatized to living in a human home. It is also characteristic of the links established between shamans and their animal or spirit auxiliaries, which, as Carlos Fausto has pointed out, is a practice that is widespread throughout Amazonia.9 Furthermore, this relationship, which involves both a relative dependence and a relative control that humans manage to impose on nonhumans of various kinds, is also used in certain contexts to designate a particular relationship between humans: namely the process that involves the tender and progressive habituation that brings a husband and a wife together in the course of their married life. The use of such a description underlines the human dimension of a taming relationship, for it is always initiated by the Indians themselves. Sometimes this relationship involves animals that the humans wish to include within their domestic community—in which the animals in question are treated with the rather brusque affection usually reserved for orphans. But it sometimes involves a shaman’s assistants, its purpose being to get these to agree to place their nonhuman faculties at his disposal. It should be added that the adoption of the young of one species by another species is a very rare phenomenon among animals and so would be unlikely to provide an analogical model for the taming process that is undertaken by humans. The Achuar certainly declare that the spirit masters of the game animals that they protect consider the latter as their pets, but no Achuar has ever told me that he has seen a spirit (who would be invisible anyway) taming a herd of peccaries. In the case of the Achuar, as in all animist societies, we are therefore bound to conclude that general schemas of relations that involve both humans and nonhumans become representable and describable only by reference to the usual forms that such relations take when they are established between humans. They do not draw upon the register of phytosociology or the behavior patterns of animals.

There are perfectly good reasons why animist peoples favor a “sociocentric” formulation for relations between nonhuman persons. In the first place, relations between humans unfold immediately before the eyes of all and sundry, in daily life, and linguistic terms always exist to describe them, even if only in the vocabulary of kinship, whereas relations between nonhumans are either formally similar to those between humans and so can be expressed using the same terms (e.g., maternity, conjugality, rivalry, predation) or else they are more difficult to describe with any precision. We should remember that (1) it was not until the twentieth century that phenomena such as parasitism, commensality, biotic succession, the food chain, and the overlapping of niches were defined and named by scientific ecology; (2) relations between humans seem to be more formalized, their content specified by explicit rules of conduct and their normality shored up by the predictable repetition of the prescribed attitudes; and (3) those relations authorize wider variations than the observable interactions between nonhumans do, in that they can be modified by practice and their conformity to a rule can be subject to public evaluation. Moreover, differences in established expressions for them become more manifest when they are compared, with a critical eye, to the forms that they take in neighboring societies. That is an exercise in which all peoples like to engage. Relations between humans thus appear as abstract and reflective schemas that are easier to handle, to memorize, and to mobilize for wide use than the relations that are detectable in the nonhuman environment. For all these reasons, human relations are predisposed to function in animist ontologies as flexible and effective cognitive models that make it possible to conceptualize human-type relations for all entities possessed of an interiority analogous to that of humans.10

An animist collective thus appears as a species whose relations are qualified by means of those that humans set up between one another, but it is a species of a very particular genus and corresponds hardly at all to the definition that a naturalist would provide. Of course, in both cases the species is a collection of individuals who conform to a particular type. However, the natural sciences rule out introducing the point of view of the members of the species when it comes to characterizing its attributes and taxonomic boundaries, except perhaps with regard to that minimal mutual form of identification that a community of reproduction implies. With the sole exception of the human species—which can objectivize itself as such, thanks to the reflective privilege conferred upon it by its interiority—the members of all species are thus reputed not to know that they belong to an abstract set that the external gaze of some systematizer has picked out from the web of living creatures in accordance with classificatory criteria of his own choosing. In contrast, the members of an animist species are said to know that they form a particular collective with distinctive formal and behavioral properties; and this self-awareness of each of them as an element in a wider whole furthermore stems from a recognition that the members of other species apprehend them from a point of view different from their own, a point of view that they need to appropriate in order to feel fully themselves. In the naturalist classification, species A is distinguished from species B because species C decrees this on the strength of the singular faculties of rational discernment that its humanity confers upon it. In an animist classification, however, I am aware that I am a member of species A not just because I differ from members of species B, as our respective attributes show, but also because the fact of the very existence of B enables me to know that I am different, since he does not see me from the same point of view as I do. In short, the perspective of the presumed classifier must in this case be absorbed by the classified in order for the latter to perceive himself truly as different from the former.

This mechanism of constitutive otherness is not at all the same as simply representing oneself through the mirror provided by another, which is a universal way of seizing upon one’s own individual and collective identity since, in certain conditions, it results in a complete identification with the point of view of that other person. In Amazonia, this mechanism takes an exemplary form that Viveiros de Castro, writing about Tupi groups, has felicitously called the “cannibal cogito”; the ritual anthropophagy of the Tupi-Guarani is not a narcissistic absorption of qualities and attributes, nor is it a contrastive operation of differentiation (I am not the one that I am eating); it is, on the contrary, an attempt to “become other” by incorporating the enemy’s position vis-à-vis me, for this will open up a possibility for me to get out of myself so as to see myself from the outside, as a singularity (the one whom I am eating defines who I am).11 Exo-cannibalism, head-hunting, the appropriation of various parts of the enemy’s body, taking captives from neighboring tribes—all these phenomena that are indissolubly linked with warfare in the lowlands of South America are responses to one single need: the only way to construct a self is by concretely assimilating alien persons and bodies, not as life-giving substances, trophies that bestow prestige, or captives who provide labor, but as indicators of that external gaze that they bring to bear on me, by reason of their own provenance.

Warfare is not the only way to achieve this result. Still, in Amazonia, the various tribes that make up the Pano linguistic group use the word nawa both as a generic term indicating strangers in a slighting way and also as an affix for the construction of autonyms: it designates both that to which one is opposed and that with which one identifies. Numerous elements in the social life of Pano groups confirm this paradoxical situation, leading Philippe Erikson to write as follows: “One can even go so far … as to say that a stranger not only is seen as a kind of reservoir of brute force that needs to be socialized … but is also more precisely defined as a model, or even as a guarantee, of the essential virtues of society.”12 It is here that the theme of perspectivism developed by Viveiros de Castro acquires its full meaning. For even in animist collectives in which it is not claimed literally that animals that regard themselves as humans apprehend humans as nonhumans, many indications suggest that identity is primarily defined through the point of view from which members of other collectives see oneself, for these are placed in the position of external observers; such is particularly the case with the dead, whites, game animals, spirits, or even an ethnologist (who may well occupy several of these positions at once). So one does not have to be bellicose and have enemies in order to see oneself through the eyes of another tribe/species: the extremely pacific Chewong of Malaysia do so when they impute to animals or to spirits a point of view on the world and therefore on themselves that is quite different from their own. In the eyes of a Chewong, the tiger and the elephant are perhaps mistaken when they take him to be what he is not, but that mistake, for the very reason that it testifies to an ability to have a point of view that is different from his own, is indispensable for him to situate himself in his own collective. In short, the assumed misunderstanding plays an essential part in the characterization of an animist species as a collective, in contrast to the definition of a naturalist species, which, on the contrary, seeks at all cost to singularize a particular class unambiguously.





Asocial Nature and Exclusive Societies



Naturalism’s sociological formula is the simplest of all to define and the most intuitive, for it corresponds to the sense of self-evidence that modern doxa has instilled in us. It is the formula that we learn at school, that the various media transmit, and that learned thought elaborates and comments upon: humans are distributed among collectives that are distinguished from one another by their respective languages and customs, in other words, their cultures, and that exclude anything that exists independently of them—that is, nature. There is no need to dwell on examples of this foundational and seldom-questioned dogma that is shared by philosophy, the sciences, and common sense, particularly as part I of the present work has already traced its historical genesis and underlined its characteristic features. So let me just recall a scattering of facts that testify to its ongoing vigor at the dawn of the twenty-first century.

As we have seen, plenty of ethologists are prepared to recognize that groups of chimpanzees may be distinguished from one another by their technological “cultures,” while the older notion of “animal societies” continues to provoke doubts and controversy. “Social” species certainly do exist in the sense that their members, with few exceptions, can live and survive only in collectivities. However, as is frequently repeated, even if those collectivities are highly integrated and possess considerable solidarity, they are not equivalent to human society, for they lack not only a consciousness of forming a unit as a result of a reflective choice to live together but also the faculty to devise new rules by exercising free will. Ethologists studying the higher primates are haunted by the risk of veering into anthropomorphism by interpreting the behavior of the great apes using exaggerated analogies with human behavior. Hence, there is an abundance of ad hoc notions designed to keep animal ethology clearly separate from the sociology of human beings: dominance is not domination, cooperation is not reciprocity, and altruism, despite its ambiguity, is not quite the same as heroic self-sacrifice for the good of the community. In contrast, ordinary thinking about race has desisted from referring to the natural differences between humans that racist theories used to emphasize (an inhibition that is perhaps prompted by the public condemnation of their horrible consequences). Now they justify their aversion to otherness only by referring to the danger of mixing up incompatible cultures: to each his own world and customs, clearly, provided that those are firmly fixed in distinct territories. The ethologists most inclined to concede a culture to the great apes thus support the principle that human collectives have no parallel in nature, while even the xenophobic Westerners who are least open to differences between humans nevertheless do recognize as a fact both the heterogeneity of cultures and the biological unity of the human race.

It goes without saying that, for naturalism, the paradigm of collectives is human society—preferably that which has been developing in Europe and the United States ever since the late eighteenth century—which stands in contrast to a lawless nature. Humans come together freely, make rules for themselves, and create conventions that they may choose to flout; they transform their environment, they share out tasks necessary to provide for their subsistence, they create signs and values that they disseminate, they consent to some form of authority, and they assemble to deliberate upon public affairs. In short, they do all the things that animals do not do. And it is against the background of this fundamental difference that the unity of the distinctive properties ascribed to human collectives stands out. As Hobbes remarks, with his robust concision, “To make Covenants with bruit Beasts is impossible.”13 To be sure, social evolutionism has introduced gradations in that original break with the world of nonhumans, and they persist as prejudices: some cultures are said to be closer to nature (nowadays this has become a positive feature) because they do little to modify their environment and do not display the heavy apparatus of states, with all their social divisions and instruments of coercion. But nobody, even among the most diehard of racists, would go so far as to claim that those cultures have borrowed their institutions from animals.

Even if animism and naturalism both set up human society as the general model for collectives, they do so in very different ways. Animism displays a limitless liberalism in its attribution of sociability, while naturalism, more parsimonious, reserves the whole apparatus of sociability for all that is not natural. Conventional anthropology would formulate this by saying that, in the case of animism, “nature” is thought of by analogy with “culture,” while in the case of naturalism “culture” is thought of as what is different from “nature.” It has also become customary to label those two attitudes (“projective” openness and dualist closure, respectively) as variants of anthropocentrism. But in truth only naturalism is anthropocentric, in that it defines nonhumans tautologically by their lack of humanity and claims that humanity and its attributes represent the paragon of moral dignity that other existing beings lack. Nothing of the kind is to be found in animism, since here nonhumans share the same condition as humans, and the only privilege that the latter claim for themselves is that they can engage with nonhumans in relations founded upon common norms of conduct. Animism is thus anthropogenic rather than anthropocentric in that it derives from humans all that is necessary to make it possible for nonhumans to be treated as humans.14





Hybrid Collectives That Are Both Different and Complementary



For over a century, totemism has been regarded as a form of social organization in which humans divide into interdependent groups whose distinctive characteristics are borrowed from the realm of natural species either in that the humans imagine that they have inherited certain of the attributes of those species, or in that they derive inspiration for their own internal differentiations from the contrastive distinctiveness that those eponymous species exhibit. However, this sociocentric view unfortunately introduces an analytical dichotomy between the social system and the natural system, a dichotomy that appears to be absent from the ontological concepts of the “totemists” par excellence, namely the Australian Aboriginals. It is therefore preferable to describe totemism as a system in which humans and nonhumans are jointly distributed between isomorphic and complementary collectives (totemic groups), in contrast to animism, where humans and nonhumans are distributed separately between collectives that are likewise isomorphic, but autonomous. In the Cockatoo moiety of the Nungar of southwest Australia, we certainly find, as well as cockatoos, not only the human moiety of the tribe but also, for example, eagles, pelicans, snakes, mosquitoes, whales—in short, a whole aggregate of disparate species that could never be found together in groupings detectable in the environment. In contrast, in an Achuar tribe there are only Achuar persons; in a peccary tribe there are only peccary persons; in a toucan tribe there are only toucan persons. While the structure and properties of animist collectives stem from those attributed to human collectives, the structure of totemic collectives is defined by the differential distinctiveness between packets of attributes that nonhumans denote in an iconic fashion, while the properties attributed to their members do not proceed directly either from humans or from nonhumans, but from a prototypical class of predicates that preexist them.

Although animist collectives are distinct from one another by reason of the monospecific composition of their populations, they are homogeneous from the point of view of the principles that dictate their organizations: for the Makuna, the tapir tribe has the same type of chief, shaman, and ritual system as the peccary tribe or the howler monkey tribe and, of course, the Makuna tribe. In the case of totemic collectives, that is not so, for, although likewise different, they are homogeneous at the level of the system that encompasses them, since they are hybrid by virtue of their content and, above all, heterogeneous in the principles that dictate their composition. For, in Australia at least, there are many types of totemic collectives. Under the aegis of one or several totems, humans can be grouped in communities by sex, by generation, by cult, by a shared place of conception or birth, by clan affiliation, or by matrimonial classes; and it is common to belong to several of these collectives at once. Some of these totemic units (matrimonial classes, single-sex moieties, clans) are exogamous either in principle or in fact; others (ceremonial groups and those groups, in many cases identical to the former, whose members received their child-soul at the same site) are not; yet others (e.g., generational moieties) are explicitly endogamous. This confirms that a natural species—or the natural differences between species—do not constitute an analogical model that makes it possible for the totemic group to see itself as a totality sui generis, since, unlike plants and animals that are endogamous within the species, the human components of a totemic collective usually have to find a spouse in a collective other than their own. In fact, it is even because humans and nonhumans together form interspecific collectives that have nothing in common with the collections of individuals that species represent that unions become possible between groups of humans despite their being intimately associated with distinct species of plants and animals that cannot be paired off together.

In this respect too, the contrast to animist collectives is considerable, for the latter are, on the contrary, founded upon the corporeality of a species, since affiliation with each “society” depends upon sharing the same physical appearance, the same habitat, the same feeding habits, the same type of reproduction, and, ipso facto, being apprehended from the same point of view by other tribes/species. It is definitely in animism, not in totemism, that the biological species serves as a concrete analogical model for the composition of collectives; and this is possible because, in just the same way as species, these collectives are never integrated into a functional totality at a higher level: above an Achuar tribe/species, a toucan tribe/species, or a peccary tribe/species there is no common link other than the abstract predicate that anthropologists who study them call “culture.” Totemism is altogether different, for, as Lévi-Strauss perceived, the encompassing collection formed by the different totemic groups cannot be represented on the basis of the groupings offered by the natural world: the only available model would be a species, since a genus is a taxonomic fiction; but a species, precisely, cannot be broken down into contrastive segments analogous to totemic collectives.

However, at this point a distinction should be drawn between, on the one hand, the principle of ontological recruitment into totemic collectives, which does not discriminate between humans and nonhumans, and, on the other, the different functions fulfilled by the various kinds of collectives. In Australia, those functions can be listed right through a continuum that passes from an instrumentalization of nonhumans by humans to instrumentalization of humans by nonhumans, passing through an intermediate situation in which humans intervene as the agents of both a human and a nonhuman purpose in that they act as the ritual mediators and the beneficiaries of cosmic fertility. The matrimonial classes provide the example par excellence of totemic groups of the first type: the totemic entities arranged in moieties, sections, and subsections alongside humans, together with the plants and animals that are affiliated with them, have nothing to gain from the taxonomic divisions or the exchanges of marriage partners that these exogamous units serve to bring about at the initiative and to the exclusive profit of the humans. It makes no difference to the kangaroos, bandicoots, and goannas if a kangaroo-woman marries a bandicoot-man and brings into the world a goanna offspring. The plants, animals, totems, and Dream-beings all remain outside this interplay of alliances and affiliations by means of which the human elements in the collectives reproduce themselves by combining the resources of the various totemic groups. Indeed, that is all the more true since, in contrast, the animals and the plants reproduce themselves within their own species, that is to say, actually within the totemic collective. And because they perpetuate themselves without the complex mechanism of exogamous exchanges that govern the human marriage classes, in these they play only a subordinate role as convenient indicators that synthesize the contrastive attributes activated in the matrimonial alliances of the humans (in the case of the totems) or as illustrations of the exhaustive and coherent nature of the general classification of the cosmos that the classes provide (in the case of the species attached to them).

For the various forms of conceptional totemism, the situation is different. In this kind of totemic group, the human members of the collective are expected to perform periodic rites designed to ensure the fertility of the species associated with their totem. They do this at the very site where a Dream-being once appeared and from whom their totemic identity stems, since each one is a product of the actualization of an identical child-soul that proceeds from the stock deposited in that locality by a Dream-being at the same time as the child-souls of the species in question. These “multiplication” rites, which are very common throughout the continent, have been well described by Spencer and Gillen in the case of the Aranda, among whom they are known as intichiuma. Two examples will suffice to explain their purpose. In the multiplication rite of the Emu totem of the Strangeways site, the initiates attached to the totemic center pour some of their blood on to a small area of earth previously brushed smooth, and on the red surface obtained in this way they paint the inner parts of an emu—its fat, intestines, and heart—and also the creature’s eggs at various stages in their development. The purpose of this operation and the songs that accompany it is, in mimetic fashion, to retrace the process of an emu’s gestation and thereby encourage the species’ fertility. In the rite of the Witchetty-Grub totem at the Alice Springs site, the initiates visit and honor each of the rocks that represent the concrete presence and corporeal manifestation of the Dream-being from which this species is derived. The rocks, which are of various shapes, represent the insect’s eggs, its chrysalis, the adult creature, and also the body parts of the Dream-being. A hut is then constructed, representing a chrysalis, inside which the initiates sing the praises of the insect at each stage of its development.15 These rites are performed just before either the emergence or the coupling of the species concerned and they are designed to favor its development and increase by means of this condensation of the stages of its biological reproduction.

The human members of a conceptional totemic group are thus responsible for watching over the propagation of an animal or plant component of their collective. The task devolves upon them by virtue of the fact that they share with it the same ontological origin and participate in the same prototypical class of attributes. It would be going too far to say that, in this partially delegated reproduction process, the nonhumans make use of the humans in order to achieve their own ends, for the multiplication rites of plants and animals are also to the advantage of the human members of other totemic groups that feed on them, and furthermore, this kind of collective also provides the framework for rituals exclusively designed for the individualization of humans. Nevertheless, here humans and nonhumans are, at the very least, bound in solidarity in an ambition to perpetuate life in each of its embodied classes.

Multiplication rites may also take place in the context of clan totemism, as is the case among the Warlpiri, where this is combined with conceptional totemism. All the components, both human and nonhuman, of a patri-clan share the same “Dream-fathers” and are therefore of the same stock. For example, the humans of the Opossum/Black Plum clan call those marsupials and those fruits “fathers” and “brothers” and are invested with the mission of ensuring their ritual reproduction in the sites where their common “Dream-father” deposited their respective stocks of child-souls. This also benefits other clans, which reciprocate by watching over the species in their own care. The multiplication mechanism differs from that used by the Aranda. Here, the human and nonhuman members of the clan are inhabited by their own kind of imagistic and dynamic totemic essences, known as kuruwarri, which can only be activated when they are summoned to appear in a ritual. The rite prompts the kuruwarri of the plants and animals to function, and in this way their propagation is ensured.16

Collectives based on the sharing of a common totemic filiation or of a conception site serve not simply to propagate their nonhuman components but are also the means by which, through appropriating the reproductive process of humans, these totemic entities choose to perpetuate themselves. Throughout the continent, representations of conception are all in agreement on one point, which Ashley Montagu already emphasized many years ago: “Neither male nor female parent contributes anything whatever of a physical or spiritual nature of the being of a child.”17 As Merlan shows clearly in her comparative study of Aboriginal theories of human reproduction, children are always the product of a mother’s incorporation of a child-soul deposited in a totemic site by a Dream-being. Before taking the form of a fetus, a child-soul leads an autonomous life, often in the shape of an animal or plant that its mother may then ingest, for she is seen as a mere receptacle, a kind of incubator that allows the child-soul to develop until its birth. These seeds, which are said to be of a playful nature, wait for a human body that they then endow with the totemic attributes peculiar to the Dream-being from which they proceed. Essentially, they “look for mothers from whom to be reborn.”18 Ethnologists’ descriptions are in no doubt at all that the humans are seen as no more than vectors of an actualization sought by a totemic entity. On the subject of maroi, the child-souls of the totemic sites of the Belyuen community of the Cox peninsula, Elizabeth Povinelli tells us that “they preconceive an image of the child before making it.” The intentionality ascribed to child-souls is central to this reproductive mechanism, in contrast to the relatively passive role played by the humans: “maroi intentionally hide in foods and create children. Men and women unintentionally capture and ingest them.”19 Furthermore, this autonomy of the maroi persists after birth, for it is claimed that they exert an irresistible influence on their hosts, determining the choice of the game that they hunt, the foodstuffs that they consume, and the sites that they frequent. A similar situation obtains among, for example, the Aranda. For them, “the incarnation of a child-soul, a kuruna, comes about, in the first instance, from its desire to be embodied.”20 The parents are therefore no more than an adoptive father and a bearer-mother, the consenting instruments for perpetuating one of the dimensions of a totem that objectivizes itself in a human being who thereby herself becomes a component forever already present in the intrinsically hybrid collective established long ago by a Dream-being.

The same process is at work in totemisms transmitted through clan filiation. The impregnation of the woman usually takes place on the site that harbors the child-souls of the clan, and the newborn child quite naturally becomes a part of the collective whose continuity was ensured by his maternal and paternal ancestors, who shared the desire of the totemic entity to perpetuate itself. Thus, in the Belyuen community, the filiation totems known as durlg “preconceive the descent of themselves in the form of humans before they are actually born into a new generation.”21 It thus seems legitimate to wonder if, in such circumstances, one should even speak of human ancestors, since the whole of human life seems to be nothing but a vehicle of which the filiation totems take possession in order to become manifest in each successive generation. Like all patrilinear filiation totems, the durlg are anchored in sites scattered across the clan’s territory, and it is traditionally claimed that they legitimate their members’ rights to use the resources of the place (in particular when conflicts over land use arise with non-Aboriginals). The exercise and transmission of such rights are incontestably crucially important for ensuring the subsistence of the Aboriginal humans and for their identification with a space still animated by the properties with which a Dream-being infused it. But we should also note that the clan members are not merely guardians with rights of usufruct over the sites that are home to their totem and over the territory that it long ago fashioned in its peregrinations; they, along with the landscape, are also embodied emanations of it and the channel through which its creative action remains vibrant in a particular place. As Povinelli writes, “rather than humans passing down sites from generation to generation, the interior mythic power of sites passes itself down through the human body.”22 There could be no clearer way of saying that here humans are the zealous auxiliaries of an immanent and unique finality that both encompasses them and is beyond them.

The multiplicity of the types of totemic collectives in Australia and of the functions that they fulfill, along with the multiple affiliations authorized by this diversity, are all no doubt necessary if each of the human and nonhuman members that compose them is to be given its due. The humans need to identify with a place and a prototypical class of attributes; the nonhumans need assurance that they can continue to reproduce themselves thanks to the deliberate or involuntary mediation of humans. Each element in these hybrid units depends on the rest of them in a great exchange of services in which their respective contributions end up becoming confused, so powerful is the cement that federates them all within an ontological totality rooted in a common space. From this point of view, the totemism of matrimonial sections should probably be relegated to the rank of a subordinate—and probably late—phenomenon, despite the importance that anthropological literature has granted to these institutions. Understandably fascinated by the elegant formal complexity of the eight-section marriage systems, kinship specialists have failed to take sufficiently into account the fact that, for the Aboriginals, these models were probably prompted more by an exercise of intellectual virtuosity than by a procedure for organizing the daily existence of collectives and their reproduction. For even if matrimonial classes certainly are, like other totemic units, specific syntheses of physical and moral attributes shared with nonhumans, they have nothing to do with one fundamental dimension of Australian collectives, namely the relationship to a particular place, the space that produces an identity. They are nominal categories, as it were, anthropometric filing systems that prescribe the criteria for the general classification of humans—and therefore also for the pairings that are permitted or proscribed for them. But they are not principles for association that make it possible to develop a social life and that attach one to a territory and all its resources. In contrast, conceptional totemism and clan totemism do constitute the true bases of concrete collectives, for they bring about the aggregation of humans into separate groups, invested with responsibilities and rights with respect to the places from which they draw their subsistence and that are perpetuated through their bodies and thanks to the rituals that they perform there.

It is also reasonable to ponder upon, not so much the functions assigned to different kinds of totemic collectives, but the very purpose of such segmented organization. For at first sight this seems quite strange and counterintuitive, since it intermingles humans and nonhumans with the same interests within specific totalities that might have remained autonomous while at the same time forcing these apparently self-sufficient units to exist within the vaster collectives that are formed by their combination. One of the primary functions of this form of the distribution and association of existing beings is no doubt of a practical nature, although that is not to say that this suffices to explain it. As Lévi-Strauss rightly noted, the functional specialization characteristic of totemic order is analogous to that of a caste system in that it makes it possible to optimize the management of the means necessary for life. It introduces a strict distribution of ontological work among complementary groups that are all qualified in the production and reproduction of the localized resources with which these groups identify, even without, themselves, consuming them.23 The paradox of this generalized foraging economy that is applied throughout the whole gigantic continent is that it seems to involve a constant endeavor to fabricate and maintain what would appear to be given naturally: both the products indispensable for subsistence (by means of rites for the multiplication of species) and also the humans indispensable for their production (since each totemic group places “incubator women” engendered within it at the disposition of other groups). In other words, Aboriginal totemic collectives are highly specialized mechanisms for the creation and maintenance of certain types of resources, either for the benefit of other collectives (“bellies” to carry their child-souls, and plants and animals to feed them) or, within the collective itself, for the mutual benefit of its human and nonhuman components. They ensure the reproduction of totemic species, for which humans are responsible, the perpetuation of totems by means of women’s bodies, and access to hunting and gathering territories through totemic affiliation. Without going so far as to imply that all this is a matter of a necessary functional adaptation, one cannot help thinking that, given the strategic character of the management of unpredictable resources in a hunter-gatherer economy, it is indeed a good policy to entrust to specialized organs the job of watching over each of those resources by identifying with its fate.

When seen in its collective dimension, the totemic ontology thus acquires an extra specification that is both peculiar to the particular morphology of this kind of organization and also indispensable if it is to become truly functional. As a mode of identification, totemism recognizes only one basic unit, the totemic class, which constitutes an integral and self-sufficient totality since it provides the framework for the identification of its human components. As an emu-man, I ascribe to myself physical and moral attributes derived from the Emu Dream-being, attributes that are also present in emus and in other existing beings with which I share a common origin and the tangible source of which lies in particular sites and features of the landscape. That is all I need in order to know who I am, whence I come, and with what elements of the world I belong. But although my totemic class is certainly what fundamentally provides me with a prototypical identity, it is not, on that account, a sufficient condition for me to act effectively in the world. In order to do so, I need to establish relations with other existing beings, and that is possible only if the terms in these relationships are clearly distinct from myself, that is, if they are external to the ontological community that I form together with all the human and nonhuman members of my class. The essential unit constituted by a totemic class is thus not enough in itself if it wishes to escape from solipsism and extend its action beyond the frontiers that its form assigns to it. It needs other segments of the same nature but of different compositions, for these are indispensable if productive interactions are to occur and a sociocosmic dynamism is to be created, recalling the multiple relationships that the Dream-beings engaged in with one another long ago, so as to animate the world and diversify it.

However, simply juxtaposing totemic collectives does not ipso facto lead to a higher-level totality that can be clearly represented as a unique entity. In Australia at least, the combination of depopulation and the migrations provoked by the European conquest has brought about a wide movement of ethnic recomposition that in many cases rules out classifying as a separate totality of the “tribal” type an association formed locally between heterogeneous clans with different languages and territorial origins. Furthermore, the itineraries of the Dream-beings and the totemic affiliations that stem from these form networks that cover extensive areas, so that totemic classes that are identical since they emerged from distinct portions of the same original itinerary end up in different “tribes” that are not necessarily adjacent to one another. Faced with the ambiguity of the criteria that might make it possible unequivocally to define the principles of recruitment and the contours of a tribal “macrocollective” that integrates these totemic classes, each segment is thus obliged to seek from other segments the resources necessary in order to achieve complementarity with them in a wider combination.

But totemism does offer a means of ensuring the functional integration of segments without their being subsumed into some preexisting composite whole, for the identity, not of the individuals within the collective, but of the collective itself as a pluralized individual, necessarily depends on an awareness of what it is different from, that is, other collectives. This involves a contrastive specification that does not need to be made at the level of each of its individual elements, for these derive from their prototypical class all the intrinsic characteristics necessary to define their own being. The individuation of segments is thus conditional upon recognition of an otherness against which background the differential specificity of the segment stands out clearly and so, in consequence, does that of each of its members vis-à-vis members of other segments. As Stéphane Breton notes in a critique of the classificatory interpretation of totemism, totemism is operational as a social system only because the members of a totemic group that is, by definition, closed are able to apprehend themselves through outside eyes by identifying with another segment whose function is to reflect their own image to them as a third party.24 This alter ego collective and the segment that it has made it possible to particularize then come together to form a functional whole at a higher level than that of totemic units, and this constitutes the principle underlying the mechanism that justifies both their difference and their equivalence on a vaster scale. By having recourse to the clinamen* of contrastive identity, totemism overcomes the initial obstacle introduced by the autonomy of self-referential classes and thus accedes to a veritable sociological existence based on the interdependence of collectives of the same type within an encompassing whole. This would have been inconceivable within the terms solely of the ontological premises initially posited.

Unlike animism and naturalism, which set up human society as the paradigm of collectives, totemism operates an altogether new fusion by intermingling within hybrid sui generis wholes both humans and nonhumans that make use of one another in order to produce social links, generic identities, attachments to particular places, material resources, and generational continuity. But it does so by fragmenting the constitutive units in such a way that the properties of each of them are complementary and their association is dependent upon the differential distinctions that they present. To describe such a system, traditional anthropology has oscillated between a definition that emphasized the continuity between nature and culture (a “participative” logic) and one that contented itself with a cognitive interpretation of the phenomenon (a classificatory logic). The problem here is that although totemic collectives are certainly the basic units in the system that organizes the universe, for the Aboriginals at least they stem neither from an extension of the social categories that govern the life of humans (the sociocentrism of Durkheim) nor from the model offered by the discontinuities between natural species (the intellectualism of Lévi-Strauss). If we strive to be faithful to what the Aboriginals say about the principles that structure the existence that they lead in common with a many-faceted crowd of nonhumans, it would be better to say that their totemism is “cosmogenic.” Just as animism is anthropogenic in that it borrows from humans the minimum indispensable for nonhumans to be treated as humans, totemism is cosmogenic in that it derives from cosmic groups of attributes that precede both nature and culture all that is necessary for it to be impossible ever to separate the respective parts of those two hypostases in the life of collectives.





A Mixed Collective That Is Both Inclusive and Hierarchical



The analogical mode of identification does not find expression in forms of collectives that are as specific to it as those of animism and totemism. In an analogical ontology, the totality of existing beings is fragmented into so many examples and causes that the associations between all those singular units may follow many kinds of paths. However diverse the morphology of the groups of humans and nonhumans recognized by analogism, those groups are nevertheless always presented as being constitutive units in a collective that is vaster by far, given that it is coextensive with the whole world. Here, the cosmos and society are equivalents, almost to the point of being indiscernible, whatever the various types of internal segmentation that such an extensive whole requires in order to remain operational. For a relevant example that will be more helpful than a whole clutch of illustrations, let me take you to the southern Andes, to the Chipayas of Bolivia, to whom Nathan Wachtel has devoted a remarkable monograph.25

Lost on a high semidesert plateau in the province of Carangas, at an altitude of close to four thousand meters, despised by their Aymara neighbors, who dismiss them as “rejects,” and by now reduced to barely one thousand individuals, the inhabitants of the village of Chipaya dilute their poverty and abandonment in a microcosm of prodigious richness in which, on a reduced scale, it is possible to make out all the structural features of more grandiose and populous analogical collectives. The Chipaya, who speak a Puquina language, are the last Urus to survive as an autonomous unit in Bolivia. At the time of the Conquest, they made up one-third of the country’s autochthonous peoples. Their territory is shaped like a rectangle. It spans roughly thirty kilometers from east to west and is twenty or so kilometers wide, bordered on the south by Lake Coipasa. It is divided along a north–south axis into two sectors of more or less equal size. These are known as Tuanta (east) and Tajata (west), as are the two moieties who live there, each of which corresponds to what, in the Andes, is called an ayllu, that is, a group of bilateral descent (figs. 2 and 3). Situated approximately at the center of the territory lies the village of Chipaya, which is also divided into two moieties along a north–south axis; and each moiety is furthermore divided into two quarters along a west–east axis. The four quarters, Ushata, Waruta, Tuanchajta, and Tajachajta, are grouped around four chapels and each is occupied by several lineages that all recognize a common ancestor. The quadripartite organization is repeated at the scale of the territory, except that the moieties’ internal subdivisions do not follow the orthogonal pattern of the village but are given geographical limits in the form of riverbeds. In the Tajata moiety, the Tajachajta and Tuanchajta sectors are thus separated by a north–south axis, while in the Tuanta moiety, the Ushata and Waruta sectors are marked off by an axis running from northwest to southeast. The lineages of each quarter of the village possess, in their particular sector of the territory, hamlets consisting of a few huts that they occupy for part of the year. Here they benefit from the use of the pastureland that surrounds them, which is allotted to them by the ayllu of the moiety to which they belong. Finally, just as the territory can be seen as a projection of the organization of the village, the church presents a reduced model of that organization. The church, which is dedicated to Santa Ana, the patroness of Chipaya, is used by both moieties and stands, to the north of the village, in the space that separates them. It is a simple adobe construction, rectangular in shape, with a door opening to the east. The members of Tuanta always position themselves in the moiety on the right in relation to the east, while the members of Tajata position themselves on the left, the men being on the right-hand side within each moiety, the women on the left. The church is surrounded by a walled patio flanked by a tower and extended by a longer patio. At each of the four corners of these patios and on the four walls of the tower are placed sacrificial altars, which are reserved for each of the quarters. Their positioning in space (i.e., in relation to the east) respects the general quadripartite schema of the village and the territory (fig. 6).





FIGURE 6. The quadripartite organization of the Chipaya village



The interactions between the various levels of these interlocking units follow the classic logic of segmentary affiliations: the members of one lineage stand together against those of another lineage, as do the lineages of one quarter against those of another quarter and the quarters of one moiety against the other moiety; and all the Chipayas stand in solidarity against the Aymaras. This repetition of a contrastive structure at the various levels of social and spatial affiliation seems central in the organization of the Chipaya collective. As Wachtel notes, “it constitutes the principle of a veritable mental schema in which a number of categories that organize the world interact.”26 However, the units are not all equivalent. True, there is no political superiority of one moiety over another, for the exercise of authority regularly alternates, in accordance with the traditional principle that is recognized in the Andes; and as for disparities of wealth, which in any case are minimal, they are unaffected by the quadripartite structure. However, the dualist organization does imply a classificatory order for the moieties and quarters, which is structured around a series of pairs, the first term of which symbolically predominates over the other one: east over west, right over left, masculine over feminine, upper over lower. The Tuanta moiety (to the east and on the right) is thus superior to the Tajata moiety (to the west and on the left); and the Ushata quarter (to the east of the east) is superior to the Waruta quarter (to the west of the east), just as the Tuanchajta quarter (to the east of the west) ranks above the Tajachajta quarter (to the west of the west).

Nonhumans are also subject to this segmented division. In the first place, every year each ayllu delimits, rearranges, and redistributes its fields of quinoa and its pig pastures by means of collective labor involving ditch-digging, irrigation, and drainage in its own portion of the territory, without ever soliciting the collaboration of its opposite moiety. But it is above all the various kinds of deities that are equitably distributed among the subsections of Chipaya, in particular the deities that reside in the silos and the mallku. The silos (from the Spanish cielo) are small chapels consecrated to saints, aligned at regular intervals along four straight lines that are oriented on the cardinal points and mark out an immense cross stretching right across the territory, with the village positioned at the intersection (fig. 7). Each line of silos corresponds to one of the quarters, the last silo (the one farthest from the village) being the most important in the series because it is consecrated to the patron saint of the quarter. Although these chapels appear to refer to Christian values, that attribution is weakened if one accepts, as Wachtel does, that the alignments of silos follow the same principle as the ceques system at Cuzco in the Inca period and that, like the latter, they are linked with the cult of the sun.27 The ceques formed a set of forty-one imaginary lines radiating out from the Temple of the Sun along which 328 sacred sites, or huacas, were positioned. Each of the forty ceques (but not the forty-first, which was associated with the family of the Inca) was linked with a group of honorary Incas (non-Inca autochthonous individuals allied with the sovereign by virtue of matrimonial alliances) and was oriented toward the place where the group lived. The Cuzco ceques imposed order upon the geographical, social, and ritual space of the capital of an empire conceived by its rulers as a cosmological system, and they also served to divide up time. The whole installation constituted a veritable calendar laid out on the ground, which was also linked with an irrigation system. The same can be said, on a more modest scale, of the silo alignments. The saints are honored in a regular succession in each quarter in turn, in accordance with a rotation that covers the entire year, moving clockwise, with the summer (the rainy season) being associated with Tuanta and the winter (a dry and very cold season) with Tajata.





FIGURE 7. The quadripartite organization of Chipaya territory



The cult of the silos represents the celestial part of the relations that the Chipayas maintain with their deities. The other part, which is typically Andean, brings together elements linked with the earth and is organized around the cult of the mallku, male and individualized chthonic deities that dwell, together with their spouses, in small conic adobe monuments known as pokara. Each moiety celebrates its own mallku, of which there are four, and the pokara that correspond to them respectively are distributed in the space between the quarters. In each of the moieties, there are also other pokara that are the seats of two mallku that are common to all the Chipayas—Marka Qollu, a female deity assimilated to Pachamama or Mother Earth, and Lauka Mallku, the male deity of terrestrial water. Finally, the most important of all is Torre Mallku, which is shared by the two moieties. This is, in fact, nothing but the church tower, on the summit of which, at carnival time, sacrifices are made and offerings are placed, requiring, just for once, collaboration between the two moieties. Torre Mallku is the father of the other mallku, so these are all brothers, although they are split into pairs, one element of which is assigned to one of the moieties, and the other to the second moiety. As for Marka Qollu and Lauka Mallku, which are unique, although each is assigned to two pokara, their incarnation in each of the moieties is regarded as the twin of the other. The mallku are analogous to the mountain deities of the Aymaras, which, in similar fashion are likewise endowed with an active interiority, and it is because the desolate plateau to which the Chipayas were in the past relegated is totally flat that they have had to erect miniature substitutes for hills, namely their pokara.

It is not possible, here, to go into the details of the complex and minute rituals that are performed in each of the sites mentioned above. Suffice it to say that their primary function is to put the multitude of Chipaya deities in contact with one another and “get them ‘to talk’ to each other, so that the universe can be in harmony with itself.”28 The assignment of deities to social units, subdivisions, and spatial regions, periods of the year, and technical specializations divides up a liturgical economy. The effect of this is, at a suitable moment, to get a subgroup of humans, which is a different one each time, to organize the mobilization of the cohort of nonhumans involved in the dominant activity of the moment. Each kind of deity is responsible for mediating with this or that portion of the population of the cosmos whose assistance is required in one or other of the four great domains of human intervention, all of which are very localized: namely agriculture, the exploitation of the resources of lakes, livestock raising, and hunting. Some deities are concerned with celestial water, others with underground water; some control the winds; and others protect the domesticated animals or rule the aquatic birds that the Chipayas capture in their nets. And given that “the world is an immense field of forces and flux, in which everything echoes everything else,”29 it is essential that humans, through their offerings and supplications, be able to win organized cooperation from the deities, which are basically heterogeneous and distributed, as the humans themselves are, in their clearly separated segments of the great collective that they form all together. It is only on that condition that the beneficial complementarity and cooperation of the nonhumans will amplify the efforts that the Chipayas themselves make in the hope of fulfilling themselves, despite their differences, in the plenitude of a shared destiny.

In its most general principles, the organization of the Chipaya world differs hardly at all from that of the Aymara and the Quichua communities of Bolivia, Ecuador, and Peru or even, on a quite different scale, from that of the Tawantinsuyu (Inca Empire). In fact, its merit is that it reveals the structural characteristics of any analogical collective with exceptional clarity. In the eyes of those who compose it, this kind of collective conforms to the dimensions of the entire cosmos but is divided into interdependent constitutive units structured by a system of interlocking segments. Lineages, moieties, castes, and descent groups of various kinds extend the connections between humans and other existing beings, stretching from the underworld to the empyrean, but at the same time maintain a separation, in many cases an antagonistic one, between the various channels through which these connections are established. Although not totally ignored, whatever is beyond the collective becomes an “out-world,” prey to disorder, at times disdained, at times feared, at times destined eventually to become a part of the central apparatus, as a new segment whose potential place already awaits it. This latter status was that accorded, for example, to the barbarian tribes that imperial China annexed to one of its regions, and likewise to the “savages” who lived alongside the Tawantinsuyu on its Amazonian flank and who, although they had never been conquered, in principle belonged to the Anti section of the Inca quadripartite system. In similar fashion, the Moogo kingdoms of the White Volta valley considered those in their peripheries to be subhuman but would nevertheless periodically raid there to acquire captives to attach to the exclusive service of their royal lineages.30 The segments that strengthen and stabilize the architecture of the universe do not intermingle but may always integrate peoples along their margins.

Analogical collectives are not necessarily empires or statelike formations. In fact, some, as the case of the Chipayas testifies, involve quite modest numbers of human beings who know nothing of stratifications of power or disparities of wealth. Nevertheless, what they all share in common is the fact that their constituent parts are arranged in hierarchical order, even if only at a symbolic level with no direct political consequences. The hierarchical distribution is in many cases repeated within each segment, thereby marking out subgroups that find themselves in unequal relationships similar to those that obtain between units at a higher level. The classic illustration of such a situation is provided by the caste system in India, in which the general schema of subordination is repeated in a whole succession of interlocking groups at lower levels. (This happens in the subcastes that compose the castes, in the clans that compose the subcastes, and in the lineages that compose the clans.) A similar process operates in the organization into endogamous “sections,” or kalpul, of the Tzotzil and the Tzeltal of Chiapa. These are units that do not really qualify as moieties since some communities include three or five of them, yet they do have all the same attributes. As at Chipaya, these are social and cosmic segments in which humans and nonhumans are intermingled with moral persons who control landholdings and individuals within their respective jurisdictions. When only two sections are involved, as is usually the case, they are divided by a line running through their sloping common territory at the level of the village, so that the moiety that is preeminent at the ritual, symbolic, and demographic levels is situated in a higher position that is associated with mountains and the autochthonous deities that live in them. The patron saint of that moiety is also that of the entire community. Meanwhile, the subordinate moiety is associated with the lowlands, agricultural abundance, and the world of demons and non-Indians. The numerical and ceremonial superiority of the upper moiety simply expresses the more general schema of the segmentation of the universe into complementary pairs of elements, one of which is said to be the “elder” or “major” one, the other the “younger” or “minor” one. Every “major” mountain is paired with a “minor” one, every “elder” cave with a “younger” one, and the same goes for many other elements that are positioned within the kalpul. They range from fountains to statues of saints in the churches and include political and religious posts at every level of the community hierarchy.31 Although less formalized, the positioning of lineages in certain West African societies abides by the same principles. In some cases, the lineages are organized into a hierarchy in accordance with the order of successive segmentations spreading out from the original root lineage. In others, there are, as it were, lineage castes that distinguish between the descendants of chiefs, masters of land, blacksmiths, and captives, with the distinction between “elders” and “youngers” operating contrastively at every level. Finally, even where the “standard” hierarchy is expressed in terms of political domination or economic supremacy, in many cases it may be reversible at another level. The exercise of authority may be accompanied by religious subordination; a unit associated with what is spatially a preeminent region may find itself in a subordinate position in ritual circumstances; and in commemorative foundation rites, conquering segments may become the dependents of autochthonous segments.

Some of the collectives that I call analogical are sometimes said to be “totalitarian,” as in the cases of the Inca Empire and some lineage-based societies in West Africa.32 That is one way of expressing the extraordinary interlocking of elements in societies that are holistic yet very compartmentalized, in which the freedom of individual maneuver seems reduced and, in our eyes at least, the control over conformity exercised by the totality over its parts seems almost insupportable. It is also a way of saying that nothing is left to chance in the distribution of existing beings between the various strata and sections of the world, and that each one finds itself fixed in a place that suits, if not all its own expectations, at least what is expected of it. That is why nonhumans also find themselves enrolled in the segments that make up the collective and are expected, in the place assigned to them, to serve the segment’s interests. Llamas, millet, and rain certainly exist as generic entities whose properties are known to all, but it is through their relation to the segment upon which they are dependent that they acquire an authentic meaning and a practical identity, as the herd of llamas of such or such a lineage, the millet fields of such or such a group of descendants, the rain that such or such a mediator is responsible for causing to fall at the opportune moment. This fundamental singularization becomes even more clear-cut with one particular kind of nonhuman entity: deities. In contrast to Australian totems and to the “spirits” that inhabit animist universes, an analogical deity is the object of a real cult that takes place in one precise spot: there it receives offerings; sacrifices and prayers are addressed to it at the allotted times; and, in return, it is expected to grant the wishes of its faithful worshipers in the particular domain of expertise that it is recognized to control. The immanence of these deities is thus partially counterbalanced by their material presence at a particular site or in a particular object, by their affiliation to a segment of the collective that may produce liturgical specialists responsible for glorifying them, and by the specialized field of intervention that is generally assigned to them. The miracle of monotheism is to have fused all these particularities into one polyvalent God, unattached to any particular place or any segmentary membership: an operation so extraordinary that it did not take Catholicism, with its cult of the saints, long to restore the functional distribution peculiar to analogism.

Analogical collectives are thus alone in having veritable pantheons, not because they are polytheist (a more or less meaningless term), but because, as has often been pointed out, the organization of their little world of deities extends that of the world of humans with no break in continuity. It is, indeed, the same world, with an identical social division of labor and an identical compartmentalization of the sectors of activity, rivalries, and antagonisms among its segments. So it is understandable that, just as in the case of the Chipayas, the various units of a collective strive, by setting up cults, to get their own particular deities to accomplish whatever they are destined to do and endeavor to mobilize their obstinately separate characters for the benefit of all in certain undertakings in which their cooperation is indispensable. It is equally understandable that analogical pantheons should be so flexible: it certainly makes sense for an empire to welcome the deities of the peoples that it absorbs, for their cooperation is necessary the better to integrate within a cosmic totality all the disparate elements of which it is composed. But conversely, it is also perfectly normal that analogical collectives subjected to Christianization should enthusiastically recruit the Catholic saints, along with the powers that each of them is recognized to possess, into the regiments of nonhumans that already exist in each segment. Indeed, it was perhaps partly because they had no gods of this kind nor any segments in which to lodge them that, despite all attempts to conquer them, the Indians of the Amazonian foothills remained resistant to their annexation by the great Inca analogical machine, just as the Germans for so long remained impossible to assimilate into the Roman Empire.

There is one more characteristic that the Chipayas illuminate: the general use, in every dimension of existence, of spatial and temporal symmetries and endless repetitive structures. Quarters, cardinal points, and levels all reflect one another; the cosmos periodically turns back on its axis and the past is repeated in the future. The relics of deified ancestors are put on show and icons are set up in order to keep alive the link that connects them to the present. Everything possible is done to ensure that no singular unit remains outside the great network of analogical connections. In this kind of collective there are no solitary beings. Or if there are, it is by dint of extracting themselves utterly from those shared kinds of servitude and those endless hierarchies, as the “renouncers” in India do and the one God did in his cradle of the Near East. Apart from them, none can make the most of their multiple differences unless these are rewoven into the interlocking meshes and isomorphisms maintained by the net of coordinates in which every entity, whether human or nonhuman, is caught. This feat is achieved thanks to the combination of multilevel segmentation and the analogical obsession with correspondences. What was dissimilar at one level appears similar at another in relation to a new stream of differences, although intrinsic particularities are never effaced, since everything is a matter of perspective. Thus, it often happens that, at the summit of the hierarchy, where all points of view meet and toward which all divisions converge, one unique being is enthroned, so that all those successive integrating layers finally become totalizable: the Inca, the pharaoh, some creative deity, or, more sensibly perhaps, the tower of the Chipaya church, silhouetted against the lunar immensity of the Altiplano.

The configurations of existing beings that analogism renders possible may not be as specific as the animist and totemic collectives, nor as purified as the naturalist ones, but they nevertheless present a number of remarkable features (fig. 8). In contrast to the multiple collectives of humans and nonhumans in which all are of equal status and the composition of which is homogeneous (the tribes/species of animism) or heterogeneous (the totemic classes), all of which are designed to enter into relation with one another, the analogical collective is unique, divided into a hierarchy of segments, and relates exclusively to itself. It is thus self-sufficient, for it contains within it all the relations and determining factors necessary for its existence and functioning, unlike a totemic group, which is certainly autonomous at the level of its ontological identity but requires other collectives of the same type as itself in order to function. In an analogical collective, the hierarchy of the units that constitute it is contrastive, that is to say, definable solely by the reciprocal positions held within it, which is why its segments do not form independent collectives of the same nature as totemic classes, which derive from within themselves and from the sites and prototypical precursors peculiar to them, the physical and moral bases of their distinctive character. The moiety of the East only exists in that it complements a moiety of the West, whereas the totemic Kangaroo group, even if it may need the totemic Emu group on many occasions, nevertheless derives the legitimation of its absolute singularity solely from the circumstances of its own origin.





FIGURE 8. The consequences of ontological distribution for the structures and properties of collectives



The segments of an analogical collective are thus fundamentally heteronomic in that they only acquire meaning and a function in relation to the whole that they form conjointly, a whole that, for its part, is perfectly autonomous. It is true that, as we have seen, animist collectives also allow for a measure of heteronomy; but it is of quite a different kind since the external specification in this case is mediated by a series of identifications with individual and intersubjective otherness from various provenances. It is not produced by a superdetermination of the elements by the structure that organizes them. The enemy whose otherness—that is to say, the gaze with which that enemy sees them—a Jivaro or a Wari’ absorbs by capturing his head or eating his body, or an animal-person whose perspective both the Jivaro and the Wari’ sometimes try to adopt, certainly all come from collectives that are different from that Jivaro’s or Wari’’s own. However, characteristics intrinsic to those collectives are not what gives that enemy or that animal-person the ability to singularize an individual. What is important is simply their external position in relation to that individual. Accordingly, the members of tribe/species A are differentiated from the members of tribes/species B, C, and D because they perceive themselves as distinctive entities through the gaze that those other tribes/species direct at them when certain codified interactions occur. That is why, in the case of animism, nothing predetermines which kind of collective is likely to fulfill this function of specification from outside. Depending on the context, it may be one or several tribes/species of animals, one or several tribes/species of spirits, one or several tribes/species of humans, or a combination of all those.

As for a purely physical incorporation of an external point of view, that becomes a fortuitous luxury reserved for only a few animist collectives, as does the cannibalism that constitutes the most usual means of doing so. In an analogical collective, in contrast, the members of segment A are, as a whole, differentiated from the members of segment B, insofar as A and B are elements in the hierarchical structure that encompasses them all. In philosophical language, one could say that their positions and relations are the effect of an expressive causality. The dependence of analogical segments upon the collective that defines them is thus essential to their mode of being. They need to be able to create exteriority (from themselves) out of elements that are interior (to the collective).

The relations between analogical collectives and naturalist ones are more complex and ambiguous by reason of the historical contiguity that connects the emergence of the latter with the dissolution of the former. With the emergence of the modern world, to which the best minds of the last two centuries have devoted their analyses, the hierarchical segments of collectives based on levels of status have crumbled, giving way to an immense mass of human individuals who are legally equal but who continue to be separated by concrete disparities both within the particular communities in which they are distributed and also within the formal aggregate that they all constitute together in the “concert of nations.” The mixed worlds that each collective had tailored to suit it have become diluted in an infinite universe that is recognized by all those who, regardless of their position on earth, recognize the universality of the nonhuman laws that govern it. Above all, the City of God has fragmented into a multitude of “societies” from which nonhumans have been banished—in law, at least, if not in fact. This has given rise to collectives of the same nature that are, therefore, comparable even though for a long time they were judged not to be equal according to evolutionary criteria, principally owing to the fact that some of them appeared to be incapable of expelling from the heart of their social life plants, animals, mountains and lakes, and ghosts and gods.

The features peculiar to analogism may well have facilitated this new distribution. In effect the nonhumans that analogical collectives mobilize in their segments preserve their particularities, unlike in totemism, in which they are fused with the humans, and—of course—in animism, in which their physical and behavioral differences are very clearly evident, given that they are distributed among monospecific “societies.” Analogical segments are thus not hybrid but mixed. The entities that they encompass retain their intrinsic ontological differences—as the nature of this mode of identification dictates—but those differences are attenuated by the multiple relations of correspondence and cooperation that their sharing in the common ends of the segment weaves between them. The deified ancestor of a lineage is no longer altogether human, even if he is represented by a mummy or an anthropomorphic sculpture; a mountain is not really human, even if the group of humans that worship it expects it to heed its prayers and contribute to its well-being. When the sections that compose an analogical collective split asunder, the human and nonhuman members of each of them ostensibly seem to recover their ontological singularities, which the united actions in which they engaged had partially erased. They thus became available for the radical differentiations and massive regroupings that naturalism is forced to introduce in order to organize this chaos of singularities without resorting to a segmentary system. The old cosmocentric order disappears, given the absence of intermediary bodies able to embody its hierarchical series of levels, and it can now be supplanted by an anthropocentric order in which the world and its constituent units find themselves divided up according to whether humanity is directly present, present through delegation, or not present at all. Then, like so many solemn tutelary powers, societies with all their conventions, religion with its gods, artifice, and the objects that this creates, Nature and all that it determines—in short, all those familiar things whose reassuring ordinariness we have learned to appreciate—at last emerge into the light of reason.





12





Metaphysics of Morals




When Marx said that “mankind always takes up only such problems as it can solve,”1 he was right, provided that it is clear that particular problems and fitting solutions arise not only from the historical developments of material life with all its contradictions but also from the fact that, faced with analogous situations, not every fragment of humanity asks the same questions or they at least formulate them in such different ways that other fragments may have some difficulty in recognizing in them the very questions that they themselves have set out to elucidate. Now, most of those questions may be grouped as problems whose expression will take altogether different forms depending on the ontological, cosmological, and sociological contexts in which they arise. If we accept that the distribution of the properties of existing beings varies according to the modes of identification that we have been examining, then we must also accept that, likewise, the cognitive regimes, the epistemological positions that make those modes of identification possible, and the resulting ways of tackling a problem will all vary to the same degree. Lévi-Strauss provides an example when he compares the methods of investigation adopted by the Spanish and the Amerindians when faced with the question of their respective humanity. While the churchmen wondered whether the savages of America possessed souls, the Indians of Puerto Rico immersed the whites that they captured in water for weeks on end to see whether they would rot. The former posed the problem of the nature of man in terms of moral attributes; the latter did so in terms of physical ones.2

Logically enough, given its reformative ambitions, what modern epistemology presupposes as the starting point for its researches is an abstract, cognizant, but individualized subject, endowed with faculties of perception, intellect, and reason that, on the basis of the knowledge and technology of the period, make it possible for that subject to produce verifiable hypotheses about the state and structure of the world. However, the present work will adopt a different way of proceeding. Rather than assume the existence of a universal subject, it will be necessary to determine what kind of a subject is produced by each mode of identification—in other words, to clarify the nature of the entity that occupies a position from which legitimate statements can be made about the state of affairs and that constitutes the seat from which action in the world can proceed. Each of these protean subjects, the product of a particular ontology and acting within a specific collective, will necessarily be confronted by distinct epistemological and metaphysical problems that he will endeavor to resolve in his own way and with the means that are at his disposal, thereby establishing zones of objectivity, of nonsubject, for which he will have to elaborate a suitable kind of treatment. Many of the misunderstandings that are described as “cultural,” some of them comical, others tragic, result from the fact that the various collectives that populate the world do not really understand the fundamental questions that engage other collectives. Or, believing mistakenly that they can detect the shape of a problem that they themselves confront, they have no hesitation in applying to it the solution that they have devised for themselves. Some of those solutions no doubt do have a universal application—human rights and scientific procedures, for instance—but it is illusory to think that that they can definitely resolve questions that are formulated in other places and in other contexts and that concern mysteries not even suspected. Dissolving such questions in the acid bath of reason will not remove their relevance for those who are preoccupied by them, at least not until such time as the latter themselves disappear from the human scene along with the problems that worried them.





An Invasive Self



Animist subjects are everywhere, in a bird that is disturbed and that, protesting, takes to flight, in the north wind and rumbling thunder, in a hunted caribou that suddenly turns to look at the hunter, in the silk-cotton tree swaying in a light breeze, and in a clumsy ghost that reveals its presence by stumbling over a dead branch. Existing beings endowed with an interiority analogous to that of humans are all subjects that are animated by a will of their own and, depending on their position in the economy of exchanges of energy and on the physical abilities that they possess, hold a point of view on the world that determines how much they can accomplish, know, and anticipate. The jaguar that, the Wari’ insist, thinks in all good faith that he is taking his prey home for his wife to cook, the elephants that, the Chewong claim, visit one another and live in their own country just as humans do in theirs, the sea lions that, according to the Tsimshian, go to consult a shaman when they have been wounded by an arrow, and the Ke’let spirits that, the Chukchees say, live in villages, practice divination, and move around on sledges: all these beings may consider themselves humans and practice human skills, but that does not mean that they live in a land of mirages or willful illusions. To say that they are persons in effect comes down to recognizing that they possess autonomy, intentionality, and a point of view of the same nature as those of humans, but they are situated within spheres of practices and meanings that are peculiar to each of them, since each shares only with its conspecifics what von Uexküll calls an Umwelt, a lived and “acted” world, characterized by whatever the animal in question is capable of doing in it with the physical advantages at its disposal. It is this ability to perceive, in a subjective fashion, a world that extends their own organs and needs that converts animist entities into subjects, and it is because they are recognized to be subjects that they are said to have souls.

The fact that this interiority is described as similar to that of humans is not at all surprising, nor is the fact that it enables nonhumans to live a “cultural” life in social collectives. For it is humans and their institutions that provide the most accessible model for specifying what a subject is: namely a singularity occupying a position from which autonomous actions, perceptions, and statements are all possible. A soul is thus the concrete and quasi-universal hypostasis of subjectivities that, however, are definitely singular since they proceed from forms and behavior patterns that determine the situation and mode of being in the world that are peculiar solely to the members of the species collective that has been endowed with those particular attributes. This interiority is shared by almost all beings, but the mode of its subjectivization depends on the organic envelopes of the beings that possess it. That this is a strange paradox is shown by Viveiros de Castro when he writes of Amazonia as follows: “Animals see in the same manner as we do different things from those that we see, because their bodies are different from ours.”3 The tranquil certainty that things are indeed as we perceive them to be does not, here, stem from the apodictic power of a well-constructed demonstration, nor even from the persuasive effect of a rhetorical argument that one may come round to believing oneself. Rather, it stems from the conviction, anchored in a definite perceptive apparatus, ethos, and situation, that the world conforms with the way that we use it: it is a perceptible extension of the body, not a representation.

The animist theory of knowledge involving a generalized subjectivity that is particularized by bodies is clearly poles apart from the cognitive realism to which most of us adhere spontaneously even if we are not always able to explain it theoretically. The philosophies of the self, which, in the West, accompanied the rise of the positive sciences, postulated a radical break between words and things, between the abstract ideas used in understanding and the reality that they apprehend, between mental representations and their objects. But animism, unlike them, does not consider the work of knowledge to be a formalization of a world of preexisting substances. Perhaps one could generalize what I once wrote about the Achuar: “They are probably closer to the immaterialism of a thinker such as Berkeley in this respect, for they appear to found the existence of cognizant entities and the elements of their environment more or less entirely upon the act of perception. To paraphrase the famous formula of that Irish bishop, it is the perceptive qualities that, in a single movement, constitute at once things themselves and the subject who perceives them.” I then went on to say that the entire Achuar cosmology stems from this relational concept of belief: “The hierarchy of animate and inanimate beings is founded, not upon the degree of perfection of Being or upon a gradual accumulation of intrinsic properties, but upon the various modes of communication that are made possible by the apprehension of perceptive qualities that are unequally distributed.”4 In short, among the Achuar, the act of knowing, and the specification of subjects and objects that it renders possible, do not proceed from one fixed point in a view that sets in order the diversity of a neutral reality. On the contrary, they result from the pragmatics of communication between entities distinguished by their respective positions and by the type of perception that they can mobilize as they apprehend one another. What I said then of the Achuar (and here comes my excuse for citing it at such length) later found confirmation for Amazonia in general, for Viveiros de Castro has, for example, made the following observation: “Amerindian souls, be they human or animal, are thus indexical categories, cosmological deictics whose analysis calls for … a theory of the sign or a perspectival pragmatics.”5

Let us generalize a little further. As a first approximation, animism seems to lead to a relativist approach to knowledge, not so much with regard to the source of the point of view expressed about it—for it is always the human point of view that prevails, since it is humans that speak for nonhumans—but rather with regard to the conditions that render it possible. Each type of physicality corresponds to a type of perception and action, and so to a type of Umwelt, that is to say a relation to things that are definable not by their absolute properties but by perceptions and uses that vary according to the kinds of subjects dealing with them and the possibilities for their objectivization that they offer those subjects. But animism also manifests a decided universalism in that it refuses to confine subjectification to humans alone: every entity in possession of a soul accedes to the dignity of a subject and can lead a social life as rich in meaning as that ascribed to Homo sapiens. Here we are faced by interiorities that are generalized and physicalities that are particularized. It is a combination that is decidedly enigmatic, for it reverses our own doxa, term for term: if we stuck to the time-honored phraseology, we should have to speak here of a natural relativism and a cultural universalism—an insurmountable contradiction for any well-formed modernist epistemology.

From the point of view of its very singular premises, animism is constantly confronted by a problem both doctrinal and ethical that we have already several times glimpsed beneath the surface: how can one be sure that humanized nonhumans are not indeed humans? Of course, their bodies are manifestly different, as are the behavior and mores that are determined by their biological apparatus. And it is primarily that difference of physical envelopes that makes it possible for humans to feed daily upon animal and vegetable persons without sinking into routine anthropophagy. But the resemblance between interiorities is so powerful, affirmed so vividly in all the circumstances in which humans are involved with nonhumans, that it becomes really difficult to ignore it completely when it comes to cooking and eating. A niggling doubt always lingers: beneath the body of the animal or plant that I am eating, what remains of its human subjectivity? What guarantee is there that I am not munching (or worse) on a subject just like me? That is precisely the point made by the Inuit shaman Ivaluardjuk, to which I have already referred: “The greatest peril of life lies in the fact that human food consists entirely of souls.” It is indeed a serious peril if one goes so far as to admit that eating a person, even one covered by fur, feathers, or foliage, cannot quite be dismissed as a symbolical sleight of hand.

Humans endeavor to face up to this problem by resorting to various methods, often combining them. First, one can do one’s best to de-subjectivize this food, to make it just “a thing,” by eliminating everything that recalls the being that provides it, all the shreds of interiority that still adhere to the tissues because they synthesize the dispositions peculiar to the species. As we have seen, that is what the Makuna are doing when they decontaminate their foodstuffs by dint of incantations designed to send the “weapons” of each species back to the site of their origin. Another ploy, favored by the Piaroa and the Barasana, is to treat the game as though it were a plant: a somewhat hypocritical way of demoting dangerous foodstuffs by several notches in the hierarchy of entities that display affinities with humans.6 However, the more usual ploy is to accept the calculated risk of eating nonhuman persons but to take the precaution of compensating for this neo-cannibalism by, in exchange, making offerings to the animals or to their masters. In some cases the exchange is perfectly symmetrical, as among the Desana, where the shaman returns the souls of dead humans to the animals’ master so that he can convert them into game. An edible soul that will be clothed in flesh is traded in exchange for a soul consumed along with the flesh that has clothed it.7 Conversely, one may take the line that subjectivity is unaffected by the eating, so the integrity of the animal person survives for as long as its interiority does. That is the solution adopted by the hunters of the Siberian North, who ceremoniously thank the souls of the slaughtered game and return to the animals only that which they claimed to have taken, namely flesh, with which they punctiliously feed the various types of ongon. The Ma’ Betisék of Malaysia likewise offer food to the animal and plant species that they feed on, “because they are perceived as humans who have been wronged,”8 although this does not prevent the victims whose indulgence they have tried to buy from avenging the wrong done them anyway, by causing the humans to suffer from wounds and sickness. The fact is that no measures of compensation, however well intentioned, can ever totally dissipate the brutality of the following recognized fact: the maintenance of human life involves the consumption of nonhuman persons. It is therefore quite common in the animist world for the nonhumans upon which humans feed to be blamed for sickness, misfortune, or death, usually through the mediation of the spirits that govern the destiny of the hunted animals. Some of these, in Siberia and Amazonia, make it their specialty to hunt human souls and feed upon them. Fair enough, perhaps: if to eat a person (not just an animal) is also to eat its soul, the reprisals seem perfectly equitable.

Putting quasi-similar beings to death and eating them is far more disturbing metaphysically than the passing prick of conscience that certain Westerners may feel when they eat meat.9 It is not so much a sense of culpability that grips the Amazonian or Siberian hunter when he takes an animal’s life, but rather a muffled anxiety when faced yet again with the manifest porosity of ontological frontiers. Which will win out, the difference in bodies or the similarity of souls? Against this background of angst peculiar to animism, metamorphosis takes on its full meaning. As we have seen, here it is more a matter of anamorphosis, the experimentum crucis of the relationship between a human and a nonhuman: by changing one’s corporeal envelope, one can slip into the skin of another in order to fuse with the subjectivity anchored in its body. If that is so, metamorphosis allows interiorities trapped within heterogeneous physicalities and points of view to find grounds for an accord, in which social interactions can unfold without altogether flouting the constraints of verisimilitude. It is, in the end, metamorphosis that testifies to the humanity of animal-persons and plant-persons, and so it is metamorphosis that principally fuels the animist dilemma concerning the true nature of what is eaten. But even as it instills doubt, metamorphosis helps to dissipate it, since in this way it makes supremely manifest the separability of interiority and physicality. If humans can take on the outward appearance of animals and animals can cast off their costume and reveal their subjectivity within a human appearance, then the flesh of a hunted animal and the substance of plants become more clearly dissociated both from the souls that they shelter and from the behavior patterns for which they provide the material. Furthermore, the phenomenon is repeatable, transitive, and reversible—at least, it is when outside the temporal regime of myths—unlike other types of metamorphosis, such as the transformation of the Australian Dream-beings into elements of the landscape or into totemic entities, or indeed the changes of form, from human to animal, that the jealous gods of antiquity sometimes delighted in imposing upon mortals.10 Animist metamorphosis is a contingent meeting of two points of view at the level of perceptible experience. In this way, through its periodical sidelong shift, it helps to objectivize the duality of interiority and physicality by distinguishing the domains of autonomy open to each.

But the autonomy of souls is relative, since they are all alike. So it is, rather, in bodies, with all their variations of forms, functions, and potential uses, that animism finds signs of otherness and, against the background of a moral condition common to most existing beings, endeavors to distinguish self from nonself. The body, an objective seat of difference that constitutes both the source and the matter of knowledge, becomes par excellence the object of speculation, the one that is the most rewarding for thinking about the diversity of the world and organizing it. It comes as no surprise to find that animals rank highest in the cohort of others (alter) whose limits need to be determined. Their physiology, their habits, and the intentionality that they seem to display in their actions all easily indicate them to be subjects of the same nature as humans, even though they stand out as being different by virtue of a mass of anatomical and behavioral details that prevent them from being regarded as altogether identical. As Brightman notes when writing about the Cree, animals are “social others.” In the Canadian Far North, as in all animist territories, they are the emblematic incarnation of social otherness.11 In particular, they present a vast range of feeding regimes, that is, of bodies feeding on other bodies, and still according to the model of the food chain, this makes it possible to specify ontological taxonomies by means of the multiple interactions and hierarchies of the eaters and the eaten. Here, it is not really a matter of the universal phenomenon of marking out a collective identity by the ostensible difference in feeding habits; nor even of the equally common idea that it is commensality or the repeated sharing of the same foodstuffs that makes the eaters identical. Rather, the point here is the postulate that every existing being is defined primarily by its position within a network of relations in which it is predator to some and prey to others.

Humans are not spared this destiny, as we have seen, since they must ceaselessly “pay in person” in exchange for the nonhumans that they devour. It is those humans’ living flesh that the animal masters consume by disease; their blood that cultivated plants daily suck (e.g., among the Achuar); their dead flesh that the beasts of the Inuit and the Siberian North devour and that the ongon take back to the Spirit of the forest for it to gorge upon. And it is their souls that will provide the starting point for new animal flesh from which the bodies of their descendants may benefit. It is hardly surprising, then, that it is often by means of cannibalism or its diverse more or less metaphorical variants that humans subjected to this regime strive to carve out between them zones of identity and otherness. The souls of the members of neighboring tribes make them subjects, just like me, but their bodies objectivize them as different from me. They are decorated, painted, and tattooed differently; the weapons, tools, and utensils that are extensions of their bodies differ from mine (as do the forms of the jaws, beaks, and claws or talons of animals); the houses that shelter those bodies are not the same as the one in which I live; and the language by means of which they act upon the world is not the one that I speak (any more, indeed, than is the language of the peccary or that of the bear, or at least the one attached to their specific forms). Here, the social body is not an abstraction; it is an organic community of subjects with similar bodies, subjects who, to borrow a formula that Terry Turner applies to the Kayapó of Brazil, “apprehend their subjectivity as immanent to their concrete physical activities.”12 This is probably a characteristic of animist collectives in general. Each variety of humans perceives itself with a bodily form of its own and thus constitutes a kind of independent species, so that eating an enemy is not, strictly speaking, anthropophagy (or allelophagy) since, just as with an animal person that one hunts and eats as game, the victim comes from a neighboring tribe that is distinguishable by its physical attributes. It is not the case that the enemy is reduced to the rank of a nonhuman—for the whole world bears traces of humanity—but he is a human of a particular type and differs from his predator in the same way as a tapir-person differs in its body, not its “culture,” from the hunter tracking it.

In an animist regime, objectivizing a human who is different consists first and foremost in noting the singular properties of the physical envelope in which he appears. This is very clearly the case in the lowlands of South America, where one does not usually seek to act upon an “other” by changing the nature of its soul (that is an old missionary obsession), but instead tries to do this by appropriating features of his body: occasionally, quite literally, eating him, but more often by taking from him elements that generate his identity (head, penis, scalp) or even, more generally, by capturing fertilizable wombs and their products (captive women and children, who are integrated following treatment that alters their original appearance and habitus in a kind of one-way metamorphosis). The goal of all these practices is not to capture substances and fluids from which to derive power and energy. Rather, what flesh, bones, and hair provide in a metonymic fashion for those who appropriate them are dispositions peculiar to a particular situation and physical form: the mode of being peculiar to a particular species.13 The otherness that one absorbs along with bodies is thus neither a vital force whose distant provenance renders it desirable nor a second-order identity to be annihilated so as to mark one’s own triumph. On the contrary, it is something that is indispensable if one is to perceive oneself as distinctive. Eternally in quest of an elusive completeness and surrounded by misleading forms and concealed souls, an animist subject can be sure of only one thing: he eats and will be eaten.





The Thinking Reed *



What can be said of the epistemology of naturalism that has not already been repeated a thousand times? At the risk of advancing shocking simplifications, let us therefore content ourselves with a very brief synthesis. A subject both cognizant and political (for the two are for once united) takes the form of an abstract human capable of reasoning and exercising free will. That excludes nonhumans from superior forms of knowledge and action (those belonging to the nonperceptible realm). Within that domain, though, not all humans appear to be equally competent. One has but to remember anthropology’s ceaseless attempts to impose the idea that “savage thought” too was in some respects rational and that “a science of the concrete” constituted a worthy bricolage! Whereas animism extends to a general multitude of existing beings the position of a moral and epistemic subject, naturalism confines this to one species and surreptitiously introduces a hierarchy within that species. Furthermore, with the exception of scholars and philosophers, who, it is said, know how to rise above this condition, the general mass of more or less rational subjects remains, for most of the time, trapped in the prison of habits and prejudices. Groups of these subjects thus differ from one another with regard to their customs, languages, and conventions and also individually, within each culture, by reason of their education, their native environment, and their talents. Not only is intersubjectivity impossible between humans and nonhumans, but it also turns out not to work very well between humans themselves, so varied are their beliefs, values, and institutions, as are the sign systems by which they try to translate those fleeting constructions in communications that are always threatened by misunderstandings. Happily, a grand and beautiful certainty unites the wisest of the inhabitants of this tower of Babel. Behind the welter of particularities that man ceaselessly engenders, there exists a field of realities with reassuring regularities, knowable by tried and trusted methods, and reducible to immanent laws whose veracity cannot be impaired, whatever the processes by which they are discovered. In short, cultural relativism is only tolerable or even interesting to study when set against the massive background of natural universalism to which minds in quest of the truth can turn for help and consolation.

All the same, not everything is resolved, for the persistence of cultural arbitrariness introduces a source of persistent anxiety as to science’s claim to account for everything that exists and to do so better and more completely than religion used to. Why does culture remain intractable to the models of explanation and the causal links that chemistry, physics, and biology employ with such success? Can one be satisfied with this state of affairs or should one place one’s confidence in the human and social sciences in the hope that they will put a stop to this scandal? As can be seen, the epistemological problems faced by naturalism are the exact opposite of those facing animism. Whereas the latter wonders about the place of the “natural” (physical differences) in a world that is almost wholly “cultural,” the former is not too sure where to place Culture (moral differences) within the universality of Nature. The solutions found are scarcely more than half measures, just as metamorphosis was for animism. They consist in obstinately oscillating between two ways of eliminating the question: the first is naturalist monism, with its ambition to reduce the autonomy of culture—which has become a system of adaptation determined by genetic and environmental constraints; the second is radical relativism, with its ambition to reduce the autonomy of nature—which has become purely a system of signs with no objective referent. I have already spent too long on that dialogue of the deaf to return to it here. Let us just remember that it is totally vain to hope to discover a third way, at least it is so long as one identifies with a naturalist epistemology whose explicit foundations rest upon an irreconcilable duality between two fields of incompatible phenomena. But just as the problem of the humanity of nonhumans provides animism with an inexhaustible and fascinating object for speculation, the problem of the status of moral phenomena in material determinisms offers naturalism an endless opportunity for philosophical controversy. Those who fancy reflective subtleties and well-turned arguments will not be complaining.

While animism sees signs of otherness in the discontinuity of bodies, naturalism finds them in the discontinuity of minds. I am different from someone who, speaking another language, believing in other values, thinking according to other categories, and seeing things according to another “worldview,” is no longer just like me because the “collective representations” to which he adheres and that condition his actions are so very different from mine. A bizarre custom or an enigmatic or repugnant practice can thus be explained by the fact that those who adopt them cannot do otherwise than believe (think, represent to themselves, imagine, judge, suppose …) that this is the way to proceed if one wishes to achieve such or such an end. It is all a matter of “mentalities”—a fertile domain for history—and if these are reputed to be understandable up to a certain point from the traces that they leave in public expressions of them, it is nevertheless not possible to penetrate their ultimate sources, for I cannot quite slip into the mind of someone else, even someone very close. For naturalist subjects, there is unfortunately no mental equivalent to metamorphosis; all we have at our disposal are the unsuccessful attempts made by poetry, psychoanalysis, or mysticism. In these circumstances, it is understandable that radical otherness seems to lie on the side of those either devoid of minds or who do not know how to use them: savages (in the past), the mentally ill (today), and, above all, the immense multitude of nonhumans, animals, objects, plants, stones, clouds, all this material chaos that exists in a mechanical fashion and with laws of composition and functioning that humans, in their wisdom, work busily to discover.





Representing a Collective



For an ethnologist used to Amazonia, one of the most disconcerting features of Australian totemism is that the organic elements of the environment are not treated as persons, despite the crucial place that the fauna and flora occupy in the ontology and economy of the Aboriginals. There are no rituals designed to obtain the indulgence of some vindictive hunted animal, no shamans managing the relations between human societies and animal societies, no dialogues between the soul of a hunter and that of his prey, and no indication that kangaroos, emus, and wild yams might possess an interiority that needs to be taken into account.14 It is not that these kinds of entities leave the Aboriginals indifferent. On the contrary, in a mode of subsistence based on hunting, fishing, and gathering, plants and animals are, understandably enough, the subject of very elaborate knowledge and also of the constant attention of those who live among them and depend upon them for their existence. It is important to know about them, for some are good to eat; moreover, they are all “good to think with,” to judge by their eminent position in totemic classifications. But they are not “good to socialize with,” at least not in the form of autonomous alter ego communities with institutions analogous to those of humans. It is true that animal and plant species are included in totemic collectives because this or that one shares in common with this or that class of humans an origin and certain prototypical attributes. Nevertheless, their members are not invited to participate in social activities except as subordinate witnesses, that is, as essential parts of the décor set in place long ago by the Dream-beings, as edible provisions to be renewed (through rites of multiplication), and as impersonal signs and vectors of the presence and intentions of the original Demiurges. They represent various objectivizations of those Demiurges, just as humans do. In short, in Australia as in the modern West, animals and plants are not granted the dignity of subjects.

Does this mean that such a privilege is reserved for humans, who alone hold a point of view on the world and an ability to transform it? That seems extremely doubtful, given the extremely slender margin of independence that Aboriginals enjoy vis-à-vis the totemic entities of various kinds that borrow human bodies in order to perpetuate themselves. We should remember that totems of filiation, conceptional totems, child-souls, and even totemic sites all treat humans as instruments by making use of their dynamism and vitality in order, generation after generation, to reproduce the great segmented order of which those ceaselessly active forces are the creators, guarantors, and concrete expressions. However, this does not turn humans into puppets manipulated by ventriloquist totems, even though their subjectivity appears to stem largely from the properties incorporated in the myriad real and potential objects that were placed in the world by the Dream-beings when they bestowed form and meaning upon it. Nancy Munn has helpfully illuminated all this in her study of the mythical thought of the tribes of the central desert.15

According to the Warlpiri and the Pitjantjatjara, the whole of their present environment constitutes a kind of register that records the countless traces left by the Dream-beings. Each singularity that it contains can be traced to a metamorphosed part of their infinitely productive bodies, to the vestige of an action in which they engaged, or to the automatic realization of a plan that they decided to imagine. Every existing being is thus linked to one or another of those prototypical figures in a relationship that is both essential and consubstantial. Speaking of a small stretch of water, an Aboriginal may say that “it is the body” of such or such a Dream-being, and the same could be said of the offspring that the latter has left in a site, in the form of child-souls, and ritual objects that embody that Dream-being’s presence.16 Thus, the emergence of the landscape, of the so-called natural species and of humans, does not, strictly speaking, result from a process of creation—which would presuppose autonomy for the things produced in relation to the instrument of their coming-to-be. Rather, it is the effect of a movement of objectivization in the course of which those original subjects engendered classes of things out of themselves—by partial metamorphosis, separation, or imprint—in such a way that those things to this day bear signs of the active subjectivity of which they are the concrete consequence. The real subjects of this totemic activity and the ever-vibrant order that it instituted are certainly the Dream-beings, that is, the initially mobile agents that long ago actualized out of themselves parcels of beings and collections of objects in hybrid groups that, as a result of the circumstances in which they appeared, all share properties in common. All the same, despite the realistic tone of the stories that retrace their adventures, the Dream-beings elude any faithful description of their original hybrid character. Moreover, they have infused themselves into entities that are morphologically so diverse that it is hard to imagine them as singularities with appearances of their own. As a hypostasis of a process of segmented engendering, the active subject here is thus really an abstraction, a concept objectivized in a multiplicity of things: it is a prototypical class of human and nonhuman elements, all with the same origin and represented by a named collective.

With this perspective, it is not possible to claim that humans are subjects except by derivation or procuration, for their physical and moral identity depends on the identity of the primordial entities from which they proceed. That is made quite clear by, for example, the fact that a Pitjantjatjara identifies with the Dream-being of his birthplace when he says “I” in order to refer to that Dream-being. Similarly, it is said of beauty spots, moles, and birthmarks (djuguridja, “that which belongs to the ancestors”) on the bodies of humans that these constitute reminders of the distinctive markings borne by the Dream-being from which they stem. Those markings are still detectable in the particular features of the form into which the Dream-being has transformed itself.17 The subjectivity of any human individual thus operates essentially by means of objects with which he maintains a relation of intrinsic solidarity (elements in the landscape, child-souls, and sacred objects), for those manifest and render operational the still-quivering subjectivity of the Dream-beings and so also of his own subjectivity inasmuch as it is sustained by that of the Dream-being. The identity of an Aboriginal is thus “alienated” in the full sense of the term, in that it resides in the traces left in things by the entities that have produced the class of which he is a member, a class that in itself is an entity whose presence he himself helps to actualize by performing rituals. As Munn observes, “For human subjects, objects which come to embody ‘intimations of themselves’ already contain ‘intimations of others’—who are superordinate to them and precede them in time.”18 In this dialectic that may be either materialist or idealist (it is hard to determine which), those original subjects, thanks to their subjectivity, founded the state and dynamics of everything, by objectivizing the world. Meanwhile, humans find themselves objectivized as subjects through the intermediary of the objects that the Dream-beings have subjectivized.

So, given that humans themselves are hardly more than personifications of a reality that determines them both physically and morally, it is not surprising that animals and plants are not persons. Everything in the world is linked to those primordial Dream figures that were responsible for the distribution of beings and things into different classes. Everything forever depends on those agents that imposed order, whose essence and material properties find expression in the most insignificant of objects. So there is no reason why plants and animals should not be both condensations of attributes stemming from totemic essences and also generic substances with no real interiority, easily converted into nourishment since destroying and consuming them will in no way affect the enduring source from which springs a constant stream of ontological irrigation. An Opossum-man who eats an opossum does no harm to the “Opossum quality” by which both are defined since each, in its own way, is no more than a provisional embodiment of it. However, the irremediable destruction of the Opossum site from which both proceed (possibly as a result of being buried beneath a golf course or a supermarket) not only causes the annihilation of their generic identity but also, and above all, makes it impossible for them to perpetuate their respective descents, since they now lack the totemic seeds that prospered in that place. Amid all these separate ontological streams, it would be hard to distinguish a purely objective materiality that could be separated from a structuring intentionality and from a creative project immanent in everything and to which everything testifies. As for subjects, they are at once everywhere and nowhere: everywhere since everywhere there are tangible signs of that active subjectivity attributed to the Dream-beings, yet nowhere because, being incorporated in the landscape and having detached existing things from their own bodies, those original subjects have desisted from making themselves visible as representable individualities. So there is nothing universal about the properties of matter and nothing homogeneous about this mass of subjects submerged in things. If one wished at all costs to place this curious metaphysics in the Procrustean bed of our epistemology, one would probably have to describe it as a double relativism, at once natural and cultural, but somewhat tempered by an obsession with classification unequaled elsewhere.

In view of the depersonalizing effect on the consciousness of individuals produced by what we may rightly call “collective representations,” it is not hard to discern the problem that totemism faces: how, without ambiguity, to pick out human from nonhuman individuals, given that they are all fused within a collective; how to separate out existing beings that are amalgamated into a hybrid class as a result of a mode of identification that minimizes discontinuities? If the totemic group attached to a particular site does indeed constitute the preeminent form of a subject as a moral person assimilated to a Dream-being, then the elements gathered together in such a group become particularly difficult to distinguish since they all stem from the same prototypical matrix, and over and above differences of form, each one of them is simply a fleeting actualization of the attributes associated with that matrix. But within the collective there is a need for at least a minimum threshold of differentiation that renders possible interactions between terms that would otherwise be too similar.

In the case of fauna and flora, the solution lies in dissociating the attributes of an individual, seen as a singular member of a biological species, from the attributes of the species, seen as a component of a totemic collective. An example of my totemic species is not, for me, a subject with which I establish a personal relationship; rather, it is a living expression of certain material and essential qualities that I share with it. That is how Spencer and Gillen’s informant, whom I have cited above, could say of a kangaroo that “it is just the same as me.”19 However, that is not an absolute identity, or at least it is only as regards certain predicates reputed to be relevant when it comes to assessing an attribute that affects an ontological membership. In such a case, what will be concerned are the same origin, the same essence, and certain common substances, certain shared physical and behavioral traits, and the same taxonomic name, which, as we have seen, is usually derived from an abstract property rather than from the species’ name. In other respects, the morphology is different, as are feeding habits, forms of communication, and many other features too. Such differences are originally occasioned by the fact that the stocks of child-souls of a single totemic class are clearly dissociated: some embody themselves in humans, others in plants or in animals. It is these divergent attributes, which are obliterated in the context of ontological identification, that attract attention in practical experience, thereby introducing singularities within a totemic collective. When circumstances demand it, they make it possible for humans and nonhumans, even if fused within a single group, to be treated as distinct entities.

Such an operation is much harder to carry out when it is a matter of individualizing humans within a totemic collective, since each one, produced from the same reservoir of child-souls, conforms in the same way to the properties of the prototypical class that he or she objectivizes in his or her person. The solution here is, rather, to overdetermine the attributes of the individual in relation to those of his or her class by particularizing the basis of his or her identity, that is to say, the characteristics of his or her child-soul. This is one of the purposes of the initiation ceremonies and of the ritual objects used in them, as the function of the churinga among the Aranda illustrates well.20

The term churinga (or tjurunga) designates, among other things, religious objects of various kinds, kept at a totemic site and serving to support the identity of the Dream-being that originally established that site. Among these objects, it is important to distinguish between, on the one hand, the collective churinga (known as knanja), which are stationary stones and rocks that incorporate the child-souls of totemic species that are nonhuman and that are used essentially in rites of “multiplication,” and, on the other, the individual churinga (known as indulla-irrakura), which are all different from one another and each of which objectivizes a human child-soul. These consist of planks of wood and oval or rectangular flakes of schist engraved or painted with abstract motifs and normally tucked away in a hollow tree or a rock crevice on the totemic site. The motif that adorns each individual churinga is entirely original and represents the singularity of, not so much the individual with whom it is associated, but rather the child-soul that animates his or her existence as a particular member of the totemic collective. But how is such singularity possible, one wonders, given that the child-souls of all humans at one totemic site proceed from one and the same Dream-being and so are ontologically identical? The answer is, quite simply, because every churinga and therefore every human child-soul can be seen as a kind of fractal expression of the general structure of the properties of its totemic class, in that it illustrates a different stage in the conditions of its objectivization. This “representation of the unrepresentable,” to borrow Moisseeff’s formula, can be achieved by remarkably limited means. The motifs of circles, semicircles, spirals, and continuous or discontinuous lines that are painted on to the surfaces of the churinga each represent one portion of the journey of a Dream-being, along with the traces left by it in this or that place and following this or that event. So each individual, that is, each incarnation of a child-soul, becomes an actualization of one of the successive stages through which passed the genesis of the collective identity peculiar to the group to which he or she belongs. Against the background of a common ontological specificity, individuals are differentiated from one another thanks to the distribution, to each of the human members of the totemic class, of different segments of the initial history that has brought them together as a homogeneous class. Each of those segments takes the form of a miniature landscape animated by that founding event.

What form can otherness take in such a regime, with subjects that are everywhere present in the objectivized effects of their instituting action yet impossible to apprehend in the phenomenal guise of their original singularity? The first point to note is that totemism is, in itself, a useful mechanism for defining the thresholds of discontinuity between oneself and others, since its primary purpose is to distribute parcels of contrasting properties among the various classes of existing beings. Thus, anyone who, because he or she belongs to a different totemic collective, possesses physical and moral attributes different from my own can be defined as different from myself. Nevertheless, at least in the case of humans, the ontological gap is not so great that it prevents common life within a vaster composite unit, let alone exogamous unions between the members of different totemic groups. Far from being incompatible, differences in both materiality and interiority between totemic segments on the contrary complement one another in a harmonious fashion. In fact, coexistence between heterogeneous collectives is even a condition of survival that is necessary for all those involved, since the human members of each totemic group work hard to ensure the subsistence of the rest by multiplying, for their benefit, the plants and animals for which they are responsible and also by allowing them to make use of the resources to be found on the territories associated with the sites of their own emergence. Nor is there any incompatibility between parents who belong to different totemic species, since the physical and moral characteristics of their children depend not on themselves but on the totemic entities under whose aegis they are born or conceived. In fact this constitutes a remarkable case of rational cohabitation between “ontological races” that, despite considering themselves as utterly different with regard to their essence, substance, and the places to which they are attached, nevertheless adhere to values and norms that render them complementary. Indeed, they make use of the grid of otherness on which they find themselves placed in relation to others in order to produce an organic solidarity out of taxonomic heterogeneity.

This is not the case where plants and animals are concerned. Like the humans, they are primarily distinguished from one another by their totemic affiliations, but in their case it is not possible to transcend that original division and intermingle freely since, unlike the humans, they cannot pair off together if they come from different totemic segments, nor can they do so even within the same totemic collective if they belong to different species. Despite the totemic links that bind it to other categories of existing beings, each biological species of nonhumans is thus confined to a confrontation with itself. Furthermore, although humans gladly recognize that they share with their totemic species a profound identity of both essence and substance, they nevertheless consider the individuals that make up those species as objects lacking the type of creative interiority that permits themselves, as humans, to declare themselves the principal emissaries of the Dream-beings. In the eyes of the humans, these plants and animals that are “exactly like themselves” are no more than accidental vectors of qualities that characterize all of them: they are not subjects to be mobilized in any project of communal life. The totemic category of otherness thus plays upon a subtle dialectic interaction between the level of an individual and that of a species. It includes indiscriminately humans, when one chooses to apprehend them as a species (according to their totemic affiliation) and not as individuals (social partners), and the myriad collection of nonhumans that are treated either as individuals considered as things despite their species membership (within the totemic group) or both as foreign species and as individuals with no identity of their own (outside that totemic group).





The Signature of Things



Animist cosmologies teem with persons that are clearly individualized and easily identifiable from the diversity of their outward apparel: such or such an animal scrutinized me, such or such a great tree came and spoke to me in a dream, such or such a distant human has come to visit me. Analogical subjectivities also proliferate everywhere, but in a far more diffuse and ambivalent manner, refracted as they are in unexpected receptacles from which they must be picked out by means of tiny indications and signs that are hard to decipher. In a world saturated with a prodigious quantity of singular existing beings, themselves composed of a plurality of unstable mobile components, it becomes hard to attribute a continuous identity to any object: nothing is ever really what it seems, so exceptional ingenuity and great attention to the context are demanded in order to manage, even in a provisional way, to make out a definite individuality behind the equivocal fog of appearances and misleading indications. No doubt humans lay claim to a less indecisive singularity, given that they assume the privilege of interpretation by taking themselves as models in their task of imposing order and bringing meaning into the world. Even then, though, when dealing with one of them one needs to be sure of his or her true nature. As the mother of Amadou Hampaté Ba so aptly put it, “I should like to know which of the Amadous who inhabit him is there at this moment.” Indeed, who, really, is Amadou? Which of his many personalities is in charge at the moment that one speaks to him? And what can be said of the old Nahua man possessed by his little deity of drunkenness, of the initiate to the candomblé ridden by his orisha, or of the witch inhabited by her demon? Are they still autonomous subjects, even if they are versatile and composite, or has the entity that has alienated them become so intrusive that they will always carry within them traces of its subjectivity? And what can be said of the tona of the Mexicans, an animal double that is host to a fragment of a human’s interiority? Is it a double subject, the Siamese twin of the person whose destiny it shares? Or is it an independent being that coexists with another, partially delocalized subjectivity? In short, analogical subjects seem to be back-to-front versions of Pascal’s God: their circumference is everywhere, their center nowhere. They exist only by virtue of their surface effects, deploying themselves in concentric waves of variable amplitude and in constant interaction with one another. But it would certainly be hard to determine a focus for them, even an infinitely multiple one. Far from being “one everywhere and wholly present in every place,” they are fragmented into multiple parts that never form a stable whole.

While the parts of beings vary constantly in their dosages and combinations, the materials that constitute them seem, for their part, to be reassuringly stable. The diversity of forms and the singularity of their compositions matter little here, provided that a limited range of substances and material states guarantees both a kind of elementary physical continuity between existing beings and also the possibility of pairing or opposing them in accordance with the affinities and incompatibilities of the substances of which they are composed. Analogical physics is simple, at least insofar as an inventory of its materials is concerned. Whether it is a matter of the ancient doctrine of four elements, the Chinese or Ayurvedic theory of five elements (which are not quite the same), or the interplay of opposites between masculine and feminine humors or between the flesh of plants and that of animals, it is always the same fundamental substances and the same principles of attraction or repulsion that form the basis for the litany of sympathies and discordances endlessly produced by medical wisdom, dietary prescriptions, and ritual requirements. Perhaps that simplicity as regards components is indispensable if analogical worlds are to remain intelligible and manipulable. When each and every thing is seen as a virtually unique specimen, it has to be possible to reduce its singularity by decomposing it into a small number of elements that can define its nature and explain its behavior vis-à-vis other things. Supported by therapeutic practice and the understanding of materials acquired through metallurgy, pottery, and the chemistry of pigments, this qualitative physics is not without an empirical plausibility. Above all, and to transpose a hypothesis produced by Lévi-Strauss concerning magic thought in general, could one not consider the rigor and precision evident in these presumed associations and causalities between a few elementary substances “as an expression of the unconscious apprehension of the truth of determinism, the mode in which scientific phenomena exist? In this view, the operations of determinism are divined and made use of in an all-embracing fashion before being known and properly applied.”21

This would make the transition between analogism and naturalism a little less mysterious. Despite all the “changes of paradigms” and the “epistemological ruptures” between the Renaissance and the classical period, one conviction remains unchanged: that the elementary materials of the world have the same knowable properties everywhere and that the different combinations that they allow are everywhere valid. All the same, that is where the resemblance stops. For what analogism deploys against the background of this universalism that one hardly dares to describe as “natural” is not a teeming mass of singular societies. Rather, it is a universalism of a different order, that of myriads of diffused subjectivities that animate all things with a will yet to be discovered, a meaning yet to be interpreted, a connection yet to be revealed. This, then, is a “spiritual” universalism, if not a strictly “cultural” one. And that is probably one reason for the persistent success of “Eastern wisdoms” in the disenchanted West. In one swoop, sweeping aside the irritating question of cultural relativism, Zen, Buddhism, and Daoism offer a universalist alternative that is more complete than the truncated universalism of the Moderns. Human nature is not shredded into bits as a result of the force of customs and the weight of habits, since every human being, thanks to meditation, is reputed to be able to draw from within himself or herself the capacity to experience the plenitude of the world without preestablished foundations—that is to say, liberated from the particular foundations that a local tradition might assign to it. Understandably enough, biologists and physicists with monist aspirations may have been won over by this aspect of analogism that was provided by Asiatic philosophies in a reflective form already highly elaborated but easier for scientists to accept than the analogical doctrines of the Renaissance, against which their own scholarly disciplines were built in reaction.22

If one accepts that analogism functions by taking the line that “everything is in everything and vice versa,” then the epistemological problem that it faces is exactly the reverse of that of totemism, for it is a matter not of singularizing amalgamated entities but of amalgamating singularized ones. And it has to be recognized that this is a by no means minor problem. How can one aggregate existing beings in a mode of identification that places the emphasis on their discontinuities? How can one justify an assembling point of view in a cosmos of particularized immanences? How can one account for a division into parts within a totality that is its own justification? There are certainly ways of classifying, segmenting, and ordering that organize this medley of heteroclite beings, for, as we have seen, that is precisely the function of various types of analogy, of great classificatory structures with two qualitative poles or hierarchical divisions. However, these mechanisms of internal organization are not self-sufficient. To become effective and tolerable, they need to be legitimized and motivated by something that is bigger than they are, something whose position and status transcend the dispersion of particular subjectivities. Who or what is responsible for the division of the Chipaya world into two moieties and the complementary relations between their inhabitants, both human and nonhuman? What brings about the pairing of an Otomi Indian and his animal tona? What is the basis for the hierarchical levels of Indian castes and their inegalitarian characteristics? Who guarantees the permanence of the chain of being and the stability of its divisions? As soon as one asks these questions, one can see that there is no single answer. Just as analogism finds expression in a wide variety of collectives, it allows for a wide range of justificatory perspectives.

It is, however, possible to discern one regular feature in the institution of the totalizing structure that makes the analogical hierarchy meaningful and ensures that it functions satisfactorily. Whatever its configuration, it always results from a process that hypostasizes the world collective, the stability of which must be ensured and the segmentation of which must be perpetuated. The most common hypostasis takes a metonymic form: one exceptional singularity comes to embody not so much the whole collection of other singularities but, rather, the permanence of the ordered totality that structures it. It may be the Inca, the divine being, the vital center of the cosmos and the original model of all things; or it may be Pharaoh, the son of the Sun and the mediator between gods and humans, the guarantor of justice, prosperity, and victory; or it may be God, the architect of the chain of being and the preserver of its integrity. A similar metonymic movement may result in one segment of a collective becoming responsible for representing the bases of the sociocosmic order and maintaining the conditions in which it operates. The role played by the ancestors in West Africa or in Japan, those dead who are still active in the existence of the living, comes to mind. They are the guarantors and painstaking guardians of norms and values, eminent members of the various segments of the collective whose continuity they sanction and from whom proceed the rights and privileges of their descendants. Or it may be that one particular class of humans is invested with the mission of maintaining the world through their liturgical activities: for example, the Brahmins in India. Far more rare, finally, are attempts to hypostasize the cosmic order itself by condensing it into a principle, or even in a word, which it then becomes difficult to define other than by illustrations, allegories, and precepts. This was the course adopted, for example, by the Chinese, with their dao, although that did not stop them from also having recourse to the ancestors—for in most cases, faced with the scope of the task, one tends to take the wise precaution of combining several different totalizing principles.

However, given the need, day in and day out, to ensure that singularities are all collected into an effective hierarchy, most mechanisms of aggregation and subordination remain very abstract. This is why the political function becomes decisive in analogical collectives, particularly when very numerous items are involved. It is through the political function and the coercion that it exerts that every individual, every segment, and every aspect of the world is kept in the place fixed for it. Here, the example of India is the most instructive. We know that the Brahmin class was superior to the class of the kshatriya, the warrior princes from whom monarchs proceeded, and that their dominant position was justified by the crucial role that sacrificial activities played in the preservation of the sociocosmic order. Yet, despite this official ideology that placed a Brahmin above a sovereign, the Brahminic orthodoxy itself promoted an even more fundamental division, that between the “eaters,” namely the princes who held the power, and the “eaten,” their subjects, whose allotted role was to be obedient and productive. Charles Malamoud provides a good account of this in his commentary on a passage of the Çatapatha-Brâhmana concerning the reasons for using two kinds of bricks in the construction of a fire altar.23 Some bricks are individualized and represent the class of warrior princes, while others are not differentiated and represent the masses of the “eaten.” But even though each of the princely bricks is singular, they are unified because, as each is laid, the same formula is pronounced. This is a way of indicating what these particularized beings all have in common. Even if each of the kings and princes enjoys power, they all resemble one another and display solidarity in their use of force. In contrast, each plebeian brick is treated to a formula of its own, to show that they are all different. More precisely, “the masses are made up of elements that are not individuals nor are parts sufficiently similar to constitute a whole unless, to hold them together, there are ‘hole-fillers’ constituted by the princely bricks that ‘fill in the gaps.’”24 There could be no better way of indicating that, behind the empowering function ostensibly conceded to the Brahmins, the real work of totalizing and adjusting singularities here falls to those who hold coercive power.

It is probably safe to generalize and include analogical world collectives in Granet’s remark, cited in chapter 2, about the Chinese cosmos, which “is itself in order only when it is enclosed the way that a house is.” The boundary between what is the same and what is other is, in this case, brilliantly simple: beyond the limits of the home, which are usually marked out in a quite literal fashion, there lies an “out-world” populated by outsiders, the indistinct mass of barbarians, savages, and marginal peoples, which is a constant source of threats and a potential breeding ground for co-citizens who can be domesticated. All those peoples behind the mountains, on the borders of the deserts, beyond this or that river, and in the depths of impenetrable forests obstinately refuse to share the totalizing point of view that an analogical collective has chosen and the wise laws that it has introduced; and they do so because they do not recognize the authority of the sacred king, they know nothing of the benevolent presence of the ancestors, or they reject the aid proffered by divine enlightenment. Unlike what happens with other modes of identification, here otherness is external in a purely spatial sense, for even in the most extremely subdivided hierarchical systems, such as that of the Indian castes, the inequalities between segments are not so decisive that they cannot be compensated for by functional complementarities and the integrating effects of the schema of distribution by which they are organized. Each caste is certainly different from all the rest by reason of its specialization, its way of life, its prerogatives, and its reproductive endogamy, but together they form an integrated totality, given that they produce goods and services for one another and, in solidarity, depend on the great sociocosmic model of which each expresses a particular facet. In contrast, animism, naturalism, and totemism have all installed otherness at the very heart of their collectives: animism does so by highlighting discontinuities of bodies, naturalism by attributing it to the discontinuity of minds, and totemism by playing on the difference between the levels that separate individuals and species (fig. 9).



Readers have a right to raise one more question: what starting point do you need to adopt in order to feel justified in classifying the points of view of others in combinations that only you elude? From what do you derive and how can you justify this bird’s-eye point of view from which you organize the different kinds of problems that human beings tackle, meanwhile avoiding those that your own approach raises? In the first place, it goes without saying that my own starting point is without doubt rooted in the familiar soil of naturalism. It is no easy matter to escape from one’s origins and from the schemas of apprehending reality that have been mastered through education and strengthened by being accepted as common practice. Although we may from time to time indulge in the type of ontological judgments that other modes of identification suggest, it is out of the question for any modern subject fully to become animist or totemist (as ethnographic experience attests) or even to return consistently to the ancient attractions of analogism. It is not possible to adhere to philosophies of knowledge that tend to oppose the relativity of bodies to the universality of mind or to combine objective materiality and moral subjectivity as two relativisms or two universalisms. In these circumstances, how can one extract oneself from the dilemma of naturalism and its all-too-predictable oscillation between the monist hope of natural universalism and the pluralist temptation of cultural relativism? Above all, how does one turn one’s back on the consoling idea that our culture is the one that has carved out for itself access to a real understanding of nature, while other cultures have nothing to go on except representations that are approximate but worthy of interest in the opinion of charitable minds, false and pernicious in the view of positivists who fear their power of contagion? This epistemological regime, which Latour calls “particular universalism,”25 is the foundation of the whole development of anthropology and legitimates its successes, so it is hard to imagine rejecting its hospitable welcome without incurring ostracism and risking sterile, if fascinating, wanderings among the mirages of singularities.





FIGURE 9. How ontological distribution affects the definition and properties of a subject



However, there is one way that would make it possible to reconcile the demands of scientific inquiry and a respect for the diversity of states of the world, a way not yet properly opened up but whose twists and turns the present book would like to indicate. I am content to call it relative universalism, not to be provocative or out of a taste for apparent contradictions, but giving the epithet “relative” the sense that it carries in the expression “a relative pronoun”—in other words, where it describes a relationship. Relative universalism takes as its starting point not nature and cultures, substances and minds, nor discriminations between primary qualities and secondary ones, but, instead, the relations of continuity and discontinuity, identity and difference, resemblance and dissimilarity that humans everywhere establish between existing beings, using the tools that they have inherited from their particular phylogenesis: a body, an intentionality, an aptitude for discerning differential gaps, an ability to weave with any human or nonhuman relations of attachment or antagonism, domination or dependence, exchange or appropriation, subjectivization or objectivization. Relative universalism does not demand that an equal materiality should at the outset be ascribed to all beings, along with the possibility of giving to them contingent meanings. It is content simply to detect salient discontinuities both in things and in the mechanisms of their apprehension and to accept, at least as a hypothesis, that the options for making use of that recognition are limited, either when one ratifies a phenomenal discontinuity or when one invalidates it by a continuity.

It is not hard to detect in this project the legacy of structural analysis according to which an element in the world acquires meaning only by contrast to other elements. However, the project that I have in mind is innocent of any methodological clause that insists that these elements and their relations be divided between the black boxes of culture and nature. Relative universalism has no need of any transcendental subject or any disembodied and immanent mind that acts as a catalyst of meanings. All that this program requires is a subject with no preconceptions as to the lived consciousness of others that would be based on his own experience of consciousness, but who nevertheless recognizes that the world offers to all and sundry the same kinds of ways of coming to grips with it, whatever cognitive and practical uses these lend themselves to: what is needed is a subject more attentive to the reality instituted by the intentional activity of the very diverse subjectivities whose products he studies than to the misleading self-evident assumptions of his own fundamental intentionality. For the latter constitutes no more than an imperfect filter, invariably contaminated by the historical causes that no epochē* can reduce. To be sure, that filter is indispensable but only because it is the only one available, and the subject in question needs to manage to objectivize it from outside, simply as one variation that is provisionally invested with the function of totalizing understanding by reason of the circumstances that surround him.




