PART THREE



The Dispositions of Being



To exist is to differ.



GABRIEL TARDE, Monadologie et sociologie





6





Animism Restored




If one strips the definition of animism of its sociological correlations, there remains one characteristic that everybody can accept and that the etymology of the term indicates, which is why I chose to preserve it despite the dubious uses made of it in the past. That characteristic is the attribution by humans to nonhumans of an interiority identical to their own. This attribution humanizes plants and, above all, animals, since the soul with which it endows them allows them not only to behave in conformity with the social norms and ethical precepts of humans but also to establish communicative relations both with humans and among themselves. This similarity of interiorities justifies extending a state of “culture” to nonhumans, together with all the attributes that this implies, ranging from intersubjectivity to a mastery of techniques and including ritualized conduct and deference to conventions. All the same, this humanization is not complete, since in animist systems these, as it were, humans in disguise (i.e., the plants and animals) are distinct from humans precisely by reason of their outward apparel of feathers, fur, scales, or bark—in other words, their physicality. As Viveiros de Castro notes in connection with Amazonia, it is not through their souls that humans and nonhumans differ but through their bodies.1 Durkheim had earlier made the same point when he remarked with his usual perspicacity that “two sorts of elements produced the idea of a person. One is essentially impersonal: it is the spiritual principle that serves as the soul of the collectivity. The principle is the very substance of which individual souls are made…. From a different point of view, if there are to be separate personalities, some factor must intervene to fragment and differentiate this principle; in other words, a principle of individuation is necessary. The body plays this role.”2 It matters little that, true to his doctrine, Durkheim confined that differentiating role of the body solely to human communities, for by doing so he put his finger on the general principle that the individuation of existing beings—and, I would add, their assignment to collective groups—can only operate through the interplay of the identities and contrasts that affect the respective attributes of the soul and those of the body.





Forms and Behavior Patterns



Animist systems use this difference in physicalities to introduce discontinuity into a universe peopled by persons with such disparate outward appearances yet at the same time so human in their motivations, feelings, and behavior. But what is the nature of this difference? It consists in the form and the mode of life that it prompts, far more than in substance. The fact is that the idea of a material continuity linking all organisms together is common to most animist ontologies. As Alexandre Surrallés notes in connection with the concepts of the Candoshi Indians of Peruvian Amazonia, all the entities in the world are made up of “a permanent potential and universal substratum. This implies a substance common to all material things in consequence of which the categorical boundaries between beings are considerably weakened.”3 Marie Mauzé makes a similar observation relating to the Indians of the Northwest coast of Canada: “They consider that animals are composed of an internal substance which, given that this is essentially human, has been transformed into an animal form by means of the skin.”4 Florence Brunois tells us that among the Kasua of the Great Plateau of Papua New Guinea, the bodies of humans, trees, and animals are all filled with the same substances: bebeta (blood), ma (a vaginal humor), and above all the omnipresent ibi (which means “stomach fat” but also “tilth” and “latex”), which is the source of the materiality of all organic and abiotic bodies.5 It is perhaps in this sense of a substantial continuity between all organisms that we should understand the words of Leenhardt’s Kanak informer that I quoted in chapter 1: “You didn’t bring us the spirit…. What you’ve brought us is the body.” Old Boesoou no doubt had in mind the absolute novelty of a Christian body (Leenhardt was also a missionary), that carnal principle contaminated by the defilement of original sin, the foil to the spirit and its life-giving immortality.6 But one could also read into this enigmatic remark a recognition of the discovery of a specifically human body, with its own peculiar kind of matter and internal mechanisms. Such a concept was bound to present a contrast to the pre-Christian concept of the human body in New Caledonia, which was founded on an identity of both structure and substance between human bodies and plants, a principle that is revealed not only by anatomical terminology but also by physiological and eschatological theories. But, as Leenhardt stresses, that identity between humans and plants relates only to matter and not to form, for the two types of organism each have “a different mode of existence,” so it would not be possible for them to develop, behave, feed, and reproduce in the same fashion.7

Ethnography places beyond doubt the fact that form is the crucial criterion of differentiation in animist ontologies. Thus, Anne Christine Taylor, commenting on the diversity of human and nonhuman “person-forms” among the Jivaros, writes: “The appearance of different species, generated in mythical times, implies the emergence of particular physical forms, and humans, like every other species, possess one of their own,” for “what distinguishes one species from another is definitely its outward clothing.”8 According to Kaj Århem, among the Makuna of Colombian Amazonia, humans, animals, and plants each possess a “phenomenological form” that distinguishes them from one another and a “spiritual essence” that they all share.9 In his study of the Arakmbut of Peruvian Amazonia, Andrew Gray writes: “The physical property of the body separates a person from all others.” So it is not the soul that constitutes the unique and essential aspect of a person, for “the body gives a distinct form to a person.”10 In his pioneering article on Ojibwa ontology, Irving Hallowell says more or less the same, but puts it the other way round. Pondering on what constitutes the distinctive characteristic of a person among these Indians of Canada, he decides that it is not his or her anthropomorphic aspect, since there also exist persons “of the other-than-human class” who “do not always present a human appearance.”11 So it is certainly the corporeal form that differentiates between humans and nonhumans, for the soul that all of them possess could not perform that function. Writing about the Chewong of Malaysia, Signe Howell observes: “Consciousness in this sense makes one a ‘personage’ … regardless of one’s outer shape (or ‘cloak,’ in Chewong parlance), be it that of gibbon, human, wild pig, frog, ramboutan fruit, bamboo leaf, the thunder-being, a specific boulder or whatever.” The Chewong apprehend the world as being composed “by a series of species-grounded conscious and unconscious beings, each with a different shape.”12

The question of the discontinuity of bodies is the obsessive theme that Amerindian myths convey at every opportunity. These are unusual stories about a time when humans and nonhumans were not differentiated, a time when, in the case of the Jivaro examples, it was perfectly normal for Nightjar to do the cooking, for Cricket to play the fiddle, for Hummingbird to clear the garden, and for Swift to go hunting with a blowpipe. In those days, animals and plants were masters of all the skills of civilization, communicated with one another with no difficulty, and abided by the major principles of social etiquette. As far as one can tell, their appearance was human, and only a few clues, such as their names and their strange behavior, indicated what they were to change into. Each myth tells of the circumstances that led to a change of form and of the actualization, in a nonhuman body, of an animal or a plant that up until then had existed in a state of potentiality. Jivaro mythology explicitly emphasizes this physical transformation, indicating the completion of the metamorphosis by the appearance of some anatomical feature or the emission of some communicative sound characteristic of that particular species. Thus, the Amerindian myths do not evoke an irreversible switch from nature to culture. Rather, they portray the emergence of “natural” discontinuities from an original “cultural” continuum within which humans and nonhumans were not clearly distinguished. However, this great movement of speciation does not result in a natural order identical to the one familiar to us, since, even if plants and animals now possess physicalities different from those of humans—and also, accordingly, mores that correspond to the biological equipment peculiar to each species—most of them have so far preserved the faculties that they enjoyed before they split into different species. These faculties were subjectivity, reflective consciousness, intentionality, the ability to communicate in a universal language, and so on. They are thus persons, clothed in the body of an animal or a plant, which they occasionally set aside in order to live a collective life analogous to that of humans. The Makuna, for example, maintain that tapirs paint themselves with roucou when they dance and that peccaries play horns during their rituals, while the Wari’ claim that peccaries make beer from maize and that jaguars take their prey home for their wives to cook.13

For many years such claims were regarded as evidence of thinking that was averse to logic and incapable of distinguishing reality from dreams and myths, or simply as figures of speech, metaphors, or wordplay. But the Makuna, the Wari’, and many other Amerindian peoples who make such claims are no more short-sighted or credulous than we are. They are well aware that a jaguar devours its prey raw and that a peccary does not cultivate maize plantations but lays them waste. It is the jaguar and the peccary themselves, they say, who see themselves as performing the very same gestures as humans and who, in all good faith, fancy that they share with the latter the same technology, the same social existence, and the same aspirations. In short, in their myths and in their daily lives as well, Amerindians do not regard what we call culture as the prerogative solely of humans, since there are many animals and even plants that are reputed to believe that they possess a culture and live in accordance with its norms. It thus becomes hard to ascribe to these peoples an awareness or presentiment of a distinction between nature and culture similar to that with which we are familiar but their whole way of thinking would appear to deny.

A last example, this time from New Guinea, will make it possible to form a clear idea of the role that the body plays as an ontological differentiator. According to André Iteanu, among the Orokaiva, the myth of the ganda pig serves as a didactic account that underlines the difference between wild pigs and humans. It is a classic story about a cross-species marriage, in this case between a girl and a pig that has taken on the appearance of a magnificently appareled man in order to seduce her. When she discovers the true nature of her husband and his cannibalistic intentions, the young wife returns to her native village, where her parents, assuming that her husband will be coming to reclaim her, wait for his arrival with weapons at the ready. The arrival of the pig-man is described as follows:



Because he came from very far away, he made the journey in the form of a pig, but at the entry to the village he once again turned himself into a man. First he took his skin off, and as he was now a man, he cut it up to form a loincloth of thin bark. Round his neck he hung an oral ganda ornament that he fashioned out of pig’s teeth. He attached his snout to a handle and turned it into a club; his bristles turned into a feathered headdress, which he tied to his head. He made his shield from his own ribs, still with their leather covering.14



In other words, the pig-form is here an envelope (the skin) and a collection of movable attributes (the teeth, the snout, the ribs covered by their leather carapace), all of which, once shed, reveal an anthropomorphic person and furthermore serve to adorn him as befits a man if he is to be, without question, what he appears to be. Among the Orokaiva, as in other regions of New Guinea and in the Americas, a man-form is thus not an apparently human anatomy in all its nakedness but is an adorned body, enriched and superdetermined by ornaments that, though borrowed from the animal and plant world, nevertheless acquire the function of rendering more tangible external discontinuities in cases where internal continuities may lead to dangerous confusions. For the purpose of making such adjustments to the body-form is certainly not to mark out humans from animals by imposing the seal of “culture” upon “nature,” especially given that what are used to create the desired effect are precisely parts transplanted from an animal. The wearing of feathers, teeth, skins, and masks with beaks, fangs, and tufts of bristles makes it possible, by using the very attributes that signal the discontinuity between the species, to differentiate, not men from animals, but different kinds of human species that resemble one another too closely in their original physicality. By sporting ornaments characteristic of particular species of animals, the members of neighboring tribes can manifest in their own appearances differences that are analogous to the differences between nonhuman persons.

The fact that differences of form are more common than differences of substance is hardly surprising when one remembers that animist ontologies seem to borrow some aspects of their operational schema from the model provided by the chain of life. In Amazonia, in the Arctic and circumpolar regions, and in the forests of Southeast Asia, time and again one encounters the same idea that vitality, energy, and fecundity all circulate constantly between organisms thanks to the capture, exchange, and consumption of different kinds of flesh. This ceaseless recycling of tissues and fluids, which is analogous to that which characterizes the interdependence of foodstuffs in the synecological process, makes it possible to understand how it is that all these beings that ingest one another can hardly be distinguished from the matter of which they are made. Furthermore, in animist systems, feeding prohibitions and prescriptions are designed not so much to prevent or promote the mixing of substances reputed to be heterogeneous (as in the case of Chinese or Galenic medicine); rather, their purpose is either to prevent or to render possible a transfer from a banned or an approved species: a transfer of particular anatomical features and the behavioral characteristics believed to stem from them. On the other hand, the place that each being occupies in the chain of life is determined very precisely by its organic equipment, for it is this that conditions both the medium of life that is possible for it—terrestrial, aquatic, or aerial—and also the type of resources that will be available to it, thanks to its particular organs for locomotion and for the acquisition of food.

The form taken by bodies covers more than just their physical conformation; it includes the entire package of biological equipment that makes it possible for a species to occupy a particular habitat and there develop the distinctive mode of life by which we immediately identify it. Thus, Tim Ingold, for example, defines human and nonhuman persons in circumpolar societies as follows: “A fundamental division is always recognized into two parts; an interior, vital part that is the source of all awareness, memory, intention and feeling, and an exterior, bodily covering that provides the equipment and confers the powers that are necessary to conduct a particular form of life.”15 That description holds good for all societies in which an animist mode of identification prevails. Against the background of an identical interiority, each class of beings possesses its own physicality, which is both the condition and the result of particular diets and a particular mode of reproduction. This produces an ethogram, that is, a specialized way of behaving, the detailed characteristics of which could not fail to be recognized by the observational faculties of peoples who depend for their subsistence upon an environment little affected by human intervention.

The Makuna have theorized this concept in their own particular way. As we have seen, these Indians of Colombian Amazonia define as masa (people) many plants and animals that are endowed with a soul that is identical to their own but that they daily feed upon. Before consuming any vegetables or meats, they therefore mentally chant an incantation the purpose of which is to decontaminate the food, that is, to strip it of all its harmful principles. Those principles, known as “weapons,” are regarded as similar to the powers that each species received as its share at the time of its mythical genesis: powers that determine a species’ feeding and reproductive habits and its means of protecting itself in its allotted habitat. Every group of “weapons”—itemized as wooden splinters, feathers, poison, saliva, blood, or semen—thus objectivizes a collection of biological properties and ethological dispositions reputed to be intrinsic to the identity of a species.16 A corporeal form is therefore indissociable from the behavior that it occasions, and in many myths and anecdotes that tell of a human being’s stay among a people whose appearance and manners are altogether human, it is always some unexpected detail in the customs of his hosts that suddenly alerts the visitor to the animal nature of those who have welcomed him; a dish of rotting meat politely served reveals vulture-people, an oviparous birth indicates snake-people, and a cannibalistic appetite points to jaguar-people.17





The Variations of Metamorphosis



If animals can, if they so wish, shed the corporeal envelope peculiar to their species and reveal the human dimension of their interiority, without losing the attributes of their behavior, it is because forms are fixed for each class of entities but are variable for the entities themselves.18 A classic feature of many animist ontologies is the ability to undergo metamorphosis that is recognized to belong to beings with an identical interiority. A human can be embodied in an animal or a plant; an animal can adopt the form of another animal; a plant or an animal can shed its outward clothing and reveal its objectivized soul in the body of a human being. Admittedly, in many cases, such transformations are attested only in myths that are well known to constitute quintessential tales of metamorphosis. But in the Americas at least, mythical figures are seldom relegated to the indefinite past in which they are said to have acquired their distinctive properties, for the effects of their well-meaning or hostile actions continue to be felt even today. Among the Jivaros, Nunkui, the creator of cultivated plants, still acts as the guardian of today’s gardens, and Jivaro women actively solicit her assistance. Among the Ojibwa, “it is taken for granted that all the ätíso ‘kanak [mythological beings] can assume a variety of forms”; and these beings like to come to listen to the myths told about them or, like “thunder birds,” to relay messages to humans.19 The manifestly lasting presence of these entities mistakenly described as “mythical” is nowhere more striking than in dreams, in which they usually appear in a human form. Among the Ojibwa, Hallowell reports that one of his informants, when still an adolescent, dreamed that he encountered the “master” of golden eagles in human form. Having transformed himself before the lad’s very eyes into a bird of that species, it invited him to follow it. The boy himself then took on the appearance of a golden eagle and flew off in the wake of his mentor.20

Often enough, it is perfectly “ordinary” human or nonhuman persons, that is, ones with no mythological antecedents, that are credited with this capacity of metamorphosis, thereby testifying to the normality of the interchangeability of forms among all those who possess the same subjectivity. However, this plasticity is not total, and some modes of embodiment are less frequent than others. Conversion from animal to human and from human to animal is a constant feature in animist ontologies: the former process reveals interiority, while the latter is an attribute of the power with which certain particular individuals (shamans, sorcerers, specialists in ritual) are credited, namely the power to transcend at will the discontinuity of forms and adopt as their vehicle the body of some animal species with which they maintain special relations.21 The metamorphosis of a human into a plant or of a plant into a human is not so common and even less common is that of an animal into another animal species.22 As for the possibility of the soul of a living human invading the body of another human, that does not seem to be attested in any animist ontologies: a fact that confirms the already classic recognition of the incompatibility, in principle, between possession and what, for convenience’s sake, is known as “shamanism.”23 The conclusion that may be drawn from this list of possible and impossible metamorphoses is that the common fund of interiority stems from the set of characteristics observable in human beings, while the discontinuity of physicalities is modeled on the astonishing diversity of animal bodies: on the world’s stage, the former provides the theme, while the latter testifies to the diversity of instruments with which it can be interpreted.

What is the function of this multiplicity of corporeal instruments in the concert of life, apart from the obvious one of demonstrating a number of irreducible differences between humans, animals, and plants? Its function is to allow analogous interiorities to avoid an excessive continuity by introducing between terms differences that are indispensable if those terms are to establish a relationship with one another. The discontinuity of forms and of the modes of life associated with them separates out distinct collectivities, each of which possesses characteristics that are defined by the anatomical equipment of its members and their habitat, and the behavior that these make possible. Among the Chewong, for example, “all ‘personages’ act culturally and socially, and as long as one behaves in conformity with the moral premises of one’s own species, one may not be in any sense condemned for one’s actions.” In Siberia, relations between animal species are regarded as resembling the relations between different tribes. In the circumpolar region, “animals, like humans, are reputed to establish communities of their own and the members of all those communities can visit one another.” The Cree of Canada believe that the animals that they hunt live in social groups similar to those of the Indians. The Oglala Sioux “invariably spoke of all animal categories as representing ‘peoples as we are.’” Finally, according to the Makuna, “animal communities are organized along the same lines as human societies…. Each species or community of animals is said to have its ‘culture,’ its knowledge, customs and goods, by means of which it sustains itself as a distinct class of beings.”24 So each species has a basic physical body that constitutes at the same time a body politic and a corpus of precepts; and although a change of form is always possible, such an operation does not affect the intrinsic identity of individuals. In short, what Howell says about metamorphosis among the Chewong can probably be generalized to cover all animist societies: “This can only be done for short periods and it is a risky business.”25

So what is the point of inhabiting another body? Quite apart from the fact that one risks being unable to regain one’s original form—a fate sometimes suffered by overbold shamans and by quite a few human mythical figures—this kind of process, taken literally, requires one to suspend many of the criteria of common sense. Yet, however much one insists that metamorphosis is “symbolic” and belongs to the register of metaphor or figurative speech, many people in different parts of the world, still today, claim that it is a fact “of nature” analogous to the growth of plants and the movement of heavenly bodies. The truth is that it offers a convenient solution, indeed the only one, to the problem of interaction on the same level between human and nonhuman persons that start off with completely distinct physicalities. For the Achuar, the Makuna, and the Chewong do not spend their lives changing into anacondas, tapirs, or tigers. Nor do these animals repeatedly reveal their disguised interiority to human beings. Most of the time each of the predators feeds on its prey with the equipment that it possesses; relations between the different classes of beings are determined by the kinds of physicality that they possess—that is to say, in accordance with their respective ethograms. But given that the interiorities of predators and prey are reputed to be identical, there must arise situations in which their shared ontological destinies can find clear expression in some kind of communication between different collectivities that are separated by their bodies. Not that the moments in which a physical relationship predominates can be clearly separated from moments when two souls communicate. The example of an Achuar hunter mentioned earlier shows that such a distinction really makes no sense. The man is not solely engaged in a tracking operation in which he uses all the knowledge that he has embodied. He is at the same time careful to maintain a tenuous connection that links his interiority with that of his prey, and he does this by means of incantations that he addresses to the animal. However, for a metamorphosis in the strict sense to take place and for it successfully to confirm in a truly intersubjective experience the properties that are ascribed to the beings of the world, a further step needs to be taken, one that breaks through the barrier constituted by forms. And this is possible only in two sets of circumstances: either when plants and animals or the spirits that are their hypostases visit humans, taking on the same appearance as the latter (usually in dreams) or else when humans, generally shamans, go to visit those same entities. In both cases, the visitor assumes a position that puts him on the same footing as his hosts, for this is necessary if he is to establish communication, and this he does by adopting the same costume as those he is addressing. Nonhumans reveal their interiority by taking on the form of human physicality; humans abandon their own physicality in order to take on that of a nonhuman or so as to move freely within the world of interior forms. That is how the visitor signals that he is adopting the point of view of those he has come to meet.

Thus, metamorphosis is not an unveiling or a disguise. Rather, it constitutes the ultimate phase in a relationship in which each party, by modifying the viewpoint imposed upon him by his original physicality, endeavors to coincide with the perspective in which he imagines that the other party sees itself. Through this shift in the angle of his approach, in which each party seeks to “enter the skin” of the other, by identifying with his supposed intentionality, the human no longer sees the animal as he usually does but, instead, sees it as that animal sees itself, that is, as a human, while a shaman is perceived, not as he usually sees himself, but as he wishes to be seen, that is, as an animal. What is involved is really not so much a metamorphosis as an anamorphosis.





Animism and Perspectivism



This merry-go-round of points of view is bound to evoke what Viveiros de Castro calls “perspectivism,” the concept by which he designates the positional quality of Amerindian cosmologies. He has developed the nature and implications of this with regard to the definition of animism that I had originally suggested.26 Viveiros de Castro takes as his starting point the perceived fact that, in the eyes of many autochthonous peoples of the Americas, the following is the case: “Typically, humans see humans as humans, animals as animals and spirits (if they see them) as spirits; however, animals (predators) and spirits see humans as animals (as prey) to the same extent that animals (as prey) see humans as spirits or as animals (predators). By the same token, animals and spirits see themselves as humans; they perceive themselves as (or become) anthropomorphic beings when they are in their own houses or villages, and they experience their own habits and characteristics in the form of culture.”27

Can this thesis of different perspectives illuminate the problem of animism by providing the key to a better understanding of the exact nature of the difference between humans and nonhumans, all of which are endowed with a human essence? In an attempt to answer this question, Viveiros de Castro first considers the Amerindian ethnonyms usually translated as “human beings,” “people,” or “persons,” which are usually interpreted as signs of an ethnocentric propensity to reserve the generic noun “humanity” solely for the tribe that considers that it has a right to it. However, if one envisages these terms from the point of view of pragmatics, not syntactics—that is, as pronouns rather than nouns—“they indicate the position of the subject; they constitute an enunciative marker, not a name.”28 Far from being indicators of ontological exclusion, such ethnonyms simply characterize the point of view of the speaker (“people” would thus here be synonymous with “us”). Thus, when they say that nonhumans are persons endowed with a soul, Amerindians are in reality conferring upon them a position as enunciators that defines them as subjects: “Whatever possesses a soul is a subject, and whatever has a soul is capable of having a point of view.”29 “Perspectivism” thus expresses the idea that any being that occupies a referential point of view, being in the position of subject, sees itself as a member of the human species. The human bodily form and human culture are deictics of the same type as ethnonymic self-designations. But that is not to say that perspectivism is a relativism in which each kind of subject forges for itself a different representation of a material world that nevertheless always remains identical, since the life of nonhumans is governed by the same values as that of humans: just like humans, nonhumans hunt fish and make war. According to Viveiros de Castro, what are different are the actual things that they perceive: if animals see humans as predator-animals and blood as manioc beer, that is because the point of view from where they stand depends on their bodies and their bodies differ from ours in the intrinsic dispositions that they manifest. The emphasis that animist ontologies lay on the discontinuity of forms should therefore be regarded as a sign of the heterogeneity of the habitus that a body incorporates as the seat of a particular perspective: “Whatever is activated or ‘agented’ by the point of view will be a subject.”30

At this point it is not possible for me to comment appropriately upon these subtle propositions, to which my summary does scant justice; and besides, they form part of a more general theory of Amerindian cosmologies that represent work still in progress. So I shall simply discuss their implications with regard to the relations between animism and perspectivism. However, I cannot resist the temptation of first noting a little paradox: this interpretation of perspectivism that Viveiros de Castro presents as an alternative to the sociocentric thesis of a “projection” (of social categories on to the natural world) concurs with a penetrating remark made by Durkheim, the most illustrious advocate of the latter thesis. In his study of the role played by the body as a principle of individuation, to which I have already alluded, Durkheim remarks that such a contrastive function devolved upon it since “bodies are distinct from one another, since they occupy different positions in time and space, each is a special milieu in which the collective representations are gradually refracted and coloured differently.” Like Viveiros de Castro, Durkheim was inspired by Leibniz: “For Leibniz, the content of all the monads is identical. All, in fact, are consciousnesses that express one and the same object: the world…. However, each expresses it from its own point of view and in its own manner. We know how this difference of perspectives arises from the fact that the monads are differently placed with respect to one another and with respect to the whole system they comprise.”31 This unexpected antecedent certainly in no way diminishes the originality of the solution proposed by Viveiros de Castro, namely that the human form and culture that Amerindians attribute to animals are, as it were, cosmological deictics that are immanent in points of view. But can this argument be generalized to cover the whole group of animist ontologies?

In “standard” animism, humans maintain that nonhumans perceive themselves as humans because, despite their different forms, they all possess similar interiorities (souls, subjectivities, intentionalities, enunciative positions). To this, perspectivism appends an additional clause: humans claim that nonhumans see humans not as humans but as nonhumans (animal predators or spirits). In short, what we have here is a logical possibility in the interplay between the two positions: if humans see themselves with a human form and see nonhumans with nonhuman forms, then nonhumans who see themselves with a human form should see humans with a nonhuman form. But this crossed inversion of the two points of view, which is a defining characteristic of perspectivism, is by no means attested in all animist systems. A number of fine examples are to be found in the Americas, particularly in myths, and also, albeit much less commonly, in Asia.32 Of course, it may be that sources are laconic on this point, but that seems unlikely when one bears in mind that where cases of perspectivism are reported in a society, they are supported, even in an allusive fashion, by almost all the ethnographers who have visited it. That is a sure sign that this feature is sufficiently noticeable for it to be unlikely to escape the attention of observers, particularly in the Americas, where it is nowadays rare for an Amerindian group to have been studied by only one person.

The most common situation, typical of most animist ontologies, is, rather, one in which humans say no more than that nonhumans perceive themselves as humans. But how do nonhumans envisage humans if perspectivism does not come into it, that is, if they do not apprehend them as nonhumans? On this particular point, ethnographic studies have little to say. But that is no doubt because the answer seems so obvious that, unlike in the case of perspectivism, nobody bothers to record it: that answer is that nonhumans can apprehend humans only in their human form.33 That is hardly surprising when one bears in mind that humans and nonhumans are reputed to engage in one-on-one personal relationships, characterized by precisely defined regimes of sociability and systems of attitudes (such as friendship, seduction, maternity, affinity, and the authority of elders). Unless they consciously resort to deception, the humans who adopt these regimes vis-à-vis nonhumans are bound to expect that they will elicit from the nonhumans a reciprocal pattern of behavior. If I conform to the conventional way of treating brothers-in-law in my behavior toward a monkey that, I believe, perceives itself as a human, I surely must (unless I prefer to deceive myself) expect that monkey to respond to me in the same fashion, that is, consider me according to a “human code,” not a “jaguar code” or an “anaconda code.” For a human can establish a prescribed social relationship with a nonhuman that regards itself as a human, whereas a nonhuman could not act toward the human in similar fashion if it did not attribute to him the same humanity that it believes itself to possess; and that humanity is best manifested by the human corporeality that the nonhuman perceives the human to possess. To be sure, the nonhuman might apprehend the human in a nonhuman form, yet still assume that the human apprehends himself as a human being, but that would presuppose that, through a reflective conversion, the nonhuman was aware that it was itself not a human, despite the human form that it believed itself to be inhabiting. However, that does not really seem likely, nor, so far as I know, is it confirmed by ethnography.

So a new question now arises. If the most common situation in an animist regime is one in which nonhumans regard humans as humans, how can they distinguish themselves from humans, given that they also see themselves as humans? From the point of view of ethnography, the only plausible answer is that nonhumans distinguish themselves from humans (and from one another) by the behavior patterns that are determined by the biological equipment peculiar to each species, habits that persist in their bodies even when they regard these to be human. As we have seen, the discontinuity between forms is one means of signifying discontinuities in ways of living, not with respect to the general characteristics of social existence, which are common to both humans and nonhumans, but from the point of view of modes of subsistence, types of habitat, and the specific dispositions that their particular physical conformation both prompts and expresses. Now, if the members of each class of beings regard themselves as humans, they nevertheless do not see other classes as possessing a humanity exactly identical to their own, since the customs peculiar to each class clearly differ from one another. In all probability, a tapir reputed to regard itself as a human being does not perceive humans in a form altogether similar to that which the Indians claim it imputes to itself. In a perfect world (for the tapirs, of course, not the Indians), tapirs and Indians would live together in perfect understanding, maybe sharing the same village and exchanging wives and goods. But the Indians have a distressing habit of hunting the tapirs, as the latter, despite their shared humanity, cannot have failed to notice. Furthermore, as the tapirs see it, Indians live in villages that are different from their own, and their chiefs and shamans are different too and so is their food, particularly since they consume tapirs. Here, the perspectivist solution would be to say that tapirs that suffer attacks from the Indians regard the latter as jaguars or cannibalistic spirits, as certain Amerindian societies do indeed claim, and so, being in the position of prey, they are unable to perceive certain human features (their physical appearance, their villages, and their institutions) that render humans identical to the tapirs’ image of themselves. In contrast, in an ordinary animist solution, tapirs do see that humans possess certain social and anthropomorphic attributes that, by and large, resemble those that they think they themselves possess, but they also realize that humans are different from themselves according to other criteria, the kind to which an Amerindian would resort in order to identify members of a neighboring and probably enemy tribe, by referring to their different customs and body ornamentation. In other words, even if nonhuman persons apprehend their own bodies in terms of human morphology, they are also aware of the fact that their bodies differ, mainly through their respective dispositions (e.g., dispositions to flee or attack, daytime or nighttime customs, solitariness or gregariousness). They also know that they differ in the manner in which they present themselves to others when in action (through their costumes, ornamentation, gestures, the types of weapons and tools that they use, and the languages that they speak). For physicality—the basis of discontinuity between species—amounts to more than naked anatomy. It distinguishes that discontinuity in many ways of using bodies, of presenting them and extending their functions. These are all elements that add a particular form of activity in the world to the forms given at birth.

As Viveiros de Castro himself says, perspectivism is “an ethnoepistemological corollary of animism.”34 By postulating the reversed symmetry of points of view, perspectivism ingeniously exploits the possibility opened up by the difference in physicalities upon which animism is founded. But that is a graft that many peoples in the animist archipelago have not attempted, not for lack of imagination or of aptitude for reflective conversion, but perhaps because it introduces an extra layer of complexity into a positional ontology in which, in all the situations that daily life throws up, it is already difficult enough to attribute stable identities to the beings that one encounters. We are a long way away from the reassuring world of Being and existing beings, of primary and secondary qualities, of perennial archetypes and of knowledge as revelation. For all those weary of an overuniform world, that realization is surely cause for a measure of rejoicing.





7





Totemism as an Ontology




Defining animism as a combination of resemblance in interiorities and difference in physicalities led me to return once again to the question of totemism—not totemism as a classificatory method such as Lévi-Strauss’s Totemism suggested, with an explanation at once authoritative and beguiling, but totemism in its specifically ontological aspects, which Lévi-Strauss set aside the better to open up an intellectualist approach to the phenomenon, an approach that would supersede earlier speculations on the indistinctness of humans and nature in the thinking of primitive peoples. Taking as his starting point the principle that totemism is a mystification, Lévi-Strauss maintains that the artificial unity of this notion stems from a confusion between two problems in the minds of anthropologists: “The first problem is that posed by the frequent identification of human beings with plants or animals, and which has to do with very general views of the relations between man and nature, relations which concern art and magic as much as society and religion. The second problem is that of the designation of groups based on kinship, which may be done with the aid of animal or vegetable terms but also in many other ways. The term ‘totemism’ covers only cases in which there is a coincidence of the two orders.”1

It is above all the second of those two elements in the definition of totemism that captures the attention of Lévi-Strauss, for this is what leads to the classificatory solution already sensed by Franz Boas forty years earlier: the homology of differential gaps between, on the one hand, a natural series (that of the eponymous species) and, on the other, a cultural series (that of social segments). As for the first element, that is, the identification of humans with nonhumans, in the solution adopted by Lévi-Strauss it remains as a kind of mechanism of self-persuasion that reinforces the operational efficacy of totemic classifications in societies in which “a general tendency to postulate intimate relationships between man and natural beings or objects is put to good use for concretely qualifying classes of relatives or supposed relatives.”2 Yet, seen for themselves and not simply in their function of assisting the categorization of humans, in certain totemic configurations these “intimate relations” between humans and other natural beings present features that are altogether unique. In truth, Lévi-Strauss was himself aware of this aspect, for he devotes long passages in The Savage Mind to societies with totemic clans in which a deep physical and psychic affinity between humans and their totems is assumed. Citing the case of the island dwellers of the Torres Strait, of the Menomini of the Great Lakes, and, further to the north, of the Chippewa, he emphasizes the fact that, in this kind of case, each totemic group will be considered on its own and will “tend to form a system no longer with other social groups but with particular differentiating properties regarded as hereditary.”3 This produces among the totemic segments an intrinsic diversity that is truly ontological and that likens them to castes. In such systems, in contrast to the interpretation proposed in Totemism, the homology no longer refers to the differential relations between two series of terms (clan 1 differs from clan 2 just as an eagle differs from a bear); rather, it refers to the terms themselves (clan 1 is like the eagle; clan 2 is like the bear). “Two images, one social and the other natural and each articulated separately, will be replaced by a socio-natural image, single but fragmented.”4 In short, if it is true that totemism belongs on a quite different level from animism when it is considered in its classificatory version (the homology of relations), its “fusional” dimension (the homology of terms) can offer an interesting approach that leads to justifying treating it as a mode of identification.5

Australia is the continent that, at the end of the nineteenth century, prompted the most extravagant conjectures as to the nature of totemism, so it will come as no surprise to find that it is here that the exceptional properties that it manifests are expressed most clearly. Thanks to excellent early ethnographic descriptions, Australia came to illustrate par excellence for Durkheim, Frazer, Rivers, and even Freud, a system of social organization and a mode of relating to nature that, according to early observers, were characterized by the fact that each individual “belongs to a group of persons, each of whom bears the name of, and is especially associated with, some natural object.”6 Ever since that period, specialists studying Australia were struck by the diversity of the forms of totemism present on this continent and, at the same time, by the impression of unity nevertheless conveyed by the general principles of social segmentation and affiliation that were peculiar to the Aboriginals and to their conceptions of a person and of the environment. This apparent contradiction was explained by an endogenous evolution over a very long period of time (close on seventy thousand years), in the course of which the earliest occupants of Australia had scattered in various directions into the country’s vast territories and, apart from regional neighbors, had little contact with one another. It was supposed that each group consequently developed its own institutions, borrowing from neighboring groups or in contrast to them and producing many variations to the initial model assumed to have been common to them all. It matters little, at this point, whether this diversification of social organization and rites resulted from a combination of diffusion through migrations and local developments or from an ecological and demographic adaptation of social modes of occupying space in very different environments, which was another possibility.7 Whatever the source of those variations, the common structural characteristics that they all manifest are obvious enough for it to be possible, in the wake of ethnologists specializing in Australia, to treat this cultural region as a whole that is, in some respects, remarkably homogeneous.





Dreaming



The most original feature of Australian totemism is certainly the fact that it is rooted in a remarkable cosmological and etiological system that it has become customary to call “Dreamtime” or “Dreaming” in English.8 “Dreaming,” known as alchera, was described for the first time by Baldwin Spencer and Franck Gillen, who were working among the Aranda of the central desert. At a first approximation, it can be said to evoke all that relates to the time when the world took shape, as this is related in the ritual accounts that accompany totemic ceremonies. These tell of primeval beings that long ago emerged from the depths of the earth at precisely identified sites. Some embarked upon peregrinations punctuated by many ups and downs, the routes and stopping places of which are still detectable in the material environment, in the form of rocks, water sources, woods, and seams of ocher. These beings vanished as suddenly as they had appeared, either in the very place where they had emerged or else where their journeys came to an end, each one of them having left behind some of the many existing beings of today: humans, plants, and animals, together with all their respective totemic affiliations and the names that designate them, religious rites and objects, and all the organic and inorganic elements of the landscape. These beings from Dreamtime, which are both the engenderers and the prototypes of social and physical reality, are generally represented as hybrids, part human and part nonhuman, divided into different totemic groups already at the time of their arrival. They are human with respect to their behavior, their mastery of language, the intentionality that they manifest in their actions, and the social codes that they respect and institute, but they have the appearance and bear the names of plants or animals and are the origin of stocks of spirits deposited at the sites where they themselves disappeared. These spirits have since been embodied in individuals of the species or the object that they represent and in humans who have taken that species or object as their totem.

“Dreaming” is not just an Aboriginal way of referring to the mythical times that many peoples trace back to a fabled genesis of beings and things. For at the time of that “World-Dawn,” as Radcliffe-Brown put it, a movement of continuous generation took off, the effects of which can still be felt.9 The potential left by the beings of Dreamtime in various sites and routes is constantly realized by successive embodiments of their spirits in entities of various kinds and thanks to the rites, the naming procedures, and the repeated journeys by means of which the Aboriginals make the hidden presence of these entities tangible and alive. For they are entities that, by modeling beings and things, gave meaning and order to the world. Dreamtime is thus neither a remembered past nor a retroactive present. Rather, it is an expression of the eternity that is confirmed in space, an invisible framework for the cosmos that guarantees the permanence of its ontological subdivisions. As for the beings of Dreamtime, they cannot be likened to classic mythical heroes, since their organizing impetus, partly given solid material form by various features in the landscape, has continued without interruption even since they abandoned the earth’s surface. Nor are they ancestors, in the strict sense, since every existing being, whether human or nonhuman, is linked to the entity that determines it in a direct relationship of duplication, actualization, or formation rather than through an affiliation that unfolds from one generation to the next. Thus, in Australia, totemic organization, that is to say, this association between nonhuman entities and phenomena and groups of human persons, stems from a process that both is originating and also continues ceaselessly to stabilize essences and forms of life that are already differentiated into classes and types, within which social and physical components are inextricably intermingled. As Spencer and Gillen write in their study of the Aranda, “the identity of the human individual is often sunk in that of the animal or plant from which he is supposed to have originated.”10 But that mixed identity itself combines behavioral features, ritual instruments and objects, taxonomies at once sociological and biological, names and stories, and sites and journeys. All are elements that it would be hard to distribute to one side or the other of an imaginary line drawn between nature and culture.





An Australian Inventory



The cosmological framework of Dreaming is, by and large, valid for the whole of Aboriginal Australia, allowing for a few variations concerning greater or lesser latitude in the elaboration of a totemic interpretation of dreams that prompt ritual innovations, the degree of the personalization of the Dream-beings, and the extension in space of their itineraries. On the other hand, the relations between individuals and their totems vary widely, as do modes of totemic affiliation and the part that these play in social organization, the definition of statuses, and the interplay of matrimonial alliances. In the 1930s, Adolphus P. Elkin produced the first reasoned inventory of the diverse variants of Australian totemism, an undertaking conducted in the spirit of the functionalism of the period, that is, essentially based on the manner in which totemic divisions play an integrating role in the various social systems recorded throughout the continent.11 But before tackling Elkin’s typology, a brief ethnographic reminder of the nature of these systems and their distribution is necessary.

In a few regions along the north coast and in the southeastern quarter, there were tribes organized in local exogamous groups that recognized no internal divisions. However, the great majority of Australian societies were characterized by a more or less complex segmentation into classes. The simplest forms were represented by societies with exogamous moieties in which every individual belonged to one or other of the two named classes and had to find a spouse in the opposite class. Such forms were to be found in a number of different regions that varied according to whether the moieties were of patrilinear or matrilinear affiliation. The societies with patrilinear moieties were mostly located in the northern part of the continent, between Dampier Land and the Cape York peninsula, while the societies with matrilinear moieties mostly occupied the southern zone. As well as these societies with exogamous moieties, there were also groups with endogamous and generational moieties. Nowadays these are represented by the Aluridja tribes of the south, where a man or a woman can marry only within his or her own moiety, not into the moiety that encompasses older generations (his or her father and mother) and younger ones (his or her children). Societies that have a “four-section system” may be considered logical extensions of the system of exogamous moieties on to which a criterion of residence is grafted: for example, two matrilinear moieties (the most common case) called A and B whose members are distributed into two local groups known as 1 and 2, with the wives and children living with their husband/father, since in Australia residence is always patrilocal. In such a case, a man from moiety A of local group 1 (A1) is obliged to marry a woman from moiety B of local group 2 (B2), and their children are affiliated to B1 since they belong to the moiety of their mother (B) and the local group of their father (1); the B1 children will themselves have to marry into the opposite moiety and into a local group distinct from theirs (A2). These four-section systems, often labeled Kariera, after a western coastal tribe, were mainly present in the desert regions of the northwest, the northeast, and in much of the southeast. Systems with eight subsections follow the same principle, but with four local groups instead of two. In a society with matri-moieties, such as the Aranda, a man from moiety A and local group 1 marrying a woman from moiety B and local group 3 will have children classed as B1; an A2 man marrying a B4 woman will engender B2 children; an A3 man marrying a B2 woman will engender B3 children; and an A4 man marrying a B1 woman will engender B4 children. Similarly, switching moieties, a B1 man marrying an A4 woman will have A1 children; a B2 man marrying an A3 woman will engender A2 children; a B4 man marrying an A2 woman will engender A4 children; and a B3 man marrying an A1 woman will engender A3 children. These systems with eight subsections are common among tribes in central Australia and can be found in the north as far away as Arnhem Land and the Cape York peninsula. Finally, we should note that although the names designating sections or subsections may differ from one language or dialect to another, the general classification system remains similar, and this makes it possible to integrate individuals born in other tribes into the class that corresponds to them.

Falling with a greedy curiosity upon the Australian facts, nascent anthropology had assumed that there was a direct link between these class systems and the institution of totemism as an operator of exogamy, with the obligation to marry outside one’s totem constituting a convenient imperative the better to integrate atomized local groups through marriage. But Elkin’s inventory split Australian totemism into a multitude of apparently heterogeneous types and unambiguously showed that some of those types played no role at all in the functioning of matrimonial alliances. Elkin thus apparently ruined any hope of demonstrating a systematic link between totemic classifications and forms of social organization throughout the continent. Lévi-Strauss’s criticisms of him on this score were all the more vehement because that was precisely the objective that he himself had in mind.12 My own ambition is quite different, so it is not this consequence of Elkin’s typology that arrests my interest but rather certain characteristics that it reveals relating to the specific ontological characteristics of Australian totemism.

The first form of totemism that Elkin considers is the so-called individual totemism. Among the tribes of the southeast, he describes a particular relationship between a sorcerer and an animal species, generally of reptiles. Members of this species act as the sorcerer’s assistants, carrying disease or a cure to distant places and acting as his spies. Among the Kurnai, it is said that the sorcerer carries within him the spirit of the species that assists him and that this can also be externalized and materialize in a tamed animal. Among the Yualayi, a sorcerer can entrust an animal of his particular totemic species (what Elkin calls his alter ego) to a sick person in order for its power to cure him or her. The Yualayi also claim that a wound inflicted upon a totemic animal causes suffering to the sorcerer associated with that species. A whole series of differences are immediately detectable when one compares this individual totemism of the Australian southeast with the particular links forged between humans and certain animals in animist systems. The relations between an Amazonian or Siberian shaman and the spirits of his animal assistants, or between an ordinary man and his animal guardian or companion in North America, always involve individual creatures, not whole species, even if the animal may sometimes serve as an intermediary among its fellow creatures. In contrast, in Australia a relationship is established with a species considered as an indissociable whole, and the tamed animal that the sorcerer parades is no more than an individual expression of the characteristics that are peculiar to the species in general. Furthermore, in animist systems, human and animal persons are clearly distinguished, and it is precisely this that makes it possible to construct a wide range of dyadic relations between the two kinds of individuals. In contrast, an Australian sorcerer’s person seems completely fused with the animal species that he has adopted as his totem. The essence of that species has become his own essence, and he himself physically feels everything that affects any member of the animal group whose destiny he has now espoused. So here, it is not a matter of an alliance or a contract of assistance between the sorcerer and his totemic species. Instead, a hybridization is both sought and assumed, the end purpose of which is certainly social (i.e., either the treatment or the dissemination of misfortune among humans). But to produce a concrete realization of this, it is necessary to acquire properties that are shared with an animal species.

“Sexual” totemism is likewise common among the tribes of the southeast. This involves dividing the sexes into two mutually exclusive totemic classes, each symbolized by some species, usually an animal one: the bat for men, the owl for women, for the Kamilaroi and the Wotjobaluk; the bat and the woodpecker, for the Worimi; and so on. The exact nature of the relationship between the sexual group and the eponymous species is not clear from the data. The Wotjobaluk say that “a bat’s life is a man’s life,” thereby implying an affinity between their forms of existence, while the Kurnai instead emphasize a shared affiliation: “Every descendant of Yeerung [emu-wren] is a brother, every descendant of Djeetgun [superb warbler] is a sister.”13 So here one certainly detects the general idea that humans and nonhumans share certain common properties that are stable enough to be passed down from one generation to another. However, the idea is expressed much more vaguely than it is in the case of individual totemism.

Although Elkin brackets alongside sexual totemism the “conceptional” totemism of the Aranda and the Aluridja, the principle seems quite different from that of sexual totemism. The totem of each child is not determined by sex or filiation but by the place where the child’s mother became aware of her pregnancy, either by actually being there or by visiting it in a dream. The place in question is, of course, a totemic site, that is, a place where a Being from Dreamtime has deposited the child-souls of its totemic species, one of which is said to penetrate the womb of the mother and there to form the newborn child. An Aranda child will thus not necessarily have the same totem as its father, its mother, or its brothers and sisters, since here the subsections that function as matrimonial classes bear no relation at all to totemic affiliations. We shall be returning in more detail to Aranda conceptional totemism, but we can already learn something from it. Sexual totemism allows for collective categorizations on the basis of a homology of differences (men are to women what wrens are to warblers). But conceptional and individual totemisms clearly stem from a different model: both are primarily determined by the ontological definition of a human person conceived as sharing certain intrinsic characteristics with a particular totemic species.

Do the other collective totemisms that Elkin studies really operate differently? At first sight and as in sexual totemism, the function of the totems of moieties, sections, and subsections seems to be to use distinctive emblems to overdetermine classes of individuals that appear to be organized by and for marriage. However, the justifications put forward in each case for the totemic affiliation allow us to glimpse other principles at work. Let us start with the totemism of moieties. In its matrilinear variant it symbolizes sharing a common life founded on an inheritance of the same flesh and blood passed down by mothers. This is an identifying substance the origin of which, as we shall later see, can be traced back to the moieties’ eponymous animals, which are generally two species of birds. Meanwhile, the totemism of patri-moieties instead refers to two species of kangaroos and is combined with local totemic cults the responsibility for which is usually passed down a paternal line. The exogamy of moieties is not as strict or as automatic as its dualist organization might suggest, for, according to Elkin, here totemism is first and foremost a means of distributing all existing beings within two major classes, the members of which—humans, animals, plants, objects, and totems—present affinities with the two species that serve as the principal totems.

From this point of view, the totemism of sections presents the same characteristics as the totemism of moieties: it operates according to a fourfold partition of the entities of the cosmos “on the basis of the kinship which is held to exist between the human beings and the natural species.”14 The same principle applies for the totemism of groups with eight subsections, but with two variants and one exception: either the totems of the subsections are directly associated with sites of totemic child-souls and thus find themselves invested with a generative function that reinforces the common attributes shared by the human members of the subsection and their localized totems; or else they are more specifically categorial and may exist alongside a totemism of child-soul sites and a religious totemism, which are totally distinct from it. The third possibility, as among the Aranda, is that totemic affiliations have no link at all with subsections nor, therefore, with marriage. As can be seen, the characters of the kinds of totemism present in the various class systems are extremely diverse: most clearly have a classificatory dimension of a cosmological or ontological type rather than a strictly sociological one, the general idea being that there exist shared properties, even if they are only vaguely defined, between humans, nonhumans, and the totems that encompass them. But the totems may or may not be associated with matrimonial classes, transmitted through filiation or linked to ceremonial sites and local deposits of child-souls left by the Dream-beings.

Such diversity is even more noticeable in the last major type of totemism envisaged by Elkin, namely “clan” totemism. Australian clans may be either patrilinear or matrilinear, but some are also “native” in the sense that they incorporate all individuals conceived or born at the same totemic site. Matrilinear clan totemism is based on the principle that all persons linked in an ascendant matrilinear line share the same corporeal substance (flesh and blood) derived ultimately from the totemic entity from which the clan emerged. This shared physicality leads to strict exogamy and a prohibition against the consumption of the totemic species, since no individual should ingest the same substance as itself. In the tribes to the northwest of Victoria, this material indissociability of certain humans and certain nonhumans is confirmed by the belief that to kill a member of a person’s totemic species causes that person to suffer a real wound, as was also the case in individual totemism. Here, the totem “is more than a name or emblem; something of the life of man is in the life of the totemic species, and vice-versa.”15 Finally, as in the case of moieties, the principal totem and the species that embodies it constitute the apex of a hierarchy of secondary totems and species, so that the combination, within a single society, of all the totems, subtotems, and affiliated species takes on the aspect of an exhaustive system for categorizing the cosmos.

In contrast to matrilinear clan totemism, patrilinear clan totemism allows for a perfect coincidence between a clan and a local exogamous group whose link with the totem is materialized by and in the territory that the two inhabit together: the spirits or essences of each of the members of the local group are reputed to proceed, generation after generation, from the sites of which they are the guardians and which were the scenes of the exploits of Dream-beings belonging to the same totem as themselves. In the case of a matrilinear clan, the relation between the clan members and their totem is of a substantial nature. But in a patrilinear clan it stems from an intimate solidarity between the humans and the totemic beings, a solidarity that is nourished and strengthened by an identical spiritual genesis and an identical sacred geography—in short, by the same identificatory rooting in what may, justifiably, be called the genius of the place. Finally, native clan totemism is simply a way of associating in one sui generis group individuals who share the same totemic class of child-souls because the latter were incorporated into their mothers at their conception (among the Aranda) or at their birth (in southwestern Australia), on the very same totemic sites formed by the Dream-beings. This kind of totemic clan has nothing to do with marriage (it is not exogamous) and should instead be regarded as a religious collective, the depository of etiological stories, secret knowledge, and rites concerning the Dream-being from which its members are descended. The latter are in duty bound to use their esoteric knowledge and prerogatives in ceremonies designed to celebrate their totem and ensure the well-being and fecundity of the totemic species produced from the same site as themselves, whose essence and destiny they share. Just as in patrilinear classic totemism, religious totemism (and “dream totemism,” which is one of its individual variants) is thus based on the spiritual identification of humans, totems, and the species affiliated to them: each of these is present in the world as a particularized expression of one and the same immaterial prototype with a physical embodiment.

By cutting up Australian totemism into a dozen distinctive forms, Elkin rendered null and void the idea that it might constitute a single regulating mechanism that applied throughout the continent and was associated with a certain type of institution or marriage rule. In many tribes, several forms of totemism coexist, fulfilling different functions. Thus, in the northwest of southern Australia, an individual may be linked in diverse ways to as many as five heterogeneous classes of totems: he possesses or is possessed by one or several moiety totems but also by sexual totems and the totems of a matrilinear clan, of a religious site inherited from his father, and, secondarily, of another religious site inherited through the matrilineal line of his mother’s brother, although this is one that he cannot transmit to his children. All the same, is it legitimate to infer from this painstaking deconstruction that Australian totemism does not exist, at least not in the form of a systematic whole, but simply amounts to an anthropological fiction that mixes together, in a great dogmatic potpourri, social and natural taxonomies, concepts of a person, and rites, myths, and beliefs between which no logical link exists? That would be to leap too hastily to a conclusion and to ascribe more importance to ostensible differences than to certain resemblances that Elkin’s inventory reveals.

Admittedly, Elkin himself, although convinced of the underlying religious unity of Australian totemism, provides scant help for elucidating its principles. His clearest contribution consists in noting that all the forms that he has identified are based on a belief in the “oneness of life, which is shared by man and natural species,” adding that laying claim to a totemic name is not prompted solely by the need for a group to have a distinctive emblem, “for the name stands for a community of nature between the group and its totem.”16 Apart from his tirelessly repeated assertion that humans share the same “form of life” as their totemic species, Elkin has little to say when it comes to defining exactly wherein lies this common nature. At the very most, his inventory indicates the prevalence of two major varieties of hybridization between humans and nonhumans, totems included. One type refers to the sharing of one and the same substance (flesh, blood, skin) and concerns above all matrilinear totems, those of moieties and clans, and also the totemism of subsections when this is linked to localized religious sites. The other is based on an identical essence or principle of individuation that is engendered by the regular incorporation of the child-souls of a totemic site into both humans and nonhumans. This is most clearly manifest in conceptional totemism, religious totemism, and patrilinear clan totemism. Only the individual totemism peculiar to sorcerers seems indubitably to combine both modes of hybridization. This constitutes a somewhat meager conclusion, but it is enough to warrant an inquiry into the possible ontological unity of Australian totemism. For in his day, Elkin was one of the most remarkable connoisseurs of aboriginal Australia, and we cannot discount his opinion when he writes—probably in opposition to Durkheim—that the divisions and subdivisions of totems are not only a method of classifying nature “but an expression of the idea that man and nature form one corporate whole—a whole which is living and social.” It was an assertion that this minister of the Anglican Church no doubt did not make lightly.17





The Semantics of Taxonomies



To gain a better understanding of these presumed totemic hybridizations, we must now consider what the Aboriginals themselves have to say about them and therefore in the first instance explore what the semantic indications suggest. This is what the linguist Carl Georg von Brandenstein set out to do in a book devoted to a comparative study and interpretation of the names of totems and totemic divisions throughout Australia.18 His first task was to examine the meaning of the various terms by which the Aboriginals designate the concept that we call a “totem”; and we should bear in mind that the word was borrowed from the language of the Ojibwa of the Great Lakes of North America before becoming generalized in the anthropological terminology of the second half of the nineteenth century. Brandenstein shows unambiguously that the great majority of these generic terms refer to elements of a human or animal body or to physiological substances, some of which are explicitly regarded by the Aboriginals as vectors of a shared identity. The most current of these terms belong to an anatomical vocabulary and may be translated as “flesh” (or “meat”), “skin,” “head,” “forehead” (or “face”), “eyes,” “side,” “liver” (or “temper”), or “color” (in particular that of the skin). Next come polysemic terms that designate both corporeal humors or dispositions and also the qualities associated with them, such as ngurlu, the word for matrilinear totems among nine tribes of central northern Australia, which means “interior” or “temperament,” and its probable cognate ngarlgi. The latter term is used by the Yanyula of the Carpentaria Gulf to designate totems and to qualify “that which comes from somewhere,” such as armpit sweat, behavior, color, exudate, odor, perfume, skin, taste, tune, voice, and an identifying essence.19 On the other hand, terms that denote a relationship or sharing are much less common; they include “moiety,” “section,” “friend,” and “same name.” In short, with very few exceptions, in which the idea of segmentation or kinship predominates, what we call a totem, that is to say both the entity itself and the class that it symbolizes, is designated in Aboriginal languages by terms that refer to very concrete physical predicates that are frequently hypostasized into moral qualities.

The reason for those semantic choices appears more clearly in the light of the analysis that Brandenstein then produces—an analysis not of generic terms denoting the concept of a totem but of particular terms used to designate this or that totem, essentially those associated with different class systems. Contrary to authors such as Peter Worsley, who maintains that the assignment of a totem (and a natural species) to a social group is totally arbitrary,20 Brandenstein argues that the whole Australian totemic system is governed by a single immanent logic whose most complete expression, in societies with subsections, is based on eight combinations of three pairs of primary properties. Each combination characterizes the totem or totems of each subsection, along with the humans and nonhumans affiliated with it. He adopts a progressive method, starting with a study of moiety societies in the Kimberley and southwestern region, where totemic species are usually a pair of birds or snakes. Among the Wunambal and the Ngarrinjin of Kimberley, for example, the dualist classificatory schema is governed by two opposed principles, one of which is embodied by the kuranguli, the Grus rubicunda crane, the other by the banar, the Eupodotis australis bustard. Each of those two totems subsumes a collection of twenty or so moral, physical, and behavioral attributes that oppose term for term and that qualify all the human and nonhuman entities grouped into the two moieties. Those attributes are explicitly recognized by the members of these tribes, and Brandenstein sums them up by setting in opposition the two principal qualities “quick” and “slow,” which themselves refer to a series of pairs exemplified by “smart” and “fool,” “active” and “passive,” “slender” and “plump.”

The next stage involves examining the names and characteristics conferred upon the totems of societies with four sections. The system is quite simply doubled: the “quick”/“slow” contrast between moieties is now accompanied by a new contrast that Brandenstein describes as an opposition between “hot-blooded” and “cold-blooded.” Thus, among the Kariera, the “quick” moiety was subdivided into two sections. The first was called karimarra, which may be translated “which acts vigorously,” with, for its totem, a species of kangaroo and the attribute “hot-blooded.” The second was known as pannaga, meaning “supine,” with, for its totem, a species of goanna (a reptile) and the attribute “cold-blooded.” The “slow” moiety, for its part, was also composed of two sections: the first called pal-tjarri, meaning “supple” or “malleable,” with, for its totem, a different species of kangaroo and the attribute “hot-blooded”; the second called purungu, meaning “massive,” with, for its totem, a different species of goanna and the attribute “cold-blooded.” Those “who act vigorously,” namely the quick and warm-blooded karimarra kangaroos, thus married the “supple ones,” namely the slow, warm-blooded pal-tjarri kangaroos, while the “stretched ones,” namely the quick, cold-blooded pannaga, married the “massy ones,” namely the slow, cold-blooded purungu. The qualities of “warm-blooded” and “cold-blooded” synthesize a collection of physical attributes intrinsic to the members of the sections and their respective totems: for instance, a more or a less dark-colored blood but also the antithetical dispositions that those attributes were believed to encourage, such as vigor or languor, aggressiveness or passiveness, determination or nonchalance. These contrasts were fully recognized by the Aboriginals, as is attested by the manner in which the Kabi of Queensland describe the rules for marriage between different sections: “The lighter class of the light-blood phratry married the lighter class of the dark-blood phratry, and the darker class of the light-blood phratry married the darker class of the dark-blood phratry.”21

From his study of the totemic names of thirty or so groups with subsections and of the qualities attributed to the members of each of them, Brandenstein finally draws the conclusion that these eight-class systems introduce yet another pair of attributes, which he subsumes under the contrast between “round” and “flat.” As with the preceding ones, this pair of attributes refers to both physical and moral characteristics: “tall” and “short,” “in front” and “to the side,” “principal” and “secondary,” “wavy-haired” and “straight-haired,” “broad-faced” and “narrow-faced,” of a “choleric” disposition and of a “phlegmatic” one, and so on. The totems and members of each subsection are thus identified by a specific combination of three properties that define a type of behavior (quick or slow), a type of humor (hot-blooded or cold-blooded), and a dimension or volume (round or flat). So a “round–quick–warm-blooded” man should marry a “round–slow–warm-blooded” woman, a “round–quick–cold-blooded man” should marry a “round–slow–cold-blooded woman,” while a “flat–quick–warm-blooded” man should marry a “flat–slow–warm-blooded” woman, and a “flat–quick–cold-blooded man” should marry a “flat–slow–cold-blooded” woman. Such a system seems at first sight very constricting since a man from a subsection whose members are reputed to be plump, squat, with wavy hair, a broad face, and of small stature should take a wife from the subsection prescribed by the rules of marriage whose members, for their part, are reputed to be slim, with smooth hair, narrow-faced, and tall. Their children are expected to inherit some attributes from their father and others from their mother, the combination of which is different from that of each of their parents and will be supposed to correspond to the attributes of the members of the subsection in which they themselves will be classed. In fact though, Aboriginals are not particularly bothered when the physical characteristics of an individual do not correspond to his or her subsection’s norm. All the same, among the Murinbata of Arnhem Land, for example, it does sometimes happen that children are classed in the subsection that best corresponds to their physical qualities in cases where these are too different from the norm recognized in what is officially their allotted subsection.22

The human members of a totemic class thus share a collection of substantial and immaterial properties that are peculiar to them all. How is this common patrimony connected with the natural species that serves as their principal totem? Particularly in the cases of animals (since these constitute almost three-quarters of the recorded names of totems), but also in those of plants, the totem is said to embody, in exemplary fashion, the particular attributes of the behavior, humors, and appearance recognized as characteristic of the humans whom they represent. But there is more to it: according to Brandenstein, in many cases “the animal is named after the quality which is its main characteristic, never the quality after the animal.”23 So the section name padtjarri, which is common in a number of variants in western Australia and means “malleable” and “gentle,” also serves as the name for the hill-kangaroo that is generally the totem for this section. Similarly, among the Nungar of the southwest, the moieties were called maarnetj, which may be translated as “the getter,” and waardar, meaning “the watcher,” two terms that also served to designate their respective totems, the white cockatoo (Cacatua tenuirostris) and the crow (Corvus coronoides). In other words, the names of the totemic classes are terms denoting properties that designate the eponymous animal also, rather than the reverse, that is, names of zoological taxons from which the typical attributes of classes would be inferred. It therefore becomes difficult to maintain the interpretation of totemic classifications for Australia proposed in Totemism, that is to say, the idea that totems are borrowed from the natural kingdom because the ostensible differences between species where appearance and behavior are concerned provide a suggestive model for conceptualizing the segmentation of human groups. The fact is that the primary difference here is between aggregates of attributes common to both humans and nonhumans within classes designated by abstract terms, not between animal and plant species that are able, through their ostensible differences, to be the natural source of an analogical model that would serve to organize social discontinuities.

It is doubtful whether this “Aboriginal World Order,” as Brandenstein calls his general model of Australian totemic properties, is as perfectly systematic and coherent at the scale of an entire continent. Nevertheless, in the form in which he presents it, he provides us with valuable insights into the nature of totemism in Australia. By means of subtle semantic corroborations, he explains the modus operandi of this totemic hybridization to which Elkin drew our attention: in class systems, the identity of the totemic group is founded upon a specific collection of physical and moral attributes shared by all its members, whether human or nonhuman. This constitutes a kind of ontological prototype of which the totemic species constitutes the emblematic expression, not the concrete archetype, from which those qualities are derived. This makes it possible, where Australia is concerned, to remove two difficulties raised by the Lévi-Straussian classificatory theory.

The first difficulty stems from the fact that some names of totems designate not plants or animals but human elements (boy, breast, clitoris, corpse, cough, foreskin) or artifacts (anchor, boomerang, rhombus, canoe) or meteors or other natural phenomena (cloud, hailstone, lightning, river, tide). These are certainly few in number: they represent no more than 15 percent of the names in the list of 524 totems collected by Brandenstein. But although they constitute a minority, they should nevertheless be taken into account in any general interpretation of totemism. Yet that is ruled out by the hypothesis of a homological transposition of natural discontinuities into social discontinuities since, unlike the differences between animal or plant species, the referents of these totems are not experienced by the senses in the way that spontaneous systems of discontinuities are. But if we accept that these “non-species” totem names are nothing but more or less iconic labels denoting a class of properties with which they have only a metonymic relationship, then the difficulty disappears. As for the predominance of animals among totems, no doubt this may, as Lévi-Strauss supposed, be explained simply by reasons of cognitive economy, albeit not those that he suggested: the contrasts in behavior and appearance presented by animals are more striking and noticeable, so it was logical, although not indispensable, to prefer them to other entities as more likely embodiments of the groups of attributes for which they are not the referential source.

The intellectualist interpretation of totemism is also hard put to account for the hierarchized stacks of totems and secondary species that are subsumed by the principal totems. This is particularly evident in moiety systems. To return to the example of the white cockatoo and the black crow that head the Nungar moieties, it is—at a pinch—possible, provided one ignores the significance of their names, to accept that these birds might, by reason of their respective ethologies and morphologies, present a major contrast that native thought seized upon in order to symbolize the dualist division of society.24 But was it really necessary to turn to the animal species to find an elementary dualist schema that any number of other oppositions—such as those between the day and the night, the sky and the earth, or the sunrise and the sunset—could equally well have motivated? Above all, why should it be necessary to reinforce that contrast, as the Nungar did, by a series of minor oppositions between the eagle and the crow, the white cockatoo and the black one, the pelican and the pair comprising the heron and the sea eagle, the tiger snake and the brown snake, the mosquito and the fly, the whale and the seal, the male and the female kangaroo, and the male and the female dingo? From a strictly taxonomic point of view, all this involves a pointless redundancy that simply blurs the initial contrast between the white cockatoo and the crow and undermines the relevance of its primary function as a dichotomic matrix. It seems more likely that each of those secondary species (or each of the sexes, where members of the same species are concerned) provides a less forceful expression of certain attributes of the moiety that the principal totem illustrates far better. For in the case of the human members of the two moieties concerned, those attributes are clearly defined by the Nungar. The people in the “Getter” moiety have pale chocolate-colored skin, some are tall and well-built while others are small and frail, but they all have rounded faces and limbs and wavy hair and are endowed with an impulsive and passionate temperament, at the same time maintaining an open and agreeable demeanor. Meanwhile, the people of the “Watcher” moiety have a darker and duskier skin color, are very hirsute, thickset, and squat, with small hands and feet, and are reputed to be surly, vindictive, and secretive. These qualities are not suggested by observation of the white cockatoo and the crow. Within the order of physical and moral characteristics ascribed to humans, they express series of antithetical properties that are of a more abstract nature but that those two emblematic species are said to share and embody far better than the secondary species that their respective classes include. To employ, or rather adapt, the language of contemporary studies on ethnobiological classifications, one could say that our two birds are prototypes, that is, the “best examples” of their respective classes, but for reasons that are not exclusively morphological (as Brent Berlin, for example, claims), for they also have to do with inferred properties suggested by their customs, their habitats, and their diets.

The types of hybridization that Brandenstein’s analysis illuminates thus confirm Elkin’s intuitions and do seem to bear out the existence, in Australia, of a mode of identification founded on an interspecies continuity of both physicalities and interiorities. The identity of numerous components of physicality is patently clear when humans and nonhumans of various kinds are said to all share collections of properties both material and behavioral and to be moved to act as they do by identical humors. For, as we should remember, it is correct to say that temperament and character stem from physicality, as I have defined it, if they are considered to testify to an influence exerted upon behavior patterns by particular corporeal substances and anatomical dispositions. It is, in fact, that very corpus of common attributes that primarily defines a totemic collective, a corpus that is synthesized in a name denoting a quality that identifies both the class and the emblematic (rather than eponymous) species that expresses its organic unity.

As for the continuity of interiorities, there can be no doubt about it where classes are associated with Dreaming sites, where the child-souls that are to be incorporated into both the human and the nonhuman members of the totemic group are stored. Such is the case of the totemism of patrilinear moieties (in central Australia, in northern Kimberley, and in the eastern part of Arnhem Land) and also of the totemism of subsections that are attached to “religious sites” (in eastern Kimberley and among the Mangarrayi and Yangman tribes). Here, a soul should be understood as a principle that produces the identity and individuation that stems from the stock of totemic essences, conferring upon each of those in which it lodges a kind of guarantee of conformity to the eternal ontological paradigm that a Dream-being instituted in the distant past. However, this idea that members of a totemic group conform to an ideal type is also subliminally present elsewhere, even where there are no explicit connections between class totems and child-soul sites. It finds expression particularly in metaphors of kinship, of particular affinity, and of shared filiation rooted in an identical origin, and it takes on a public character in the custom of subsuming all the members of a totemic group, both the humans and the nonhumans, under a generic name. The fact is that it is the class itself, with all its physical and moral attributes, that here constitutes the vector and symptom of a shared interiority. Each and every member of a totemic group, humans and nonhumans alike, possesses the same intrinsic characteristics that define the group’s identity as a species. The essence that defines them all stems partly from the substances that they share in common, as the vocabulary used sometimes clearly reveals: we should remember that the term ngarlgi, by which the Yanyula designate totems, connotes not only characteristics of both a material and a moral nature but also an “identifying essence.”25

The above considerations suggest that we should treat with circumspection the sometimes-suggested hypothesis of a clear-cut opposition between, on the one hand, a patrilinear totemism founded solely on a shared spiritual identity proceeding from totemic sites located in the paternal territory and, on the other, a matrilinear totemism founded solely on a shared identity of substance that is inherited from the mother. Quite apart from the fact that, as we have seen, certain class totemisms combine transmission from both types of attributes, totemic hybridization seems everywhere to occur simultaneously at the levels of both interiority and physicality, albeit according to variable modalities. It is not possible to demonstrate this generally for all Aboriginal societies, since, at the time of the European conquest, there were, after all, close to five hundred different languages among them. So I shall limit myself to a brief illustration featuring two contrasting ethnographic cases of subsection systems, the one characterized by a semimoiety patrilinear totemism, the other by totemism of the conceptional type.





Varieties of Hybrids



The totemism of the Mangarrayi and the Yangman living to the south of Arnhem Land, studied by Francésca Merlan, is characterized by being associated not with the eight subsections that govern matrimonial alliances but with four semimoieties each of which is composed of a pair of subsections designated by a term that combines the names of both the subsections concerned.26 So these semimoieties have nothing to do with marriage but constitute a form of totemic segmentation that divides up larger groups that encompass the members of two generations who are linked by patrilinear filiation. Known by the generic name marragwa, the numerous totems peculiar to each semimoiety include plants, animals, natural phenomena, mythical figures, and abstract entities. And even though informers who are asked to name their totems always first cite a small number of plants and animals, there is no formally hierarchized system in which major totems head the list of subtotems, as happens in societies divided into moieties. A quadripartite grid of totems may be seen as an inclusive classification of all elements in the cosmos, although it is not organized as a taxonomic tree: for example, all the catfish species may well be affiliated to the same semimoiety but that is not the case of other equally typical forms of life such as snakes, fish, or lizards, different species of which are distributed among all the semimoieties. In short, the Lévi-Straussian principle of the conceptualization of social discontinuities by means of natural discontinuities does not work here. We must therefore turn to mythical ontogenesis to understand the reasons for the totemic groupings.

Among the Mangarrayi and the Yangman, Dream-beings are hybrids, part human, part animal, that are known by the generic name warrwiyan and are distributed among the semimoieties. Each of them brought to its site beings from its semimoiety that now stay there in the form of trees, rocks, or other features of the landscape. These are also called warrwiyan but are furthermore given particular names that constitute the inherited stock of names of the human members of that semimoiety. Although their feats are recounted in myths, warrwiyan have not confined their generative activities to a distant past. One of Merlan’s female informants told her that her child-soul was taken from one place to another by wirrilmayin, a type of goanna, and one of the warrwiyan of her semimoiety. What relations do warrwiyan Dream-beings maintain with the totems of marragwa semimoieties? Dream-beings may be considered particular realizations of an ever-vibrant creative potential, whereas totems express the direct and continuous link between humans and the entities of the cosmos that were instituted by the Dream-beings. As Merlan tells us, because humans, totems, and all other existing entities “were placed in the social-and-natural order by warrwiyan, there is an unchanging relationship of common origin and substance between them, regulated by a system of categorization (the semi-moieties) that pre-existed, and in terms of which the warrwiyan were already differentiated among themselves.”27 Thus, mythical accounts relate not to an initial undifferentiated state but to a world already divided into substantive essences that were actualized as classes of particular entities thanks to the intervention of the Dream-beings.

The contrast with animist mythologies, those of Amazonia, for example, is striking. In both cases, the beings whose adventures are recounted are certainly a mixture of humans and nonhumans living within a regime that is already both cultural and social through and through. But there is a difference. Amerindian myths tell of separate events that occasioned the introduction of discontinuities between the species that had all been part of an original continuum (plants and animals dissociating themselves from humans through their forms and behavior, yet retaining an interiority that is shared by all). But Australian mythology evokes a process of parthenogenesis unfolding actually within the classes of hybrids already constituted. When this process was complete, each of those classes of existing beings contained a vaster number of species, including varieties of humans who nevertheless remained in conformity with the essential and material particularities of the ontological type peculiar to the subdivision in which they had come to be.

Now let us return to the Aranda tribes of the central desert. As we have seen, their totemic groups are constituted by all the individuals linked with the site of the Dream-being under whose sign they were conceived. This makes the totemism of the Aranda even more independent of matrimonial classes than it is among the Mangarrayi and the Yangman, since members of a subsection can claim several distinct totemic affiliations. These depend on the peregrinations that their mothers have happened to engage in and their visits to this or that reservoir of souls presided over by some Dream-being, for one of those souls enters the woman and becomes the existential and categorial principle of her as-yet-unborn child. It is true that, with residence being quite stable, people from the same locality generally frequent the same totemic site, where ceremonies periodically take place, so the chances are that, given that the mothers have regularly visited this site, the children of a particular subsection will all have the same totem. However, there is nothing systematic about this, in particular on account of the long journeys that entail visits to different totemic sites. As a result, a group of coresidents may well be composed of individuals who identify with quite distinct totems.

How is this identification conceived? Spencer and Gillen insist on the fact that what they call the “reincarnation” of a Dream-being in a human leads to that human being identified completely with the totemic species of the site. “The totem of any man is regarded … as the same thing as himself.”28 At first sight, then, this is identification with at once a generating principle, a class of totemic entities, and the animal or plant that symbolizes this class. This is illustrated by an anecdote concerning a man of the Kangaroo totem who said “‘That one,’ pointing to his photograph which we had taken, ‘is just the same as me; so is a kangaroo.’”29 All the same this perfect identity posed a problem for Spencer and Gillen, given that they subscribed to a Frazerian concept of totemism, which was understood above all as a special relationship of protection and mutual respect between humans and the totemic species from which they are believed to be descended. However, among the Aranda there is no sign of either mutual respect or protection, since it is not forbidden to kill one’s own totem, although one is advised to eat of it no more than sparingly. Moreover, mythical accounts and fables suggest that long ago it was customary to feed above all upon one’s totem. The totemic animals and plants were therefore not treated as relatives that it would be wrong to harm. Furthermore, the ceremonial prerogatives of totemic groups include the performance of rites known as intichiuma, in the course of which they increase the number of individuals of their totemic species so that other totemic groups can also draw upon these as food. How can one both set up a relationship of profound identification between a human and a nonhuman and at the same time accept that the former brings about or is complicit in the destruction of the latter?

The answer to that question is no more than hinted at in the studies that Spencer and Gillen devoted to the Aranda. The first thing to note is that the child-souls that the Dream-beings deposited in sites are, in principle, differentiated: some come to be actualized in humans, others in animal or plant species that the Dream-being has at some moment adopted as its form. Dream-beings are thus not plants or animals that undergo metamorphosis and change into humans, nor are they humans that change into plants or animals. Rather, they are original and originating hybrids, concrete hypostases of physical and moral properties that can thus transmit those attributes to entities all with their own individual forms but each of which is regarded as a legitimate representative of the prototype from which it came. Any example of my totemic species is, for me, not an individuality with which I can maintain a personal relationship (as would be the case in an animist ontology). Instead, it constitutes a living and contingent expression of certain material and essential qualities that I share with it, qualities that will not be affected if I kill it so as to feed on it, since they stem from an immutable matrix from which both of us have emanated. Far from mutually apprehending each other as subjects engaged in a social relationship, humans and nonhumans are merely particularized materializations of classes of properties that transcend their own existences.

In her synthetic study of the Aranda materials, Marika Moisseeff confirms this. Stressing the “constitutional hybridization” of Dream-beings, she reminds us that this is in fact intrinsic to all existing entities—at least it is if one is to believe the myths of ontogenesis.30 Myths of origin that are quite distinct from the accounts of the peregrinations of Dream-beings evoke an earlier period in which the earth carried no life apart from semiembryonic masses produced by the incomplete transformation into human beings of various plants and animals, all amalgamated together in their hundreds. These conglomerates, known as inapatua (incomplete beings), could neither move nor see nor breathe. There then arose other beings called Numbakulla (issued from nothing), quite distinct from the Dream-beings, and these brought into being the celestial vault, the sun, the stars, and the watercourses. Two of them also set about segmenting the inapatua with stone knives and extracting the rough shapes of human forms and modeling these. As Moisseeff explains, “it was only once it was individualized out of the common mass of matter that each human being became associated with the nonhuman element, either an animal or a plant, from which it had at first been separated. This element … was to become its totem.”31 Because humans were hewn out of a composite material, their morphological singularity was accompanied by an inevitable substantial hybridization that remained a reminder of their totemic association with the plant or animal from which they had been separated. This is how it is that their identification with specific nonhumans can be manifested at two levels: that of the common matter from which they emerged and that of the essence of Dream-beings, themselves hybrids, that was incorporated in them.





A Return to Algonquin Totems



The ontological formula of totemism as illustrated above assumes an exemplary character in Australia, even if it is not everywhere presented equally clearly. Nowhere else do we find such a vast gathering of peoples that has so systematically, explicitly, and uniformly developed the idea that there exists a moral and physical continuity between groups of humans and groups of nonhumans. However, on other continents—even, in an attenuated form, in Europe—one does come across institutions that may also be described as totemic, in the traditional sense of the term, to the extent that the names of natural species and phenomena are used to designate clearly delimited social segments. In most of these cases, the Lévi-Straussian interpretation based on the homology of differential gaps can legitimately be applied without the necessity of introducing a substantive distinction between nature and culture: the discontinuities between species constitute an easily observable phenomenon and hence an ever-available source of labels that make it possible to designate distinctive groups. In contrast to Australia, this classificatory tool generally possesses a purely denotative aspect and in no sense implies any recognition of material or spiritual continuities between the humans and their eponymous species. My use of the term “totemism” to characterize the particular ontology for which Australia provides the model may therefore lead to some confusion since it adds a new sense to the meaning that has been generally accepted ever since Lévi-Strauss’s analyses in Totemism. To get around this difficulty and the better to emphasize the specific features of Australian totemism, specialists of that continent have lately tended to substitute the word “Dream” for the word “totem.” The inevitable consequence is that they thereby reduce the scope of the concept, which is now confined to one particular—albeit vast—ethnographic region.

I am not in favor of such semantic cosmetics for, although the Australian formula of totemism is certainly remarkable for its coherence and its degree of elaboration, it is not at all unique. Rather, we should regard it as the expression, in a particularly purified form, of a more general ontological schema of which sporadic or residual examples are to be found elsewhere. Such is the case in the southeastern United States in certain societies with totemic clans that Lévi-Strauss considered to be hybrids, a mixture of totemic systems and caste systems, since their internal subdivisions were so very accentuated by a differential repertory of physical, moral, and functional features believed to be derived from those eponymous species.32 For instance, the Chickasaw attributed to each eponymous clan, or even each hamlet, definite particularities of behavior, diet, costume, temperament, means of subsistence, and physical aptitudes. It was said of Puma people that they had an aversion to water, lived in the mountains, and fed mainly on game; Wild-Cat people slept in the daytime and, thanks to their keen sight, hunted at night; Red-Fox people lived by plundering, deep in the forest, and prized their independence; Raccoon people fed on fish and wild fruits, and so on.33 Of course, here, unlike in Australia, it was not a matter of identifying all the human and nonhuman members of a particular totemic class by the properties of an ideal prototype whose eponymous species was simply a materialization more striking than others. In a more classic fashion, here animals and their mores constituted concrete paradigms for the humans, who were said to be descended from the species from which they derived their clan name. Nevertheless, the general inspiration for the totemic mode of identification is preserved, since each group of humans claims to share with a group of nonhumans a collection of physical and psychic dispositions that distinguishes them, as an ontological class, from others.

We should furthermore remember that modes of identification are ways of schematizing experiences that prevailed in certain historical situations and are not empirical syntheses of institutions and beliefs. Each of these generative matrices that structure practice and peoples’ perception of the world certainly predominates at particular times and in particular places, but is not exclusive: animism, totemism, analogism, and naturalism can each tolerate a discreet presence of other emerging modes, for each of them is a possible realization of a combination of elements that are universally present. Each one may thus introduce nuances and modifications into the expression of the locally dominant schema, thereby engendering many of the idiosyncratic variations that are customarily called cultural differences.

This is certainly what happens in totemism as I have described it on the basis of the Australian data. I will provide only one illustration, which will return us to the country where the term “totemism” originated, namely the northern region of North America. The terms totam and totamism appear for the first time in the memoirs of John Long, a fur trader operating at the end of the eighteenth century among the Ojibwa Indians north of the Great Lakes.34 As many authors have pointed out, the birth of these terms seems from the start to have been dogged by confusion, for Long mentions the term totam in the context of an anecdote in which one of his Ojibwa companions uses the word to refer to a bear that is apparently his own personal guardian spirit, not the eponymous animal of his clan. It is important to note at this point that the Ojibwa people, like most of the northern Algonquins, customarily established an individual personal relationship with benevolent and protective entities that Hallowell calls pawagának. These would manifest themselves above all in dreams, although even in a waking state one could sometimes encounter them in an animal form.35 Furthermore, unlike other tribes that speak an Algonquian language and live farther north, the Ojibwa of the Great Lakes were organized into patrilinear clans named after animals (bear, crane, loon, moose, and so on), membership of these social subdivisions being indicated by possessive constructions based on the root -dodem, which expresses a relationship of kinship or coresidence: for example, ododeman, “my cousin” (of either sex), or makwa nindodem, “the bear is my clan.” It was thus concluded that Long had made a mistake when he applied the word totam (a term reserved for collective social affiliations) to what was actually an individual animal spirit of the pawagának type. To avoid this confusion, anthropologists then, in the second half of the nineteenth century, took to drawing a distinction between totemism in the proper sense, namely various types of association between social groups and their eponymous species, and “individual” totemism, a relationship between a person and an entity in the form of an animal or a plant. In some cases, as indeed among the Ojibwa, the two forms of totemism coexisted.

That was how the matter rested until Raymond Fogelson and Robert Brightman cast some doubt on the reality of the confusion imputed to Long.36 We should note that Long knew the Ojibwa well, had spent several winter seasons with bands of them, and was fluent in a simplified form of the Ojibwa language that was used for fur trading. Moreover, Long was well aware of the existence of collective totemism. For example, at the beginning of his book, he records the fact that each of the five “nations” in the Iroquois League was divided into three tribes or families known respectively by the names Tortoise, Bear, and Wolf. So it seems unlikely that he would not have realized that the Ojibwa people also had clans named after animals.37 Finally, Long was not alone in making this purported mistake. Half a century later, Father De Smet, a Jesuit missionary famous for his ethnographic descriptions, mentioned an identical use of the word “totem” (which he spelled “dodeme”) among the Potawatomi, an Algonquin-speaking tribe neighboring the Ojibwa to the south. The term was used of an animal that appeared to a young man in a dream and became his guardian spirit in an association that was clearly of an intimate nature, since it implied the adoption of the animal’s name as a personal name and permanently sporting some distinctive emblem (a paw, feather, or tail) that evoked the animal metonymically.38

These two independent occurrences of the word “totem,” in situations said to be different from those in which it is ordinarily used and reported by observers whose word we have no good reason to doubt, encourage one to examine in greater detail the semantics of the term in Algonquian languages. In Proto-Algonquian, /*o.te./ is a verbal root that may be translated as “to live together as a collective” and from which may stem nouns, generally employed in a possessive form, such as /*oto.t.e.ma/, “someone’s coresident.” Considering thirty or so uses of this root in North Algonquian languages and the various Ojibwa dialects, Fogelson and Brightman conclude that the terms and expressions in which it figures always refer to a social link, usually of a localized nature and in many cases characterized by some kind of connection. In the Ojibwa language, for example, /-do.de.m/ designates both a patrilinear clan and also its eponymous animal, and /odo.de.man/ expresses the kinship between an individual and his cousin of either sex, for its use may cover all the Ego’s relatives. Among the Woods Cree, /nito.ti.m/ means “my relative” or “my friend.” Among the Penobscot, /-tottem/ may be translated as “friend,” as may /-tuttem/ in the Micmac language. Among the Fox, finally, William Jones ascribes to /oto.te.ma/ the meanings “his (elder) brother,” “his eponymous clan-animal,” and “his provider of supernatural power.”39 As can be seen in this last case, the term may be used indifferently so as to denote either kinship or a totemic association or a link with an individual animal spirit. This is not at all surprising, given that all the variants considered in other Algonquian languages denote some personal relationship, whether it be kinship, coresidence, or friendship.

Now let us return to Long. The word totam, which he explains in a long commentary, stems from an account confided to Long by one of his Amerindian companions and related totally in the Ojibwa language. The man tells him that his guardian spirit, a bear that he calls nin, O totam, is furious with him because he has killed a fellow bear. In consequence, Long’s confidant fears that he will no longer be capable of hunting. The expression nin, O totam is probably an approximate transcription of /nindo.de.m/, meaning “my relative” or “my friend” and here used in the generic sense of a relationship of familiarity and intimacy between persons living in the same place, which corresponds well enough to the tonality of the links that exist between a man and his individual guardian animal. In other words, although Long is at fault in that he has decontextualized the term totam by turning it into a noun, he is nevertheless not mistaken when he reports the use of this polysemic term in an apparently unusual context. On the contrary, it seems fair enough to assume that the Ojibwa, or the Potawatomi described by Father De Smet, were not as strict as anthropologists later were when it came to distinguishing between what the anthropologists called “social totemism” and “individual totemism.” As the example of the Fox shows, depending on the pragmatic situation of enunciation, it is not at all incongruous to use one and the same word to refer sometimes to a clan relative, at other times to one’s clan’s eponymous animal, and at yet other times to one’s individual animal spirit.

Should such semantic polyvalence be considered to indicate that the totemic complex and the complex of guardian spirits were not as dissociated as had at first been claimed? At first sight, the two registers of a relationship with an animal do seem to be clearly differentiated. As I have already several times had occasion to point out, the Ojibwa, and the northern Algonquins more generally, undoubtedly can be connected to an animist mode of identification, given that they attribute an interiority of the same nature as their own to nonhumans that are seen as persons. As for the totemic groups among them, these are not characterized by the kind of continuity both physical and spiritual between humans and eponymous species that prevails in Australia and in certain tribes of the southeastern United States. Rather, they seem to be governed by the mechanism, detected by Lévi-Strauss, of a relationship that is metaphorical, not inwardly motivated, between two series of discontinuities. But in any case this kind of segmentation is far from general: the most northern Ojibwa groups have no totemic clans at all.

Nevertheless, even if the two systems are governed by different logics (the one truly ontological, the other classificatory), they are not on that account heterogeneous. For even if the guardian spirit takes on the appearance of one particular animal, it is also an emissary of the species and, as it were, its representative to the man whom it assists, in particular by facilitating his hunting of its fellow animals. So the typically animist relationship that links a human person and an animal person is compounded by a special relationship between that human person and the whole animal species. This clearly suggests a totemic aspect, especially when the latter relationship is prefigured by the fact that at birth the human has been given the name of an animal species whose “onomastic twin” (nijotokanuk) he then becomes, as is the case among the Ojibwa of Big Trout Lake, who, however, have no totemic clans.40 Similarly, the purely denotative totemic association between a class and an animal species may shift toward an animist relationship where a man acquires as his individual guardian spirit an animal belonging to the eponymous species of his clan. For him, this species now becomes something more and other than merely the referent of a collective name: it makes it possible for the human to identify immediately with a class of nonhumans that are now personalized. That being said, it is true that the phenomenon of identifying with the animal species remains on the individual level and does not take the classic Australian form of sharing material and spiritual attributes that belong to groups of both humans and nonhumans.

Yet a rough version of a truly collective continuity between humans and animals does exist among the northern Algonquins, but in a society without descent groups. The Penobscot of Maine did in fact possess what Frank Speck called “game totems.” Of the twenty-two local groups of which they were composed at the end of the nineteenth century, thirteen were named after an animal species reputed to be particularly abundant in the winter hunting grounds of the band that had adopted its name: lobster, crab, eel, beaver, sturgeon, raccoon, wolf, squirrel, wolverine, otter, wildcat, hare, yellow perch.41 The identification between the local group and its eponymous species rested upon the fact that the members of this band hunted or fished mainly for the animal whose name it bore, either for food or for trade, and they therefore depended acutely on it for their subsistence or, sometimes, for their very survival.

Such collective specialization may not have resulted solely from the technical constraints of adapting to the differential distribution of species to habitats, which was always an essentially relative matter. Speck establishes a parallel between the Penobscot and the Mistassini Cree regarding their relationships to the game that they hunted, noting that the “totems” of the band in the former case and the guardian spirits in the latter were always the animals that they hunted for preference. Now, the Cree considered the animal species to be the legitimate proprietors of the hunting territories that they allowed humans to use, and the same may well have been true of the Penobscot; in which case, the eponymous species would have lent the band of hunters not only its name but also the use of its territory, that is to say the possibility, day after day, to take from it whatever was needed for the humans’ survival. Here, the totemic names were not based on some arbitrary correspondence between natural and social discontinuities but on an accepted material relationship of dependence reached between the human groups and the nonhuman groups that had imprinted the mark of their identity on to the territory. Such a situation puts one in mind of certain aspects of Australian totemism and shows clearly enough that totemism, as I have defined it, may be present, in a minor mode or potentially, in animist ontologies even where, in the absence of any groups segmented by descent, there are no truly totemic institutions.





8




