The Ethos of Collectives



The prevalence of a relational schema in a collective leads its members to adopt typical behavior patterns, the repetition and frequency of which are such that ethnographers who observe and interpret them feel justified in describing them overall as normative “values” that orientate social life. The need for sharing among the Matsiguenga and the Ojibwa, the bellicose spirit of the Jivaros, and the obligation of exchange among the Tukanos all provide examples. But no relationship is absolutely predominant because, all together, they constitute the panoply of methods at the disposal of humans for organizing their interactions with other occupants of the world.

To return to the example of the Jivaros, it would be absurd to claim that everything in their daily existence stems from violent incorporation. The schema of predatory assimilation constitutes, rather, a moral horizon that orientates many fields of practice, each of which reflects it in its own way. It tolerates and encompasses other relational schemas that are elsewhere preponderant but here are relegated to particular niches that, however, are always under threat from insidious contamination by the dominant schema and the influence that this exerts. Thus, the Jivaro kinship system, which is of the Dravidian type, is founded on the ideal model of an exchange of sisters between cross-cousins. This form of union, which is, in practice, very common, establishes and perpetuates within localized kindred groups an island of reciprocity and solidarity between real affines; and this is probably indispensable for the development of a predatory attitude toward more distant affines, whether these be real, potential, or ideal. It indeed seems likely that the generalized hostility toward all that lies more than one day’s march away necessarily engenders, in reaction, a central kernel in which symmetrical exchange makes it possible to count on a relative security. However, the fall-out rate from the system is considerable: brothers may become deadly enemies if they become rivals for the same potential spouses or if they feel slighted when, in accordance with the levirate rule, the widows of one of them are distributed among the deceased’s brothers. Similarly, a son-in-law may attack his father-in-law if the latter refuses to let him marry the sister of his first wife. In such cases, murders and seizures of women are not uncommon. Despite all the measures taken to minimize the fracturing effect of affinity at the heart of a local network, the possibility of this is always present, as a fermenting agent of dissension capable of blowing sky-high the fragile balance of reciprocity between the closest members of a kindred group. Fair exchange is thus formally present in the logic of the Jivaro alliance system, but it remains peripheral to the Jivaro ethos.

Conversely, predation is not absent from the Tukano groups, even if warfare between them has long since disappeared, possibly as the result of a deliberate choice to favor pacific exchanges instead. We know, at any rate, that the Tukanos used to draw a clear distinction between, on the one hand, raids to procure wives from linguistic groups with which wives were not normally exchanged and, on the other, murderous, more long-distance expeditions. The first type of raid seems to have been quite common. Generally, no bloodshed occurred, and the raid was assimilated to a hunting expedition and considered as a possible alternative to ordinary exogamous exchanges. In most cases these abductions were subsequently regularized through negotiation between the two parties, and this could then lead to the establishment of a cycle of matrimonial alliances of the classic type. Exchange would thus recover its primacy following an occasional act of predation.34 Although very rare, the murder of a man in a distant Tukano tribe constituted a far more drastic form of violence in that it affected the procreative power of another group and thus caused a loss harmful to the whole system. However, unlike in Jivaro head-hunting, this gratuitous destruction cannot be assimilated to an act of predation since it implied no gain of energy or genetic power for the murderer’s group. For this reason, a warrior who was “a killer of a man” (masa sĩari masa) was regarded as the most negative figure in any possible interaction between Tukanos.35

As can be imagined, the Tukanos’ relations to nonhumans are likewise not exempt from a predatory dimension. Emphasizing this aspect, Århem even chose to describe what he called the ecocosmology of the Makuna as a world envisaged from the point of view of a hunter, that is to say, as a network of eaters and eaten.36 He defines the limits of the system by two poles: at one extreme, the supreme predators (jaguars, anacondas, certain other rapacious species, and Yurupari spirits), which feed on all living beings and are not prey for any of them; and, at the other extreme, edible plants, the very lowest level in the food chain. Between these two poles lie most of the organisms whose fate is to be at once predators and prey. That is, in particular, the case of humans, whose souls, when they die, are captured (literally “consumed”) by the spirit founders of their clan, so that they can be reborn in another form. Such formulations are hardly unexpected, since all animist cosmologies seem to derive their functional principles from the model of the food chain, regardless of the nature of their most favored relational schema. Even Århem admits that these relations between the eaters and the eaten are regarded by the Makuna as exchanges, not as acts of predation: “In this cosmic society, where all mortal beings are ontological ‘equals,’ humans and animals are bound by a pact of reciprocity…. The relationship between the human hunter and his prey is thus construed as an exchange, modelled on the relationship among affines.”37 The subordination of predation to exchange could find no better expression. Finally, regarding the Campas, one just needs to recall that the gift schema occupies a dominant position at the heart of human and nonhuman kindred groups only because it is set against a background of predation from which they can protect themselves only by maintaining a system of exchanges with neighbors identical to themselves.



The three cases studied in this chapter prompt a more general interpretation of the nature of what I have called a “collective.” Even if such an entity acquires part of its apparent homogeneity from the mode of ontological identification that characterizes it, that is not enough to differentiate it from other entities that are similar to it in this respect. So the limits of a collective are above all defined by the prevalence within it of a specific relational schema. But the resulting unit does not necessarily tally with the customary divisions into ethnic groups, tribes, linguistic groups, and so on.

The example of the Jivaros will serve to illustrate this point. The way in which I have been describing them up till now might suggest that, despite internal dialectical and cultural differences, they constitute an altogether separate group. However, some of their southern neighbors, such as the Shapra and the Candoshi, share with them not only the schema of predatory appropriation but also the institutions associated with it, and do so despite differences in language and in many features of their social organization and their material culture.38 On their eastern frontiers, in contrast, the Jivaros maintain enduring relations of commercial exchange and sometimes intermarriage with communities speaking the Quichua language, the sacha runa, even though the Quichuas do not share the Jivaro predatory ethos.39 At first sight, the scale of contrasts between the forest Quichuas and the Jivaros seems neither greater nor less great than that which differentiates between the Jivaros and the Candoshi or the Shapra. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to treat the latter two peoples as if they were part of a “Jivaroid” continuum, whereas the Quichuas, despite many resemblances, have attained a higher level of differentiation. This is borne out by the customary behavior of the interested parties. Although the Jivaros may “Quichuarize” themselves in a peaceful fashion through marriage, and vice versa, such an incorporation is always prompted by an individual initiative. In contrast, the Candoshi and the Shapra maintain with the Jivaros a collective relationship of essential otherness that is sufficiently close for them to be included in the code of head-hunting and abduction of women, whether as victims or as aggressors. The Shapra and the Candoshi are thus essential players in the constitution of the Jivaro “self,” whereas the Quichuas, for their part, offer the alternative of “becoming different” to all those tempted by a change of identity.

The unification of a mosaic of peoples through the sharing of a dominant relational schema is even clearer in the interethnic cluster of the Amazonian northwest. We should bear in mind that the flows of reciprocity peculiar to this region include not only the eastern Tukanos but also Arawak groups (Baniwa, Wakuénai, Tariana, Baré, Kabiyerí, and Yukuna), a Carib group (the Carijona), and the Maku, hunter-gatherers speaking an independent language who trade game in exchange for the products cultivated by the riverside communities of sedentary horticulturists. It is true that linguistic exogamy is limited to the Tukano tribes, with the exception of the Cubeo, who dispense with it. But all the components of the metasystem subscribe to the same conviction: that the harmony of the cosmos can be maintained only by dint of a constant and balanced exchange of goods, principles of individuation, and reproductive elements between the various communities of humans and nonhumans that inhabit it. As for the various Arawak peoples of the Peruvian foothills, I hardly need to repeat that they know they belong to the same network of solidarities, structured by their shared values of generosity, egalitarianism, and openness toward others—values that are all the more cherished and respected because, in every way, they stand in opposition to the negative attributes ascribed to the Andean invaders.

In short, it is not so much linguistic limits, the perimeter of a commercial network, or even the homogeneity of modes of life that mark out the contours of a collective. Rather, it is a way of schematizing the experience shared by a more or less vast collection of individuals, a group that may well present internal variations—of languages, institutions, and practices—that are sufficiently marked for one to consider it, on a different scale, as a transformational group composed of separate units. Even if it cannot be a complete substitute for the habitual categories—culture, civilization, ethnic or linguistic group, social milieu, and so on—which may well remain useful in other analytical contexts, such a definition at least makes it possible to avoid the snags of essentialism and to sidestep the almost automatic tendency to apprehend the particularities of human groups on the basis of the characteristics to which they themselves draw attention in order to distinguish themselves from their close neighbors. This way of proceeding is the reverse of that which Benedict adopts in order to reveal her “patterns” of culture; instead of casting one’s eye over a group with preassigned limits, to which one ascribes an abstract and transcendent unity that is a mysterious source of regularity in behavior patterns and representations, it is better to seek out a field covered by certain schemas that bring together the practices of collectives of very variable sizes and natures, the frontiers between which are not fixed by custom or by law but simply reflect the breaks that separate them from other ways of being present in the world.

Stripped of any functional or purposive dimension (such as a desire for togetherness), that notion of a collective is also somewhat different from Latour’s definition of one: namely a specific association of humans and nonhumans as put together, or “collected,” within a network at a particular given moment and in a particular given place. Likewise, for me, a collective is a group combining entities of many kinds. But it is not, strictly speaking, one organized as a network whose frontiers—inexistent in effect if one decides to include all their ramifications—can only be drawn by the analyst’s arbitrary decision to limit his field of study to data that he is in a position to take into account. If, instead, one recognizes that the limits of any collective are coextensive with the area of influence of this or that schema of practices, then its definition will depend above all on the manner in which the humans in it organize their experience, in particular in their relations with nonhumans.40 The task traditionally assigned to anthropology, namely to set in order and compare the discouraging multiplicity of circumstances in this world, will in this way perhaps be rendered less difficult, providing grounds for hope for those who persist in believing in the worth of such a mission and a sign of encouragement for those who wish to devote themselves to the task.





15





Histories of Structures




The many kinds of collectives that we have studied so far have been composed of entities with stable attributes and unchallenged positions. They are rendered homogeneous by great relational schemas that unify their practices, and they have confronted particular problems that they have gradually solved in their own original ways. They seem, however unlikely it may be, to have defied the test of time. My choice of method is largely responsible for this impression. Extracted from their context at an arbitrary point in their historical trajectory, the examples chosen appear as ideal types rather than as the products of contingent events that have made them be as we know them at the moment at which observers describe them. But it is also true that cultures and civilizations do display a remarkable permanence when envisaged from the perspective of the “worldviews,” styles of behavior, and institutional logics that indicate their respective distinctive characters. In this respect, it is easier to spot the contrastive oppositions that differentiate them from one another in the synchronic space of an analysis than it is to pick out the structural breaks that each one, taken in isolation, may have undergone between two successive stages in its development. Yet those breaks do exist, as historians of the long-term view of history are careful to point out. One particular distribution of existing beings and their attributes gives way to another; a mode of treating “others” is superseded and another, previously marginal, acquires a dominant position; what has been considered normal now seems impossible and what has seemed unimaginable eventually becomes common sense. Such mutations usually remain unnoticed by those who live through them, for they may be drawn out over a long period of time, spanning many generations. The effect of a threshold that helps one to see that there has been a shift into a new system is perceptible only to a historian bold enough to divide agelong eras into a series of different periods or, by dint of other methods, to an anthropologist who decides to envisage a spatial continuum of comparable societies as if they were transformations of one another—without, however, suggesting that some of them must constitute simpler forms from which the rest must have evolved. Leaving aside questions of genesis and antecedent causality, and instead adopting a resolutely synchronic approach, it is possible to illuminate the structural properties of the combinations that I have put forth and also the positive or negative conditions of their transformations.

One of those conditions seems to be the replacement of one dominant relational schema by another. Even if, as we have seen in the last chapter, a single mode of identification may be modeled by entirely different relational configurations, there are limits to how far this can be taken. Certain ways of treating “others” that are present in a minor form in one mode of identification sometimes come to play a more predominant role that soon renders them incompatible with the ontological regime in which they have developed; and this makes it necessary to alter that ontological regime or transfer to another mode of identification that is better suited to a different way of treating others. Such transformations frequently accompany striking mutations in technological systems, but that does not necessarily mean to say that the latter were the cause of the former. In plenty of cases it would, on the contrary, seem that the generalization of a previously secondary way of relating, by reorienting the interactions between the components of the world, opens up the way for technical innovations, which, in their turn, strengthen the hold that the new dominant relationships wield over practices and the ways in which these are regarded. Let us consider just one example, that of the way in which variations may affect a protective relationship as a result of changes in the relations with the animal in question.





From Caribou-Man to Lord Bull



Herds of caribou numbering as many as several hundred animals are prime game for the native peoples of subarctic America. Caribou are migrant animals, equally well adapted to a forest environment as to the more northern regions of tundra, and their passage through a locality is of crucial importance to the hunters there, who keep an eager watch for their arrival and the promise of abundant supplies of meat that it offers. So it is not really surprising that the apparently erratic migrations of these animals are reputed to be controlled by some master, a spirit that behaves as their herdsman. It is a way of attributing a particular intentionality to a plurality of behavior patterns all of which tend toward the same collective aim. The Montagnais Indians call this spirit the Caribou-Man. He has a human appearance, white and bearded, and he lives in a cave deep within a hill to which access is gained by a narrow passage. In this cavern, he—like Polyphemus—keeps his immense herd. And it is from here that he sends out his beasts on their annual migrations, having previously decided which animals and how many of them may be killed and by which particular hunters. The souls of the slaughtered caribou return to the cave, where they are reincorporated into new animals that will be sent out to the hunters on another occasion. Although the hunters never approach the cave or the zone surrounding it, a ritual specialist may sometimes intercede with the Caribou-Man, begging him to spare some of his beasts to the humans when the latter are passing through particularly lean times.1

This, then, is a typical case of “gift-giving” animism: the world is inhabited by intentional entities with a benevolent attitude toward humans. The Caribou-Man and all the spirits that govern the destinies of other species of game offer up their animals out of the goodness of their hearts, expecting no compensation, provided the ethics of hunting remain respected. As for the caribou themselves—whose master is a kind of hypostasis that the Rock Cree describe as a gigantic male—they deliver themselves up to the hunters with all the abandon of a woman in love. The Mistassini Cree say that a caribou is of a feminine nature and can seduce the hunters, taking on the form of a beautiful girl who sometimes visits them in their dreams; and the killing is assimilated to the sexual act.2 This erotic symbolism of hunting recurs in many regions of the world, but here it is particularly relevant, for it is by a caribou being killed by a man that a new animal can be engendered. However, although gift giving dominates as the general form of relationship between the world’s various entities, in the relationship between the Caribou-Man and the animals in his charge, that gift giving gives way to a very different kind of behavior. The Caribou-Man is the absolute master of the animals’ fates; he looks after them day in, day out, is attentive to their well-being, controls their reproduction, and is the sole judge of the moment when they must die. In short, like a livestock raiser, he extends over them a cloak of protection that authorizes him to dispose as he will of the animals that he controls.

On the other side of the Bering Strait, in northeastern Siberia, the Chukchees also hunt caribou. When these are found in Eurasia, they are usually known as “reindeer,” but the species is the same: Rangifer tarandus. Wild reindeer are the game par excellence of the Siberian taiga. From the Ob River across to the Pacific and from the edges of the Mongolian plateau across to the shores of the Arctic Ocean, reindeer have been ubiquitously present, everywhere regarded as difficult prey and everywhere enthusiastically hunted. As in North America, the destiny of the reindeer is ruled by spirits. Among the Chukchees, the master of wild reindeer is called Pičvu’čin: he is described as a tiny man, with a sledge made of grass stalks, who sees the mice that pull it as reindeer. Just like humans, he devotes much of his time to hunting and his favorite game is the lemming, which for him takes on the appearance of a bear, for both species possess the ability to stand upright on their hind legs (a fine case of “perspectivist” animism, as is worth pointing out in passing). Pičvu’čin lives with his reindeer in an underground den that can be reached by a deep ravine, and it is from there that he sends his herds out to the humans for them to hunt, except when they fail to show him respect and treat his charges with cruelty. But Pičvu’čin is also a livestock raiser, and he uses the wild reindeer that he sends to the Chukchees in the same way as they use their own domesticated reindeer, as draft animals that they also ride.3

Unlike in North America, where the autochthonous peoples have never domesticated the caribou, all the Siberian peoples have more or less domesticated the reindeer. It seems that this domestication was undertaken both by means of hunting and for the purpose of hunting. Animals were captured alive as lures for their fellows, and they were also used to carry the belongings of the small, extremely mobile human groups who roamed in search of wild herds.4 The reindeer in Siberia are saddled and ridden or harnessed to light sledges and also provide meat and milk. Admittedly, it is frequently just a matter of semidomestication in which actions affecting the animals are minimal. In the tundra zones, the Nenec, Iakoutes, Dolganes, and Tunkusi possess large herds and follow their migrations. But in the taiga regions, the beasts number no more than a few dozen animals, which are left to their own devices for part of the year. To the west, among the Xant and the Selkup, they are left at liberty during the summer and are rounded up at the first snowfall, for the hunting season. To the east, the Evenks milk the females and so keep the herd close to their camps during the summer. In the winter, they let them loose in the forest. Then, when the snows begin to melt, they recapture them, as though they were wild. All the same, even if domination over the animals remains weak and sporadic, a decisive step has been taken: whereas in subarctic America, protection remains an ideal relationship, confined to the links that the spirits in control of the game maintain with their animals, the peoples of Siberia have not been content to leave the animals’ protection to the reindeers’ spirit masters but have themselves taken a hand in it.

The Chukchee master of the reindeer belongs to a class of spirits known generically as ke’let. These spirits all possess herds of domesticated reindeer, which they use to pull their sledges. In accordance with good perspectivist logic, some of them use mammoths to draw their sledges when they descend to the depths of the chthonic world. So domestication does not solely concern the wild reindeer, which, throughout Siberia, are believed to be raised by herding spirits. For the Evenks, for example, all wild species of animals and fish upon which humans feed live in herds controlled by their masters.5 Meanwhile, the Yukaghir regard the masters of game as jolly fellows who pass their time drinking and playing cards, using the animal species in their care as stakes. A species may thus change hands depending on the luck of the game, a factor that explains sudden migrations.6

Although, like the humans, the masters of the animals subsist mainly by hunting, the relations that the former establish with the latter take the form of relations of exchange between livestock raisers. By way of compensation for the wild reindeer that Pičvu’čin sends them, the Chukchees give him tobacco, sugar, flour, and trinkets obtained from the Russians. No doubt these goods are not strictly equivalent in value to the animals obtained; but in contrast to the unqualified generosity of the Caribou-Man toward the Montagnais, here there is a clear idea that the master of the reindeer must, even if only in a symbolic fashion, be compensated for the losses that his herds incur as a result of human hunting. Furthermore, the wild reindeer of Pičvu’čin are greatly appreciated in the rutting season, when, attracted by the females in the humans’ herds, they venture into range of the Chukchees’ encampments. It is then easy to shoot them down, first making sure to incite them, by means of invocations, to mate with the tamed females, for the offspring from such couplings are reputed to be particularly robust. When the males are eventually killed, they are thanked with offerings of food, and their heads are taken into the tents, where they are entertained with music.7 As in northern America, in Siberia likewise the hunting of big game is assimilated to sexual coupling: wild reindeer appear to men in dreams, in the guise of beautiful young women, the daughters of the master of the deer tribe, and the men make love with them. The wild male animals thus render to the herds of the Chukchees the same sexual services as the Chukchees render to the daughters of the master of reindeer. The result on both sides is pregnancies that help to increase the livestock.8 The theme of matrimonial exchange, so widespread in Siberia in relations with nonhumans, here acquires the perfection of a balanced symmetry: the humans provide the wild males with domesticated spouses from their herds, for those males to impregnate, in exchange for the wild spouses that they impregnate themselves in their dreams for the benefit of the master of the reindeer. Where the Montagnais hunter is content to accept the sexual gift sent to him by the Caribou-Man, the Chukchee hunter offers his own female animals in return, in a not entirely disinterested gesture of reciprocity.

Like the wild reindeer, the domesticated reindeer of the Chukchees depend on a nonhuman protector, the Reindeer-Being, an entity with somewhat vague attributes whose mission is to watch over the well-being of the herds. The Reindeer-Being is totally distinct from Pičvu’čin, the master of wild reindeer, and belongs to a class of benevolent powers, the va’IrgIt, that are hypostases or individual expressions of a general principle of existence that animates the whole world, humans included. The va’IrgIt entities are associated with cardinal points and may be named after them, and it is to these, in particular Zenith and Dawn, that slaughtered domesticated reindeer are consecrated. The Chukchees, like the Greeks, slaughter and consume animals that they have raised only within the framework of a sacrifice. But this is nothing like an offering made to a deity. The various kinds of harmful or beneficent spirits (ke’let) (e.g., the master of wild reindeer) act like persons and are sometimes organized into tribes, and humans maintain with them relations of hostility or exchange. In contrast, the va’IrgIt are impersonal and localized manifestations of cosmic vitality with which no kind of interaction is possible. The sacrifices of domesticated reindeer to the va’IrgIt are therefore not transfers from one group of individuals to another, which call for reciprocation—as in the case of the food given to the master of wild reindeer. Rather, they are a way for humans to contribute to the general circulation of the flow of life that is carried by the blood of the sacrificial victims. The ones to whom this flow is directed—that is, the va’IrgIt—regenerate it and return it to humans in the form of good health, abundance, and prosperity for the livestock.9

Each herd is also placed under the protection of a little fire-board, strictly for family use, which is carved into a vaguely anthropomorphic form. Over and above its basic purpose, the Chukchees regard it as a particularized expression of the Reindeer-Being: the holes bored by means of the friction of a bow drill are considered to be its eyes, while the grinding noise made by the drilling is the sound of its voice. When sacrifices are made, the members of each domestic unit daub their fire-board with the animal’s blood, which they also use to paint their faces in their own particular patterns. They say that in this way they resemble the Reindeer-Being that protects their herd.10 The Chukchees’ relationship to the guardian power that watches over their domesticated reindeer thus contrasts with the one that they maintain with the figure that raises wild reindeer. They endeavor by every means to identify with the Reindeer-Being, joining their efforts to his, the better to ensure protection for their herds, in the expectation that he will bring to bear on them part of the beneficent power of which he is a reflection and which they themselves help to activate by means of their sacrifices. In contrast, in the case of Pičvu’čin, who is a clearly individualized spirit, endowed with an altogether human disposition, it is more a matter of maintaining balanced relations based on an exchange of services and reciprocal transactions.

In effect, as regards all that concerns dealings with existing beings that elude the jurisdiction of humans, in particular the deer species and those who control them, the Chukchee world differs little from that of the hunters of northern America. In both cases we find animist cosmologies peopled by intentional entities organized into collectives. The only difference between them is the dominant relational schema, which is based on gift giving to the east of the Bering Strait but on exchanging to the west. In the Chukchee region, however, the link with certain classes of nonhumans is subtly modified according to the hold, slight though this is, that the humans have established over them. Their field of protection has been extended beyond the masters of game to include human reindeer raisers and the entity that supports them. That expansion is possibly facilitated by the fact that most visible things, ranging from rainbows right down to the bundles of pelts prepared for trading, are reputed to depend on a nonhuman master.11 Furthermore, a few features characteristic of an analogical identification are now becoming perceptible in a rough form: the components of the world begin to multiply and above all to vary in nature. Some, namely the va’IrgIt, no longer belong to a particular species and have even lost their form and are no longer confined to the framework of autonomous collectives within which other categories of existent beings go about their activities. They have become active, fluid, and mobile principles whose impersonal permanence must be fixed in objects and cardinal points. The task of getting them to communicate harmoniously falls to humans, who must act as mediators by means of their sacrifices.

The ontological diversification of the entities in the world is still embryonic among the Chukchees, but it becomes increasingly manifest as one moves farther south. This phenomenon has been noted by specialists on Siberia. It takes the form of a series of contrasts in social organization and religious beliefs between the people of the northern zone and those of the southern zone. The remarks that follow are based on the oppositions established by Morten Pedersen, whose typology presents the advantage of referring to analytical categories that I had myself suggested.12 According to this author, the northern fringe is dominantly animist. This covers the regions of tundra and taiga of northeastern Siberia and the extreme east of Russia. It is inhabited by ethnic groups of the Paleo-Asiatic phylum (Chukchees, Koriak, Yukaghir, etc.) and Turkish families (Iakoutes) and Altaic ones (the Tunkusi group and its Evenk and Even offshoots). The southern zone, that is, the steppes of the Mongolian plateau and its forested fringes, is inhabited chiefly by peoples from the Ural-Altaic family (Buryats, Halx, Darxad, etc.). Here, the egalitarian relations between collectives of human and nonhuman persons with identical attributes, as found in the north, have disappeared. They have been supplanted by vertical relations of differentiation that Pedersen calls “totemic,” although he recognizes that there are no true cases of totemism in Siberia: even if clans and moieties do often receive animal names, there is no trace of any identification between their members and the eponymous species. In fact, upon closer examination, the “totemic” characteristics that he attributes to southern Siberia turn out to be much closer to what I call the analogist system.

On the basis of his ethnography on the Darxad and Caroline Humphrey’s study on the Daur, two Mongolian ethnic groups, Pedersen emphasizes the movement of ontological differentiation and pluralization that is peculiar to southern Siberia: certain nonhumans—mountains, animals, and trees—are still regarded and treated as persons, but to most existing beings are attributed very heterogeneous and idiosyncratic properties that, however, can be linked together by segments of analogist chains that are revealed in ritual specializations. Thus, among the Daur, mature men are made responsible for harmonizing the elements, for they are on the side of the sky and hence of meteorological phenomena; women have to deal above all with social mobility, for they are associated with rivers, which are expressions of flux; the elderly, who are linked with fire, the sign of light, manage hierarchies; the shaman, who is capable of metamorphosis, is close to wild animals and their whole range of specific aptitudes; midwives, whose field of competence is fertility, are linked with the womb and caves, symbols of maturation.13 No totalizing principle is introduced to unify this conglomeration of autonomous domains and independent spheres of intervention that are linked only by discontinuous parcels of short associative series in which the lineages of ancestors stand out as fixed points. Animist features are still present, one being shamans, who, alone, are able to cross frontiers in this hierarchical set of separate areas and to transcend the ontological fragmentation. But the shamans mobilize above all the spirits of the dead, not the animal auxiliaries of their fellow shamans in the north. In short, differences are beginning to multiply, and with them, relations of a different nature are established between existing beings.

The example of the Exirit-Bulagat, already briefly evoked to illustrate the general protection schema, will help to explain this.14 We should remember that these Buryat herders of Cisbaikalia, who are organized into exogamous clans, adopted extensive horse and cattle raising only in the seventeenth century, although that did not stop them hunting wild reindeer, elk, and roe deer. As with the domestication of reindeer farther north, the borrowing of horses from the Mongols of the steppes was motivated by their effectiveness in hunting, which is here practiced by large groups of mounted beaters. The Exirit-Bulagat treat their herds of horses in the manner of reindeer raisers; that is to say, they turn them loose for part of the year. Like the hunters of subarctic America and northern Siberia, they assign the control of wild deer to a spirit that we have already come across, known as “Rich-Forest” (Bagan Xangaj). This spirit is described as a very large reindeer or elk and is seen as a kind of generic father-in-law who gives game to his human sons-in-law when they copulate in their dreams with his daughters. So far, this is all very classic: in their relations with wild animals, structured by a logic of alliance with intentional entities, the Exirit-Bulagat differ little from the Siberian peoples. But this pocket of animism has become residual, as has the hunting that used to provide it with a framework of practical experience. For the progressive predominance of livestock raising goes hand in hand with the establishment of a vertical relationship of protective domination—of humans over domesticated animals, human ancestors over their descendants, and a mythical begetter of the tribe over both its members and its herds. This presents a strong contrast to the egalitarian relations between humans and nonhuman persons that are characteristic of northern Siberia.

The founder of the tribe is reputed to be Buxa Nojon, “Lord Bull,” a celestial animal that came down to earth, where he impregnated a girl and then took in and raised the child that he had fathered. The lines of ancestors descended from this union each live on a precise site of the mountain at the foot of which their descendants are established. Horses are sacrificed to them to persuade them to grant their protection to the herds and make them prosper. The meat from the victims consecrated to them is impregnated with “grace,” xešeg, which the ancestors place there so that it will be incorporated by the humans who consume it. In the course of a long ceremony held in July, mares and geldings are sacrificed to Lord Bull in equal numbers and for identical reasons. The souls of the horses, substitutes for those of humans, are regarded as a propitiatory gift offered to the deity in the hope of obtaining in return happiness and wealth, which are the concrete expressions of the grace dispensed to them. However, unlike the balanced exchange involved in the relations with Rich-Forest, this sacrificial oblation to Lord Bull does not always prove effective. The humans beg for his grace, backing up their pleas with offerings and flattering words, but can never be sure that they will receive the hoped-for protection, because, on the part of the deity, that protection is simply an expression of the power that it holds as a result of its position.15 Far from constituting anticipated compensation offered in exchange for future benefits, the animals sacrificed to the ancestors and the celestial bull represent tokens of devotion addressed to figures whose designs remain impenetrable, figures that may choose not to concede the good fortune that they can dispense as and when they wish to. Just as the lives of the animals dependent upon the humans are at the mercy of those who supervise their well-being, so too the fate of the humans dependent upon ancestors and deities is governed by the goodwill of the latter. At any moment, protection may be withdrawn, in the case of the beasts when they are slaughtered and of the humans when the entities to which they sacrifice remain deaf to their pleas.

The preponderance of this relation of protective dominance is accompanied by a cascade of particularized hierarchies in which many features of an analogical collective are discernible. Despite a seminomadic life, the links with localized ancestral lineages, which are maintained by various forms of a cult of the dead, constitute the source of segmentary identities. The ancestors that each constitutive unit in the tribe claim as the source of their distinctive autonomies are the masters of the places that their descendants occupy in the summer period, and those masters control the destinies of both the latter and their herds. As guarantors of the integrity of the lineages, the dead thus continue to animate with their presence the places that their members frequent for part of the year. It is moreover said that they lead an existence similar to that of the living, contracting intermarriages and giving birth to children. The lineages, which are spread out along a scale of gradations of prestige based on the antiquity of their founders, are like moral persons in a permanent situation of rivalry who, however, on occasion know how to unite to make a common stand against the external world. The Exirit-Bulagat thus certainly constitute a collective divided into separate hierarchical and complementary units, each of which is attached to particular sites and composed of a mixture of entities of various kinds. The collective is structured by a logic of segmentary interlocking which favors the expression of differences yet at the same time limits its dissolvent effects. Despite the superficial resemblances, this is no longer the world of the Chukchees, with its multiplicity of egalitarian and monospecific collectives of humans, spirits, and animals, in which there is as yet scarcely any sign of impersonal entities that stand apart and are no longer included in the solidarities and allegiances of the group.

In contrast to that world, the Exirit-Bulagat collective extends to the very limits of the cosmos and integrates within it a diversified multitude of nonhumans, each with its own domains but linked to the rest of the existing beings, including humans, by a network of correspondences and influences. As Hamayon writes, “Representations of supernatural beings start to proliferate.”16 As well as the lineage territories controlled by ordinary ancestors, many localities are placed under the jurisdiction of the spirits of dead individuals, either because they were born there or because they encountered a premature death there: for example, a hunter who died of exhaustion in a far corner of the forest is thereafter in control of access to the game there and must be begged to supply it. As well as controlling particular sites, these dead also become the masters of particular diseases, activities, properties, and modes of existence that oppress human beings, who either long to be free of them or to gain control of them, if only the dead will agree to this. Another form of dependence is that linking all humans to “destiny spirits” (zajaan), which are produced by the dead of shamanistic lineages. These are said to be extremely active and excessively imaginative, and they allocate to each human a destiny that becomes intrinsic to him or her, to the point of being regarded as a component of his or her personality. These spirits may be either masculine or feminine; each is attached to a particular site and specializes in particular types of destinies. They are sufficiently numerous to provide all the biographical trajectories that are necessary for the normal diversity of existing beings. This predestination is accompanied by another factor of particularization, namely the “essences” (udxa). These are aptitudes inherited from ancestors, which predispose individuals to exercise particular functions, such as those of a shaman, a blacksmith, a saddler, or a fletcher. Each essence is a potential quality that is transmitted and is necessary for the practice of some special activity. However, it may possibly not be actualized by whoever possesses it. Even so, in order to avoid the wrath of the ancestors, it is imperative not to let it go to waste, that is, to remain unrepresented in the world of the living. Over and above individual destinies, this innate quality thus introduces into the collective differences that are, strictly speaking, “essential,” albeit complementary, between different categories of humans. Finally, far more distant from humans but organized according to the same segmentary logic, at the summit of the hierarchy there is a quarrelsome community of “Heavens” (tengeri). They are divided into two rival groups, the elder faction of fifty-five white Heavens of the east and the younger faction of forty-four black Heavens of the west. These are individualized entities associated with atmospheric states and are the creators of particularities, insofar as everything that they do has a predetermined function. Each Heaven is thus the depository of one specific attribute, which it helps to maintain and diffuse: a spirit of initiative, jealousy, cunning, or malevolence, each of which is characterized by a color and a particular cardinal point.

Among the Exirit-Bulagat, pockets of animist identification certainly do remain, particularly in the domain of the treatment of wild animals and of Rich-Forest, the master of the deer species, and even in certain properties attributed to domesticated animals, such as the souls of the horses sent to the spirits to which sacrifices are dedicated. But, in contrast to the ontological regime of animism, in which the persons, both human and nonhuman, distributed among differentiated collectives all nevertheless share certain similar attributes, all the elements in the collective to which the Exirit-Bulagat belong seem to be particularized: places, beings, social segments, the dead and the living, the sectors of the cosmos, the deities, the fields of activity, the spheres of skills, predispositions, destinies, qualities—all are dissociated, and everything stems from an obsessive particularism that analogism strives to recompose in an always incomplete network of partial similarities. Even the nature of shamanism has changed and begins to move in the direction of the forms of possession by spirits that are so common in analogical ontologies: whereas a shaman in northern Siberia maintains with his animal auxiliaries a collaborative relationship, the Buryat shaman in a trance physically incorporates the spirits of the ancestors and Lord Bull. Perhaps, in this case, it is not strictly speaking a matter of possession, since it seems that the intrusive powers do not replace the intentionality of their host to the point of alienating him completely; but it comes close to possession especially when, having incorporated the spirit of Lord Bull, the shaman begins to low and drops to all fours as if he had himself become a celestial bull.17 In short, despite the geographical continuity and superficial resemblances, this world fragmented by vertical relations, teeming with autonomous entities and qualities in quest of hosts, hierarchized by ancestors, and differentiated by essences and destinies is utterly different from that of northern Siberia. Here, right on the edge of the analogical archipelago, in order to become an integral part of it, all that is required is to expel the memory of Rich-Forest and, along with him, the little troop of animals, trees, and mountains that remain aquiver with an interiority similar to that of humans.

Moving from northern America to the fringes of the Mongolian plateau, we have passed in a series of minimal transformations from a system dominated by gift-giving animism to a different system in which protective analogism is beginning to take hold (fig. 11). For this to happen, it was enough that the protective relationship spread beyond the restrictive framework of the raising of wild animals by spirits that watch over them, in order to infiltrate the embryonic domestication of those same animals that is undertaken by humans. That was but a small step to take and one seemingly without grave consequences so long as relations, now of symmetrical exchange, persisted between humans and the collectives of nonhuman persons. But those relations eventually become residual when, spilling over from the practices of occasional livestock raisers, the need for protection contaminates even those dispensing it. At this point, the hierarchies of dependencies, which are felt to provide the necessary conditions for security, have to be extended upward and humans have to enter a cycle of voluntary servitude vis-à-vis their ancestors, their elders, their deities. Now they have to fill the world with beings and principles that are made responsible for the unexpected twists and turns of destinies. They have to implore the benevolence of masters whose silence is feared, and they have to flatter them with sacrificial offerings; they are obliged ceaselessly to interpret signs that bestow meaning upon a compartmentalized and heterogeneous cosmos in which even the assurance that each thing is in its place cannot quite dissipate anxiety regarding the unpredictable consequences of the intervention of certain of those things into human daily life.





FIGURE 11. The transition from “gift-giving” animism to protective analogism





Hunting, Taming, Domesticating



The domestication of animals no doubt did play a role in the “Siberian transition,” but it does not suffice to explain it. For the availability of a domesticatable animal does not necessarily lead to its domestication, since every technical innovation stems from a choice, that is to say, an opportunity to retain or exclude certain options, depending on whether or not they seem compatible with the other elements of the system within which the technique must be integrated. This is borne out by the fact that the peoples of subarctic America abstained from taking the same path as their Siberian neighbors, who did domesticate their reindeer. Moreover, they abstained from doing so even though the protective relations implied by livestock raising were potentially present in the figure of the master of the caribous and concretely present in their own extremely longstanding domestication of dogs.

Besides, even the example of the practical advantages of livestock raising does not guarantee that it will be lastingly implanted, as is shown by an experiment carried out in Alaska at the end of the nineteenth century.18 Faced with the decline of the caribou herds in the Seward Peninsula, the representatives of the federal administration had the idea of importing from northeastern Siberia domesticated reindeer along with their Chukchee minders, in order to teach the Yup’ik Eskimos the techniques of livestock raising and thereby procure for them a source of meat that did not depend on the hazards of hunting. The autochthonous Eskimos used sledges drawn by dogs, but the Chukchees also introduced their own sledges harnessed to reindeer as a means of getting around. This was greeted with enthusiasm by the authorities, who then proceeded to promote their diffusion by appealing to Sami, large numbers of whom were brought from Finland and Norway with their own more docile reindeer and better-adapted sledges. With a view to keeping pace with the development of colonization at the time of the gold rush, the governmental program for the raising of reindeer ended up by being almost exclusively directed toward providing transport for prospectors, for trading posts, and for the postal service, leaving to the missionaries the task of trying to convince the native peoples of the advantages of livestock raising. The results of the campaign failed both to meet initial hopes and to repay the efforts expended. The Yup’ik continued to prefer hunting caribou to raising them and were happier moving around on their sledges drawn by dogs than with harnessed reindeer. Only a handful of them, under pressure from the missionaries, agreed to remain far from their villages for most of the winter in order to supervise herds of reindeer. It is hard to say with certainty whether this failure resulted from the inadequacy of the techniques employed to meet the conditions of local life (the dog-drawn sledge was better adapted for the Yup’ik; they found itinerant livestock raising too restricting; the zones for pasturing the reindeer were too widely scattered; etc.) or whether the failure was attributable to reasons of a more moral nature, such as the autochthonous Yup’iks’ distaste at the idea of raising an animal that they usually hunted and consuming the meat that they had “produced” rather than obtained within the framework of a person-to-person trade-off with the entities that controlled the hunted animals. As in many similar cases, those two types of causes were no doubt both in play. At any rate, the fact remains that, unlike in northern Siberia, where the environment and modes of existence were not very different, to the east of the Bering Strait no one spontaneously switched to the domestication of the caribou.

We now need to digress at length in order to gain a better understanding of this phenomenon. It will take us among other peoples who have likewise abstained from domesticating the local fauna, even though they possess great practical experience of animals raised in semicaptivity. Throughout Amazonia, Amerindians cohabit in their homes in perfect harmony with many species of animals.19 These animals are the young of game killed by hunting or baby birds that have been taken from their nests. They are either fed by hand (in the case of birds) or breast-fed and thus receive what ethologists call a substitute “imprint” that leads them to attach themselves to their masters to the point of following them wherever they go. The Amerindians know all about this mechanism, which is indispensable for the taming process, and they are skilled at evaluating the period, which is quite short but differs for each species, during which the imprinting phenomenon is likely to take place. Among the species usually tamed, the ones most suitable for domestication are no doubt the larger rodents (the paca, the agouti, the acouchi, and the capybara), the two species of peccary, the tapir, and certain birds, principally terrestrial ones, which already live a farmyard-type existence around the houses of the Amerindians: the Cracidae, the Tinamidae, and the trumpet-birds, the latter widely used throughout the region as sentinels. Provided they have been familiarized with humans at a relatively early age, all these animals are fairly docile and adapt well to captivity. So it is quite common to find a peccary the size of a wild boar peacefully snoozing by the fire or a tapir weighing five hundred kilograms gamboling in the river with its master or swimming in his wake when he travels by canoe. Now, although they represent a potential source of meat, none of these household animals are ever killed to be eaten, except in a few altogether exceptional cases such as the ritual slaughtering of a tapir among the Pano, to which I have already referred.20

Nor have the Amerindians attempted to breed, in captivity, the animals that they have tamed nor, a fortiori, to select the best of their offspring. Beyond the Andes, where members of the camel family and guinea pigs were domesticated at least six thousand years ago, the only autochthonous domesticated animal of tropical South America is the Barbary duck, which was probably domesticated at the beginning of the Christian era along the northern coast of the continent. However, the raising of this creature has spread extremely slowly to other regions in the lowlands, where it is still relatively rare even today. Despite the very ancient tradition of domesticating the principal plants cultivated in non-Andean South America, there has been no equivalent movement toward the domestication of animals, here understood in the traditional sense defined by Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire: as the reduction to a state of domesticity of “a succession of individual animals produced one from another, under human control.”21

The first possible explanation for this state of affairs obviously relates to techniques of rearing animals: even though many species of South American fauna allow themselves to be tamed without difficulty, none would appear to be suitable for true domestication. But plenty of indications suggest that this is not the case. Thus, a study of the livestock-raising potentialities for a variety of wild species, expressed in terms of meat productivity and ethograms, has picked out, for South America, in particular the capybaras, the peccaries, and the agoutis.22 Intensive raising of these three species on modern farms has become quite common in South America, with the capybaras even serving as ordinary butcher’s meat in certain regions of Venezuela. It is also known that a tapir will allow itself to be trained if it is captured at a very early age and that it has occasionally been used as a draft animal by the Caboclos of the interior of Brazil.23 As for the paca, the agouti, and the acouchi, at a zoological and ethological level, these are very close to the guinea pig, long a principal source of meat for Andean peasants. Finally, it should be noted that, with the exception of the tapir, all these species of mammals are light in weight (less than forty kilograms) and have a medium rate of reproduction, which models of evolutionary ecology consider to be the most favorable conditions when it comes to deciding to switch from hunting to domestication.24

However, of all the mammals of the tropical fauna of South America, it is the collared peccary (Tayassu tajacu) that presents the most characteristic ethogram of a species suitable for domestication: it is gregarious and sexually promiscuous within a framework of relatively large groups that are both diversified and arranged into hierarchies; it can maintain a high speed only over short distances and adapts well to environmental changes; furthermore, its feeding habits are not very specialized.25 The experience of zoos moreover shows that the reproduction of this peccary in captivity raises no particular problems.26 In view of all this, the fact that they have not been domesticated by the Amerindians has caught the attention of a number of authors.27 Although it is true that male peccaries sometimes become uncontrollable when they reach adulthood, in South America it would have been perfectly possible to adopt the technique of pig-raising practiced in New Guinea, where the sows are left to roam freely in the bush surrounding the villages, where they copulate with stud boars that have remained wild. In Amazonia, tamed peccaries and tapirs are very seldom confined to an enclosure but are left to roam as they please around the inhabited areas, returning to be fed only when their masters call them. Feeding a whole herd would not demand any great intensification of horticultural resources, because at present these are under-exploited and also because the sweet potato, one of the first plant species to have been domesticated in America, is already widely used in Amazonia for feeding another domesticated animal, namely the dog. Its introduction into New Guinea contributed, precisely, to the raising of pigs, in the famous “Ipomean revolution.”

It is true that in Papua, gardens are often protected from the incursions of pigs by solid barriers the construction of which is quite hard work, an investment of energy that the Amerindians, whose gardens are not enclosed, might be unwilling to accept. Nevertheless, it would be perfectly possible to keep the peccaries themselves in enclosures, given that such a procedure was probably employed in Brazil in the past, as a hunting technique, by the Mundurucú: herds of peccaries were driven into a corral where they were kept and fed before being slaughtered when the need for food arose (not that this stocking of food on the hoof ever led to any attempt at their controlled reproduction).28 This example in fact underlines the difference in the Amerindians’ attitudes to, on the one hand, animals captured for food but kept collectively outside the village and, on the other, individuals of the same species that are never eaten since they have been mothered and socialized in inhabited places. Furthermore, the raising of European pigs in enclosures is not unknown in Amazonia. Certain societies in upper Amazonia that are in regular contact with the Andes have apparently practiced this for a long time, feeling no particular scruples about eating pork. So it would seem, here, not to be so much a distaste for domesticated animals in general but rather a repugnance felt for the domestication of animals that are usually hunted as game.29

The explanation for such a repugnance might, of course, be the simple fact that it is more economical to procure meat by hunting relatively abundant animals than by going to the trouble of raising them. It is now known that contemporary Amazonia is not the “proteinless desert” formerly imagined by some advocates of cultural ecology and that the Amerindians are by no means lacking in game, even if ecological circumstances did introduce notable disparities in its accessibility. Many studies establish definitively that Amerindian hunting is highly productive, and one has even used a mathematical model to compare, among the Piro, the actual yield of meat from hunting collared peccaries with hypothetical yields were they to be raised in captivity. This study demonstrates that it is more profitable for this population to continue to be hunters.30 No doubt the Amerindians had no need to know how to calculate the allometric relations between density, biomass, and levels of reproduction in order to come to an identical conclusion in many regions of Amazonia with ecological and demographic conditions similar to those of the Piro. It also seems likely that certain animal species were domesticated in the first place, not in order to be eaten (since they could perfectly well be hunted), but rather in order to obtain access to secondary products (milk, leather, wool, transport, etc.).31 From this point of view, with the exception of the trumpet-bird (which acts as a sentinel) and parrots and macaws (whose feathers are prized as ornaments), the Amazonian fauna has little to offer. That being said, in most major centers of animal domestication, in particular in the Near East, domestication was fully developed only once sedentary living and demographic growth in circumscribed territories had increased to such a degree that dependence for food on the products of livestock raising became irreversible, relegating hunting to a supplementary activity. However, the low population densities that nowadays make it possible, in the interfluvial regions of Amazonia, to acquire adequate supplies of animal protein by hunting have not always been the norm. Sedentary and extremely dense societies, which were destroyed at a very early stage in the European colonial expansion, had developed in the course of almost two millennia on the rich alluvial terraces of the great rivers and in the foothills of the Andes; but even those societies never judged it necessary to resort to the domestication of the peccary, the agouti, or the capybara in order to compensate for whatever hunting could no longer deliver. Instead, they preferred to exploit alternative sources of protein, in particular the intensive cultivation of maize and, to a lesser degree, aquatic fauna. Keeping live tortoises inside enclosed pens was in any case common along the Amazon, although this conservation technique cannot be assimilated to livestock raising since no direct human action was exercised on the animals. It would thus appear that, between the taming of game animals and their domestication, there is a boundary that the Amerindians of the tropical regions have always refused to cross.32

This is all the more remarkable given that, in Amazonia just as much as in North America and Siberia, hunted animals are believed to live under the control of spirits that behave toward them as breeders. Even if the term generally used to designated this relationship denotes “taming,” this really is a matter of livestock raising for, unlike the Amerindians themselves, who neither eat their pet animals nor try to get them to reproduce, the spirit masters of hunted animals often do feed off their herds or at any rate zealously promote their propagation. Not only are relations of protection for animals concretely present everywhere in Amazonia, taking the form of taming, but they also obtain potentially in all the decisions relating to livestock raising that are taken in the management of wild animals by nonhuman herders. And it is perhaps this duality in the treatment of protected animals that explains why the Indians of Amazonia have not domesticated the peccary, the capybara, or the agouti. For household animals have a status of their own; they socialize in the house in which they live at liberty, are fed and mothered by the women, are playmates for the young boys and girls, and are assimilated to preadolescent children, a fact that is sometimes invoked to explain why they do not reproduce themselves. In contrast, in Amazonia, hunted animals and their masters are usually regarded as affines—sexual partners or brothers-in-law in the case of the animals, parents-in-law in the case of the spirit masters. This is a feature that, as we have seen, is characteristic of many animist systems both in this part of the world and elsewhere. By regarding the young of hunted animals as adoptive children, the Amerindians distance them from the relations of alliance that they maintain with the spirits that protect the fauna, and they themselves fill the place of those spirits when they assume the function of a livestock raiser feeding his animals. But that substitution is both partial and temporary, for the humans are careful neither to encourage the protected animals to reproduce nor ever to kill them in order to eat them. In short, they “play” at being livestock raisers, possessing all the required zoological and ecological skills but without pushing such behavior to its logical conclusion.

In the lowlands of South America, taming animals is thus in no sense an incomplete attempt at “protodomestication.”33 The reason it has not led to veritable livestock raising lies in the manner in which relationships with animals are apprehended in this region. Game is either an alter ego, in a position of absolute exteriority when it is hunted, or else, when it is tamed, it is so close to humans that it cannot be eaten. In an animist regime, it is not surprising that animal-persons that live in their own independent collectives should be perceived as exterior. And as for the excessive proximity of household animals, it is occasioned by the fact that these orphans, separated from their own collectives and integrated into those of humans, have, despite their persistent differences of form, lost most of the attributes typical of their tribal-species origins. Being, in most cases, the only one of their kind in the house that takes them in, they interact no longer with their fellows but with humans or with animals of other species placed in the same situation. They no longer find their food in the habitual manner but eat whatever is prepared for them. They no longer occupy their own habitat but live in an environment created by others. Since they no longer reproduce in the mode that is characteristic of their species, they remain without sexual partners in the state of sexual immaturity of eternal children; even their bodies change, for they are sometimes massaged and shaped as if to make them more like humans, as may happen with the malleable bodies of infants, so that they acquire the perfection desired by their parents.34 In short, in adopting some of the habits of those who have tamed them, the animals have lost their initial distinctive properties and have come to resemble the humans. That is why they do not end up in the cooking pot. Just as one does not eat the children who are captured from enemies and then integrated into the family of the murderer of their parents, where they are treated as distant blood relatives, likewise one does not eat the young animals whose parents have been killed, for they have now acquired the habits and customs of the collective into which they have been welcomed.

Yet this naturalization through adoption does not totally abolish the tamed animals’ dependence on the masters of game, who continue from afar to ensure their protection. Under pain of arousing the anger of the spirits that watch over these temporary guests, there can be no more question of mistreating them than of inflicting pointless suffering on the animals that one hunts or of failing to respect them. The fact is that, in the social imaginary, most animals are already domesticated by their spirit masters and far more completely so than as a result of their adoption by humans; and, in a way, this rules out the humans themselves attempting to domesticate them. That would in effect imply, not so much a practical process prefigured by the taming of the animals, but rather a total transfer of subjection to which the masters of game would have to consent. Totally abolishing the exteriority of animal-persons and integrating them into human collectives would result in a situation that would upset the ontological frontiers of Amerindian cosmologies and also the principles by means of which relations between humans and nonhumans are put into practice. In contrast to pigs in New Guinea or cattle in Africa, which are the objects of a metonymic transfer that enables them to express the qualities and aspirations of whoever owns them, and consequently to serve as substitutes for humans in certain exchanges, an animal in tropical South America can only be seen as the subject, both individually and as a member of a group, of an egalitarian relationship between two persons. Here, the rejection of the technique of domestication is thus not so much the product of a conscious choice independently made by thousands of different peoples; rather, it is an effect of the impossibility, for them, of transforming their schema for relations with animals by generalizing vis-à-vis certain species a protective attitude that is the prerogative of nonhumans and that restricts the human taming of animals to no more than a few individual creatures. Of course, this blockage was necessarily a matter of accident, but it has been maintained ever since the pre-Columbian period right down to the present day. This is borne out a contrario by the failure of attempts made by developmental bodies in Amazonian societies to implant model farms in which to raise agoutis or peccaries as alternative sources of meat in regions where the environment has been degraded to the point of reducing the yield from hunting to almost nothing.

Provided certain conditions are met, it is far easier to adopt a new technical object than to invent a new technical relationship. The Indians of Amazonia immediately understood the advantage of metal tools, firearms, and, more recently, outboard motors and power saws, which, far more effectively than their old wooden and stone tools, perform exactly the same functions: cutting, dispatching projectiles, propelling canoes, and so on. Nor, in some cases, did they hesitate to learn from the whites elementary techniques of smelting and fashioning metals so as to make or repair the weapons that they needed in order to rid themselves of the presence of the very people who, with great naivety, had instructed them in this art.35 The introduction of domesticated European animals among the Amerindians, foremost among them dogs, also took place without major difficulties, since the technical and ideological modalities of the treatment of animals were mostly transmitted along with the animals themselves, and all that was required were a few adjustments in taxonomies.36 But it was an altogether different story when it came to the domestication of autochthonous animals, despite the fact that the principle was already present by analogy with the supposed behavior of the animals’ spirit masters (and also, in some regions, by almost five centuries of familiarity with European domesticated animals). The trouble was that the adoption of such domestication would have necessitated a serious reorientation in the modes of relating to nonhumans and would have entailed modification to their ontological status.

It would, of course, have been possible to separate animals of the same species into two more or less sealed-off domains according to whether they were raised or hunted, as the Chukchees do with reindeer and certain Papuans do with pigs. In both these cases, minimal protection for the semidomesticated animal coexists without problems alongside predation upon their wild fellows, with the consent of the spirits that raise these.37 The Indians of Amazonia did not follow this course with their peccaries, nor did those of subarctic America with their caribou, for reasons upon which it would be hazardous to speculate. Let us simply note that this kind of rectification of ontological frontiers comes about very gradually over a very long period of time. The reindeer that originated in America began to be domesticated in northern Eurasia almost five thousand years ago, probably by populations that had arrived from the south with longstanding skills as horse breeders. But their domestication took several millennia to become diffused in Siberia, where in certain regions it now dates from no more than a few centuries ago, and it remains embryonic wherever wild reindeers are abundant.38 As for the domestication of the pig, it is still at no more than a midway stage of taming in some regions of New Guinea, where the inhabitants are content simply to capture wild piglets, which they then raise.





The Genesis of Change



It is not technical progress in itself that transforms the relations that humans maintain between themselves and the world but rather the sometimes tiny modifications made to those relations. It is these that render possible types of action previously considered unrealizable with respect to some particular category of existing beings, for every technique is primarily a mediated or immediate relation between an intentional agent and inorganic or living material, which may include the agent himself. For a new technique to appear or to be adopted with some chance of success, it must certainly be seen to possess a real or imaginary use and also to be compatible with the other characteristics of the system in which it finds a place. Above all, the original relationship that it implies must be possible to objectify—that is, it must correspond to a preexisting schema of interactions that, however, has so far been confined to a subordinate or specialized position because it affects only one particular well-defined class of objects. In this sense, a technical choice presupposes both a reconfiguration of elements already present and also the application of a specific type of relation to entities that were not previously concerned with it. This is what happens in animal domestication, with an expansion of the protective relation beyond its original niche, in which it affected above all the nurturing behavior of parents toward their children and the control that they consequently exerted over the conditions of the latter’s existence. That control might even extend as far as the right (which many societies recognize) for parents to dispose of their children’s lives, if only through a lack of care, abandonment, or exposure to the elements.

Understood in this way, a technical relation is remarkably stable over a long period of time, in contrast to the instrumental means that it employs and the organization of the operational chains in which it finds expression, for these may undergo setbacks within quite brief periods of time. The range of possible relations with oneself or some other living or inert being is far more limited than the whole collection of objects that those relations may engender and than the gamut of usable methods to achieve one’s aim. Technical evolution could therefore be envisaged, not as a gradual complexifying of tools and processes of transformation, but rather as a limited and more or less cumulative series of objectivizations of new relations. The transition from cart to automobile or from the belted loom to the Jacquard loom was in no way inevitable or predictable, but at least it seems compatible with the features of such operations and the nature of the results inherent to those categories of artifacts. However, that is by no means the case with the objectivization of a new technical relationship, such as the domestication of plants or animals (the two do not necessarily go together), which constitute unprecedented revolutions in the apprehension and treatment of the frontiers between oneself and others. Instrumentalization is another of those major revolutions, probably the first one, since the idea of transferring an organism’s physical function to an object that will facilitate it germinated in other species before flourishing so spectacularly as human beings evolved. Among such new relations with things, we should include the storage of foodstuffs, that is, the accumulation of energy for the reproduction of life, a phenomenon that is quite independent from domestication (for some agriculturalists do not practice it while some hunter-gatherers do) and is the probable source of the first economic inequalities.39 Making no claims to be exhaustive, we might add to this short list the invention of cognitive artifacts (from the Inca quipus to writing and passing by way of the abacus and pictograms) and also the separation of skills in the organization of tasks, this time involving relations between humans, which came about when the multiple abilities of each individual, previously employed in collective operations with no explicit coordination, were redirected by an overseer in order to facilitate the accomplishment of the various specific tasks that were assigned to every individual: the nature of the skills mobilized did not change, but modifying the relations of different parties to the whole made specialization possible and, with it, introduced a social division of work. In all these cases, objectivization takes the form either of an externalization of human properties and physical and mental functions or of an artificialization of some nonhumans, both processes rendered possible by transposing previously developed skills or relations to meet new ends.

With the exception of the stocking of goods, none of these breaks in relations to matter presupposes or even results in a radical modification of social and economic conditions, for the actualization of the productive potentialities contained in the new technical relations is by no means automatic. Perhaps the best illustration is provided by the domestication of plants, an extraordinary mutation in the treatment of nonhumans but one that cannot be considered the deus ex machina of political stratification, demographic growth, or the exploitation of others: we should remember that plenty of hunters–cum–swidden horticulturalists are barely distinguishable from hunter-gatherers from the point of view of their sociopolitical systems, the organization of subsistence, and their strategies for occupying and managing a certain space. In contrast, societies founded exclusively on the tapping of natural resources (the Indians of the northwest coast of North America and those of southern Florida) have presented inegalitarian features—disparities in wealth, the use of servile labor, hierarchical political structures—that are nowhere to be found among most cultivators of tropical tubers.

In the domain of technical innovations as in historical evolution in general, it is not so much movement that needs explaining as stability. Every day brings its quota of tiny discoveries; curious minds everywhere speculate about the world and its mysteries; at any moment strong personalities may embark on enterprises with unpredictable consequences; so conditions are always suitable for things not to remain as they are but, instead, through an accumulation of minuscule mutations, to transform themselves at a pace said to vary depending on the standard adopted for measuring change. If we try to avoid the shortsightedness of the present moment that causes us to assess a general movement according to the way in which we ourselves sense it in the course of the ups and downs of our own existence, we cannot fail to recognize that the major frameworks for the schematization of human experience change very little, in particular ontological regimes and the dominant relational modes that structure praxis; and this does not apply solely to the societies that Lévi-Strauss called “cold” because they seek to neutralize the effects of historical contingency. Stability, then, is due, not to an unlikely absence of movement, but to a suppression of movement or, more precisely, to the obstacles placed in the way of its normal course by mechanisms that inhibit its immediate consequences. One of those obstacles, possibly the most common of them, lies in the difficulty of extending the field of certain relations to include new objects, thereby encouraging them to change in status in order to conform to the expected characteristics of the class of existing beings to which those relations originally applied. The nature of the terms involved constrains the nature of the relations that can be established between them, which is why, in my view, ontological identification must logically precede relationships. For this reason, terms cannot easily be transferred from one relationship to another, and this ontological resistance constitutes the most decisive obstacle to the movement of transposition that characterizes an objectivization of the original technical relationship.

This is what happens in tropical South America with the coexistence of different modalities of relations to two distinct classes of animals: namely, on the one hand, the treatment of animals habitually hunted and, on the other, the raising of domesticated European animals, the most common of these being dogs and chickens. While the protection of certain individuals from the former group remains provisional and conditional upon their being tamed, for the second group, which is totally subordinated to the humans, it becomes absolute; and this tendency explains why it was more or less inconceivable that animals hunted as game could be slipped into a domesticating relationship. Where a transfer from one relationship to another has occurred, it happened because nonindigenous terms came to be included in the original relationship, not the other way around. For instance, in savanna regions several cases are known in which feral cattle that have reverted to a wild state have been turned into game animals by Amerindians, but there is no record of any game animals being turned into domesticated ones.

Such persistent resistance to change is nevertheless rare. More usually, a class of existing beings that is preeminent on account of the role that it plays in some sector of the existence of a collective finds itself gradually subsumed into a relational schema that was previously marginal and that now comes to acquire a preponderant position. The way is then clear for the relationship that initially characterized the treatment of those objects to lose its importance. Thus, although it took a very long time in Siberia, the strengthening of a protective attitude toward certain animals was bound to cause a decline in the person-to-person relationship that previously prevailed with them and, little by little, to lead either to the disappearance of the patterns of behavior previously followed toward nonhumans that were believed to possess attributes identical to those of humans or else, possibly, the consignment of those original relationships to the vault of folkloric survivals. All the same, such a mutation can only come about if the mechanisms that inhibit change have themselves been inhibited by the consequences of events sufficiently exceptional for creative imagination and a sense of innovation to come into their own, upsetting habits transmitted from one generation to the next. Generally, this happens when the terms likely to be objectivized by extending the field of a previously secondary relationship are either totally new or else already deeply modified by the progressive weakening of the relationship that previously objectivized them. Although the first case may be typical of phenomena involving borrowing and diffusion, experience also shows that the arrival of a new entity—a new domesticated animal, for example—does not necessarily imply that it will be adopted if the relationship that objectivizes it (i.e., a certain type of relation to the animal) remains too alien to the locally dominant schemas of interaction and systems of skills. And even if its use is eventually accepted, it will tend to remain confined to a niche that will impede its transposition to other objects. So the second condition, namely the disintegration of a previously preponderant relationship, is fundamental to the process of change. It usually comes about when circumstances generated by the vagaries of history, climate change, or the unintentional effects of human action on the environment force peoples to adapt to different milieux or to ones in which the usual characteristics have changed for the worse. Long-distance migrations under pressure from invaders or bellicose neighbors, expansion as the result of conquest, containment within a territory subjected to more intensive exploitation, the human degradation of an ecosystem or its progressive transformation in the wake of climatic accidents: all these things oblige humans to modify their strategies for subsistence and, above all, upset the relations that unify them with others and with the world, thereby making them more receptive to drastic measures that they would otherwise regard with suspicion.

It is not that innovation is inevitably born of necessity. Rather, a lasting transformation in the relations with real or imaginary entities whose destiny we share can only get under way in the tumultuous and sometimes very lengthy periods in which humans open up to new experiences because the links that they had woven between one another in the ordinary course of things give way before the onslaught of contingency and begin to reshape in a different form. But this reorganization does not follow an altogether random course. Even though, in the evolution of organisms, as in that of the collectives in which they cohabit, chance and arbitrariness are indispensable in the gestation of a new order or equilibrium, that new order, without being altogether predictable, does come about following certain organizing rules and principles of compatibility that are less fortuitous than the events that prompted its development. Destruction can be wreaked in a thousand different ways, but reconstruction can be achieved only with whatever materials are available and by following a limited number of plans that respect the architectonic constraints peculiar to any edifice. All the rest, all that catches the eye in the first instance and provides the pleasures of diversity, is no more than ornamentation.





Epilogue





The Spectrum of Possibilities




Despite the alternatives offered, one after another, by a variety of different structural approaches, ever since its inception anthropology has been more or less overtly fascinated by the robust simplicity of etiological explanations. There are many ways of accounting in this way for a particular institution: by means of appealing, in the manner of nineteenth-century evolutionism, to its supposed genesis or to earlier circumstances or external influences, as do contemporary anthropologists discovering the somewhat outworn virtues of a purely descriptive history. Alternatively, one can try to discover the adaptive function that that institution would fulfill in a given environment or to regard it as an expression of archaic influences or presumed archetypes. All such approaches are no doubt reassuring for minds in quest of certainties, but they do not really make it possible to answer the only question that matters: namely why is a particular social fact, belief, or custom present in one place but not in another? A multitude of reasons have been suggested to explain sacrifice, cannibalism, and ancestor worship, including some provided by those who practice such things, but we are no closer to a better understanding of the motives that led some to adopt them but others not to, let alone how it is that in one place cannibalism cohabits with sacrifice or ancestor worship but in another place it excludes them. Why is there no totemic royalty? Why are nonhumans not represented in parliaments on the grounds of their particular qualities? Why does an Inca or a Pharaoh not eat his enemies? Why do Amerindian shamans not make sacrifices? Those are pointless questions, you may say, and do not deserve serious attention. Yet they are the questions that matter when one tries to account for differences in the ways of inhabiting the world and giving it meaning. We should not be striving to reduce the diversity of established practices by assigning to them unverifiable origins, functions of a general nature that is not very illuminating, or hypothetical biological or subconscious bases. Rather, we should ask ourselves what it is that renders these practices compatible or not compatible with one another, for that is the first stage for an inquiry into the rules that govern the syntax of these practices and their organization into systems. The structural typologies sketched in earlier in this book were prompted by precisely that ambition. For one cannot hope to reveal the principles according to which certain elements are combined unless one has first defined the elements that they affect and has defined them sufficiently precisely for the table of those elements to remain accessible to further additions. If anthropology were ever to discover a source of inspiration in a better-established science, it should turn to chemistry rather than to physics or biology, although the latter are often invoked as models for the anthropological discipline even if the relationship to them is never developed beyond a metaphorical level. It is true that humans are capable of producing new combinations and of thereby modifying the properties of whatever is combined, but whatever the apostles of creative action may claim, except in myth or fiction it is not possible for them to create functional hybrids out of components that possess irreconcilable properties.

That may be something that one is beginning to sense at the end of this long journey through the labyrinth of ways in which things are used. In a schematization of the different aspects of experiencing the world and others, identification and relationships can be divided into a whole range of modalities the intrinsic characteristics of which differ, either permitting or ruling out their coexistence in any particular collective or, in the case of relations, their interaction between a dominant form and one or two minor forms. I have chosen to examine four modes of identification and six relational modes, so, for the picture to be complete, it would be necessary to review the twenty-four configurations that the combinations of those modes produce. But that would be to carry the analogy with chemistry and a spirit of systematization to unreasonable lengths. Besides, some of those combinations are fanciful and only exist in the domains of Utopia or the pages of science fiction, where their contradictory fusions are most successful at momentarily lightening the burden of an all-too-predictable reality. So at this point I will limit myself to evoking a few types of compatibility and incompatibility, leaving readers better versed in comparativism to decide whether some of the impossible collectives I left separated really are so in fact.

Animism and naturalism may be seen as antithetical ways of discerning the properties of things. Animism lays the emphasis on the physical differences between existing beings (they have dissimilar bodies) while recognizing that they maintain similar interrelations (given that they share an analogous interiority). Naturalism, on the contrary, lays the emphasis on the physical continuity between the world’s elements (all are subjected to the laws of nature), the better to note the heterogeneity of the relations that may bring them together (these are said to depend on their capacity or incapacity to manifest interiorities of various kinds). So it seems reasonable to examine these two schemas of identification together, seen from the point of view of the relational modes that they are able to sustain.

Despite the patent discontinuities in the biological equipment and the ethograms that animist subjects display, they maintain between one another a permanent dialogue of souls, and this intersubjective communication is the basis for the principle of an unrestricted sociability that encompasses both humans and nonhumans in its universal network. The differences in physical dispositions do not constitute an obstacle to communication and are partly wiped out by the interpersonal relations that are established between terms that can be substituted for one another since they are positioned at the same level of the ontological scale. In animist cosmologies, in which entities of equal status are defined by the positions that they occupy vis-à-vis one another, the only structuring relations possible are those that operate with potentially reversible links between subjects, whether human or nonhuman, whose identities are not affected by the realization of the relations that bring them together: that is to say, the relations of predation, exchange, or gift giving. Conversely, intransitive relations of the production, transmission, or protection type are bound to remain marginal given that they presuppose a hierarchy between terms whose ontological disparity is rendered effective by the very action that one exerts upon another within the relationship. With gift giving, exchange, and predation one subject ratifies the other; with production, protection, and transmission, the subject establishes a dependent subject or a subordinate object.

In that an Achuar hunter regards the animal that he pursues as an alter ego, he actualizes in a particular context the general relationship of predatory affinity that exists between the hunters and the hunted; possibly he reinforces it, but through this interaction he modifies neither the ontological properties of his interlocutor nor the nature of the relations that he establishes with it. The same can be said of the exchange relations that the Tukanos weave between themselves and their environment, and of the gift schema that ideally directs the actions of the Campas and some of the nonhumans with which they cohabit. But in relations of production as these are traditionally conceived by Moderns, the situation is altogether different (even if that conception proves contrary to what practical experience shows). We know that matter resists and imposes its own constraints upon whoever works upon it; yet it is that producing agent who comes to the fore when he is declared to impose a specific form and function upon matter lacking any autonomy, in order to produce a new entity for which he alone is responsible even when he does not, in effect, own it. The object that results from his actions exists with its own particular attributes only insofar as a genetic relationship has brought it into being, as a repeated example of other, similar actions prompted by the same project. As is suggested by the example of the Wayana basket makers, this is why it is mistaken to speak of “craft production” in the case of animism: the artifacts here are not realizations ex nihilo that reinforce the position of subject held by those who fashion them; instead, they are transformed subjects that preserve some of their original ontological attributes.

Protection implies control over the biological functions such as reproduction and feeding, by means of which existing beings can be distinguished from one another. Similarly then, protection cannot constitute a general relational schema suited to animism. Stripped of its freedom to behave in every way in accordance with the physical habits of its species-tribe, the protected subject loses its independence and eventually even its quality as a subject. So protection is truly acceptable only in particular niches of animism and always in a minor mode—such as the prerogative held by the spirit masters of animals that is sometimes extended to humans engaged in semidomestication, although it may happen that its attractions (security for some, domination for others) eventually prove so powerful that a new ontology is required to accommodate it fully.

As for transmission, a way of guaranteeing and reproducing the physical and moral dependence of the living on the dead, it instantly eliminates the possibility of treating animals and plants as subjects, since all its efficacy rests upon a relationship of hierarchical subordination between one generation and others: the central articulation of collectives is formed of human lines of descent that are differentiated one from another and maintain relations solely through reference to groups of ancestors from which they have inherited riches, rights, and all the components of personalities and destinies. It is hard to imagine any way in which such an arrangement could be adapted to the animist abundance of species-tribes of human and nonhuman subjects, which, for their part, distinguish themselves from one another by their dispositions for action, which are determined by the physical form that remains identical for every generation, thereby perpetuating their various modes of life. The cumulative and anthropocentric transmission of substances, patrimonies, and predestinations would thus run counter to the need for every subject, whatever its physical envelope, to re-create at every moment the conditions for a sui generis existence founded on interaction with others. That is why it is necessary to wipe the dead from memory and to destroy their meager possessions and why any tradition that they may transmit must be disassociated from their person.

By rejecting or marginalizing certain relations, animism provides a negative template of all that it rejects. Throughout its territory, there will be no sign of any exclusive livestock raisers, no castes of specialized craftsmen, no ancestor cults, no lineages that function as moral persons, no creative demiurges, no taste for material patrimonies, no obsession with heredity, no arrow of time, no excessively wide-ranging filiation, and no deliberative assemblies. Some perspicacious observers who have noticed those absences have interpreted them as lacks. But they are, of course, nothing of the kind. The price to be paid for populating the world with subjects—each day re-creating the experience of indecisive identities—appears too high only to those who, enclosed within a reassuring block of institutions, are content to measure the promises of the present by the yardstick of whatever the past has bequeathed.

The same remark could well be applied to naturalism, so hypnotized are Moderns by the attenuated variant of transmission constituted by historical consciousness. It is a variant that is certainly attenuated, for even if the dead and their legacy of objects and ideas do combine to define our individual and collective identities, and even if their achievements have circumscribed the field of what we ourselves can accomplish, nevertheless our liberty as human subjects is also reputed to stem from our ability to transform the achievements of the present with a view to improving what happens in the future. This is why, despite our pronounced taste for commemorations and despite the ceaseless celebration of heroes of the past, and the devotion with which it is considered seemly to surround the dead, there will be no trace among Moderns of that subjugation to the ancestors that is a sign of the purest forms of transmission. For us, the dead are not still-active despots who regulate our daily lives. They are just benign puppets to which we turn when involved in affairs that no longer concern them. Far from characterizing transmission, it is in naturalism that this blandness seems to be the rule—naturalism, within which a variety of relations can coexist, many of them in a derivative or incomplete form. This is because of the very properties of the naturalist ontology. For even if the continuity between existing beings links them all together in a network of shared determinations in which they are differentiated only by degrees of complexity, the singularity that is ascribed to humans on account of their distinctive interiority has the effect of preventing any relational mode from occupying a hegemonic position: some relations are deemed suitable for connections between humans, others for connections with nonhumans, but none has the power to schematize the principal interactions between all the world’s elements.

Exchange (of a mercantile type) and protection (of citizens by the state) are thus central values for modern democracies; but their advantages do not extend to nonhumans: these are pushed to the peripheries of collectives on account of their lack of any reflective consciousness and moral sense. One does not enter into a contract with plants, animals, machines, or genes, all of which are objects, not subjects, of transactions. The protection afforded to them stems from the interest that humans derive from controlling them and preserving them, not from any rightful inclusion of them in the sphere of social interactions, as would be the case in the forests of Amazonia or the savannas of Nilotic Africa. It is true that, in its capitalist variant, naturalism has been able to disguise this subordination by emphasizing the production of nonhumans as a condition for exchanging them. Where commodity fetishism prevails, labor relations between persons tend to be seen as connections in which things become linked, unlike in animism, for example, in which, to use the language of Marx, it is more a matter of things linking together, on the assumption that they are establishing a connection between persons. But that charade is never perfect since, in order to conceal the sources of capitalist alienation beneath an impenetrable veil, it would be necessary to grant to things an autonomy greater than that of persons, by recognizing them to possess, not only free will, but also the ability to dispose, without hindrance, of those who produce them and exchange them. However, that is far from being the case, even if the trend for treating production and mercantile exchange as natural phenomena that exist in themselves is continually increasing in the assertions of latter-day capitalism. Abstract generalities, such as “the economic environment,” “growth,” or “profit margin” may, it is true, have acquired the status of independent intentional entities; but all the same, it is hard for those who undergo their effects to believe fully and constantly that it is these things that, in themselves, govern the destiny of billions of humans, not the individuals who act as their by-no-means-disinterested oracles. Thus, even though in naturalist collectives production has little by little become the central schema of relations with nonhumans—a fact that the proliferation of genetically modified organisms has made patently obvious to all of us—the use of production has not yet succeeded in becoming general in relations between humans, even if the fantasies prompted by reproductive cloning show how greatly some people wish to see it extend its influence.

As a consequence of the dissociation that it introduces between human subjects and nonhuman objects, naturalist ontology furthermore condemns itself to perpetual compromises, even as it clings to the utopian hope eventually to see the establishment of a dominant relationship capable of eliminating the segregation upon which it is founded. Unfortunately, in such a clearly apartheid regime, it is impossible to set up between all existing beings a schema of interaction with the synthesizing power and simplicity of expression of the relations that structure nonmodern collectives. That is a painfully self-evident fact that feeds the widespread nostalgia for a world untouched by disenchantment. Despite superficial analogies, transmission, as we have seen, remains imperfect: a veneration for history is not the same as veneration for ancestors, sites of memory are no substitute for lineage altars, nor do laws of inheritance fully replace the rules of descent. Marginalized by mercantile exchange, gift giving fares even worse, despite pious attempts to resuscitate its social virtues; it survives only in rites of intimacy and humanitarian charity, and possibly also in a providential notion of the generosity of good Mother Nature, which, however, would appear not to be very convincing given the outrages that we heap upon her. Nor, despite appearances, does predation lie at the heart of naturalism, at least not if predation is regarded as an incorporation of “others” that is indispensable for the definition of the self. The thoughtless ransacking of the planet’s resources and the destruction of its biotic diversity may well contribute to increasing the wealth of the very rich, but they result from our forgetting the belief that prevailed in the first ages of modernity, namely that the splendid otherness of nature is necessary for the manifestation of the specific qualities of humanity. As for the annihilation of strangers who speak a different language, display a different skin color, practice another religion or other customs, which is the hackneyed chauvinist expedient for consolidating a contrastive identity, what this rejects in others are precisely the qualities required to fulfill the role expected of them. Such destruction is a negation of what a human embodies and not, as in animism, a recognition of the position of exteriority that must be assimilated if one is to be fully oneself. Naturalism is thus destructive rather than predatory in its behavior toward certain categories of both humans and nonhumans—not that it is any more constant in this relationship than it is in others, as is shown by the versatility that the colonial powers have demonstrated over the past two centuries. The records of ordered production and mercantile exchange that predominated in the metropolitan capital were effaced overseas by the plundering of natural riches and of workforces—plundering that was, furthermore, frequently presented as a protective mission. Was this cunning? Cynicism? A sarcastic negation? No doubt a bit of all those, but it also demonstrated that naturalism does not possess the means to develop within a single relational mode.

The inability of Moderns to schematize their relations with a whole diverse range of existing beings by means of an all-encompassing relation takes on an almost pathetic aspect when they are faced with the temptation to establish a genuine reciprocity with nonhumans. To effect a deal with nature, or at least with certain of its representatives, is one of the most ancient and elusive dreams of those who are disappointed by naturalism. The strange varieties of Naturphilosophie that flourished in the nineteenth century, the aesthetics of the Romantics, the current success of neo-shamanistic movements and New Age esotericism, and television’s and cinema’s taste for cyborgs and desiring machines—all these reactions to the moral consequences of dualism, and many others too, testify to the desire lurking within each of us, with various degrees of anxiety, to recover the lost innocence of a world in which plants, animals, and objects were fellow citizens. However, the Moderns’ nature can emerge from its silence only by means of all-too-human intermediaries, so that no exchange, no negotiation, no contract with the host of inanimate beings is now conceivable. This assessment should not be seen as an attack on technological society. On the contrary: the contradictions of naturalism, in particular its inability to subsume different regimes of behavior into one dominant relationship, are what give it its fascinating plurality. This entails the more or less pacific coexistence of would-be collectives, all of which try with considerable ingenuity to explore paths leading to an exclusive style of behavior to which, however, they will never be able to conform by reason of the ontological constraints with which they start out. This is what bestows upon postindustrial societies their hybrid iridescence and meanwhile provides sociologists with an inexhaustible terrain to explore.

In contrast, totemic and analogical collectives present greater internal uniformity because, even if they contain a constitutive hybrid element, this is tucked away in the composite nature of the existing beings that they gather together and not, as in the case of naturalism, in mixtures of genera into which the relations that structure them are forced. We should remember that the humans and nonhumans included within a totemic group, despite their different forms and modes of life, all share the same collection of physical and moral attributes. This ensures their identity—in both senses of that word: that is to say, a distinctive character and also an equivalence as members of the prototypical class whose properties they embody. As they see it, they thus all stem individually from the same mold while, to an outsider’s eye, they seem collectively heterogeneous. This identity of composition is rendered possible and also reinforced by the identity of the relations that determine them. In the exemplary case of Australia, they share the same origin (a Dream-being), inherence (in the class that that Dream-being instituted), and parity (in the attributes that they received from it). In this sense, no veritable relations can exist between the members of a totemic group—at least none of the kind that stamp their vigorous mark on practices and inject the dynamism necessary for each collective to act in an autonomous way in the world. That is not to say, of course, that there are no interactions between the elements that make up a totemic group, for this does include men and women, parents and children, plants and animals, material entities and immaterial ones, all squeezed together in a complex and contradictory tissue of affects, interests, and obligations. But the excessive proximity of these terms in permanent quest of individuation forces them to look outside the group that they form, to other totemic classes, for partners sufficiently different from themselves for a relationship of complementary opposition to become possible. This is the only way for them to escape from the ontological enclosure by which their distinctive existence is determined. Therein lies the principal paradox of totemism, which is what makes its nature so hard to determine: within the framework of a collective, it produces a perfect synthesis between a multitude of existing beings that, at first sight, seem heterogeneous, but it does so at the cost of a paralyzing immobility that prevents this collective from being self-sufficient and obliges it to establish with others the relations that it is incapable of setting up within itself.

Although differentiated by their respective properties, the totemic groups that are forced to enter into contact are all positioned at the same ontological level: they all derive their singular identities from the same type of genesis, the same type of reference to a prototype, and the same type of attachment to particular places. So it is hardly surprising that exchange should be the dominant schema into which their links are subsumed, since this, more than other schemas, makes it possible to establish connections between whole groups (meanwhile also permitting individual associations) and above all is particularly suited to terms with status parity but which have to maintain between each other a situation of mutual dependence (the permanence of the relationship being guaranteed by the cycle of obligations that go with it). Exchanges of women, exchanges of services, exchanges of foodstuffs, and exchanges of resources: the round of transactions is incessant and it is easy to see how it was that Aboriginal Australia provided Lévi-Strauss with not only the most complete model of generalized exchange in matrimonial alliances but also with striking confirmation of his no doubt more ancient conviction that exchange in all its forms constitutes the indestructible basis of social life.

On the other hand, no univocal relations involving nonequivalent terms can be established externally between totemic collectives, nor, a fortiori, internally, within them. Thus, despite a superficial resemblance that in the past was the source of much confusion, the perpetuation of the physical and moral properties that each totemic class embodies, generation after generation, can in no way be assimilated to the transmission of a patrimony. The Dream-beings are not distant ancestors in whose debt the living must always remain but are prototypes endowed with a still vibrant creative potential. Far from transmitting the attributes of which they are the guardians, they instead transmit themselves in the form of attributes into the bodies of the humans and the nonhumans that they choose to actualize by their presence. As for production, in the exemplary sense in which naturalism employs it in the fabrication of objects, that too is a relational mode that has no place in totemism, even in the form of the rites designed to multiply animal and plant species. Ceremonies of the intichiuma type are the means whereby the human members of a totemic group encourage the propagation of a class of nonhumans that is likewise affiliated to their collective, for the benefit of other totemic groups that feed on them. This they do by stimulating fertility and favoring the incorporation of its essences by means of actions that, in mimetic fashion, retrace the various stages of pregnancy. So the humans here play the role of midwives assisting the birth of quasi fellow beings, not that of autonomous creators of objects; they facilitate a process of engendering that they do not control, rather in the way that, in certain animist collectives, a hunter must be sure to collect the bones of the animal that has allowed itself to be killed by him and whose flesh he has consumed, so that the animal’s interiority, which is unscathed, can, thanks to these material traces of its singularity, be reborn as a new individual.

While totemic collectives have to project themselves outward in order to introduce a relational movement into their all-too-inert togetherness, analogical collectives can, on the contrary, establish links only within themselves. Since each is coextensive with the world and is able to receive within it all that the world contains, outside it no partner worthy of an authentic relationship can exist—only, at the very most, muddled collections of unfamiliar existing beings whose sporadic growth has to be contained and whose chaotic nature must be reduced by absorbing them into the sociocosmic order in which a place has already been prepared for them. The proliferation of particularized entities with dissimilar components that analogism sets in order, and the multiplicity of graduated differences that result from this, are tempered by an obsession to detect common features, signs of correspondence and themes of agreement, for these are the bases of the general system of a segmented hierarchy from which no singularity can be left out. The paradox of totemism is that in principle it posits an identity between terms that are thus forced to seek outside their mixed intimacy for the means to produce something different that will generate relationships. Meanwhile, the paradox of analogism is that it posits in principle differences between terms that in some respects resemble one another but do so in ways so diverse that the relations that may be used to organize them into a common project depend less on ontological properties than on an imperative need to integrate them all into a single functional whole.

So here the relations that predominate are those best suited to cope with differences and to discipline heterogeneity. One such relationship is that of transmission, which is by nature hierarchical and dispenses order. Its temporal continuities encompass long parallel lines of humans both dead and alive, which are distinguished one from another by the contents of whatever they pass down from one generation to the next. Transmission is an ingenious way of cementing their solidarity by distributing among them complementary prerogatives and functions. Another is the relationship involving protection, often combined with the segmentary logic of ancestrality, whose field of activity it helps to expand by extending a cascade of dependencies reaching all the way from plants and animals up to the summit of the pantheons. Each unit owes its security, its well-being, and even its existence to another—even the tutelary deities, who owe all this to the beliefs of the humans who instituted them. In many cases, these hierarchical relations take the form of a division of tasks through the medium of exchange: exchanges of goods and specialized services between the Indian castes, the exchange of an assurance of stability in the cosmos guaranteed by a pharaoh or an Inca in return for forced labor and tribute, and the circulation of work, products, and women between autonomous descent groups. But here the exchange is not so much a cardinal value that schematizes relationships; rather, it is a way of moderating the original disparity between the terms that it brings together through an illusion of equivalence in the obligations that fall to them when they engage in exchange. In these circumstances it matters little if the exchange is unequal or maintains subordination since it does manage to link elements that are sometimes very distant on the scale of statutory positions, and through this interdependence, it helps to ensure their coherence in an all-inclusive system. The only thing that really counts in an analogical collective, whatever the relational arrangements employed to achieve it, is to integrate within an apparently homogeneous whole a host of singularities that are inclined to fragment spontaneously.

This is why the ideology of a collective of this type is bound to be functionalism—that is, the idea that each of its constitutive elements contributes, in its well-defined place, to the perpetuation of a stable totality. In all probability, the sway that was exercised in the United Kingdom by the “functionalist” anthropological doctrine resulted partly from the circumstantial fact that British anthropologists tended to study the social organization of the peoples in the African and Eastern possessions of their vast colonial empire; and most of those stemmed from analogical collectives. These peoples represented themselves as functional groups, and their members had no qualms about explaining their integrating mechanisms in detail to those observing them. The same can certainly not be said of animist collectives, above all those in the Americas, which were tacitly neglected by the functionalist school because of their ostensible lack of institutional cohesion. It was not until the developments of structural anthropology that the singular manner in which these collectives introduced discontinuity within themselves by means of their relational system began to be better understood. If confirmation is needed, this vindicates the effort of abstraction and decentering that must be made if objectivizing reflection upon collective experience is to manage, at least to some degree, to move aside from the collective schemas that subjectivize experience.



Now that the time has come for me to bring this book to an end and I cast a retrospective and almost detached eye over the propositions that it contains, I cannot help feeling a stab of apprehension regarding the misunderstandings that they may occasion. Even though, for some essayists, their no more than superficial understanding of the themes that they tackle has seldom acted as a brake, one might well raise the question of competence: by what right does an ethnologist whose scholarship was for many years confined to one particular region in South America pass judgment on all these civilizations about which he possesses only a limited knowledge? How can one presume to say anything about the Australian Aboriginals if one has read no more than a fraction of the ocean of monographs and articles that have been devoted to them? Is it possible to comment seriously on the concepts of a person among the ancient Mexicans if one has not acquired a command of Nahuatl philology? Above all, how can one treat in such a cavalier fashion the history of the West, the philosophy and epistemology of the Moderns, and the sociology of industrialized societies, to which so many distinguished scholars have devoted so many sleepless nights and even then only manage to explore certain fragments in an incidental fashion? Those are classic questions that a specialist may well address to those who dare to compare and that may be deflected only by an avowal of humility such as that made by Max Weber in the introduction to his The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. I should like to echo his words, so faithfully do they reflect my own state of mind: “It is quite evident that anyone who is forced to rely on translations, and furthermore on the use and evaluation of monumental, documentary, or literary sources, has to rely himself on a specialist literature which is often highly controversial, and the merits of which he is unable to judge accurately. Such a writer must make modest claims for the value of his work.”1

However, such an act of contrition would hardly seem sincere were it not accompanied by some justification of the scope of the undertaking that motivated it. No doubt some of my analyses will be regarded as simplifications of phenomena that are very much more complex, or as flawed by an excessive fidelity to exegeses that are not accepted by all experts. It is even possible that, as a result of the kind of blindness that conviction engenders, I have failed to discern the true implications of factors that might run counter to my own interpretations. Those are criticisms that I would accept with equanimity provided it is recognized that the hypotheses set out in this work are above all of a heuristic nature and that the sole aim of the ethnographic and historical examples by which I support them is to sketch in what might be a different way of treating social facts: what I mean is, not by seeing them from the start as characteristics that confer dignity upon our species, but by trying to gain a better understanding of the principles according to which humans schematize their experience of things in such very different ways, welcoming nonhumans into their collectives with varying degrees of liberality and either actualizing the relations that they discern between existing beings in concrete systems of interactions or not doing so. Now, however varied the expressions that they take may be, those forms of relating to the world seem to me neither limitless nor incommensurable. Their motley effects are disconcerting only if, fascinated by the multiplicity and richness of motifs and convinced that one can do no more than comment upon them and propose stylistic ways of reordering them, one ends up rejecting the idea that common structures may govern their organization. In the present book, I back the converse assumption, in the wake of many others who have likewise sought to find in fundamental constants (ranging from laws governing the mind to the constraints of material life) the sources of regularity in human patterns of behavior and their collective frameworks. For these may to some extent dissipate the chaotic appearance that they present to our eyes. In the present context, those constants are reduced to the minimum, and no doubt a philosopher would find them somewhat unsophisticated. I have postulated that identification and relations constitute the warp and weft of customs in the world and that the ways in which they intertwine mark out some of the major configurations in which those customs have become established in the course of history. However, I have absolutely no desire to add a small contribution of my own to some hypothetical theory of human nature. I wish only to propose a more effective and less ethnocentric way of accounting for what is usually called cultural diversity. So it matters little to me if the conjectures from which I start out are criticized, provided that, as I trust, the combinations that they allow for make it possible to create a more economical way of accommodating a greater quantity of material and ideal entities than the classic opposition between the universality of nature and the contingency of human societies does; and also provided that, as I am convinced, those premises prove less easily assignable to a particular cosmology, however respectable the tradition from which it emerged may be.

Much remains to be done before an enterprise of this kind becomes acceptable and before, having possibly caught the interest of those who may find in it suggestions leading to a better understanding of the matters that preoccupy them, it can, with their help, begin to bear fruit. Before expecting more abundant harvests, it may be necessary to prune away certain branches that seemed solid to me, to graft on to the trunk new varieties that I did not know existed, and to train back certain wayward limbs. To take but one domain in which anthropology has for many years excelled, it is clear that the way in which I have described types of collectives is still much too summary for it to take into account all the delicate variations in the social structure and organization of networks of kinship that a host of observers and analysts have for many years, and with great success, been describing and systematizing. I also appreciate that numerous facets of human experience have been ignored in this book and that it is by no means certain that they can easily be fitted in with the models whose features I have described. So even though I have found certain empirical foundations for advancing the hypothesis that identification and relationships are what in part define other schemas of practice—configurations, temporality, and categorization, for example—that intuition has yet to be justified by well-sustained arguments and rigorous investigations. Finally, and although this is something that I have mentioned before, it may be useful to remind readers that the precedence ascribed to the discovery of structural configurations over research into the causes of their genesis is no more than a methodological priority and that, however imperfect our understanding of structural configurations may still be, this should not be considered a reason to defer a study of the causes of their genesis. The same applies to the elucidation of the mechanisms of change and what it is that so often inhibits it. Understanding how one mode of identification changes into another or how, on the contrary, its principles are perpetuated and how it is that a particular relationship loses or preserves its prevalence are clearly tasks of urgent importance, which have been no more than outlined in the preceding pages. These remarks will no doubt have made it clear that, unlike the harmonious and polished constructions that the dualism of nature and society has accustomed us to erect, the present endeavor remains a work in progress, a building project whose site manager has decided to hand it over prematurely solely in the hope that those interested in it will, in the fullness of time, bestow upon it not only an aspect and potential that may be very different from what was anticipated but also the look of an edifice that can truly be hospitable to all.

Might such an edifice provide a home for occupants other than engineers of social mechanisms, technicians of networks of solidarity, and experts in cultural distribution? Might humans of every kind, all with their own ideas about the collectives to which they belong, animals and machines, plants and deities, genes and conventions, in fact the whole immense multitude of actual and potential existing things, find a more welcoming refuge in a new kind of regime of cohabitation that would once again reject discrimination between humans and nonhumans, yet without resorting to the formulae tried out in the past? Maybe, but that is not what I have in mind. For although one may hope for a cosmology, a social system, or an ideology that could offer such hospitality, that is not a role that befits an anthropological theory such as the one that I have roughly sketched in. Its aim is limited to establishing the bases for a way of conceiving the diversity of the principles of a schematization of experience that is free of the preconceptions that modernity has led us to maintain regarding the state of the world. Its purpose is not to propose models of communal life, of new forms of attachment to beings and things, or a reform of practices, mores, and institutions. That such a reform is indispensable is clearly indicated by everything around us, ranging from the revolting disparity between the conditions of existence in the countries of the South and the countries of the North across the board to the alarming degradation, as a result of human action, of the major bases of equilibrium in the biosphere. However, it would be mistaken to think that the Indians of Amazonia, the Australian Aboriginals, or the monks of Tibet can bring us a deeper wisdom for the present time than the shaky naturalism of late modernity. Every type of presence in the world, every way of connecting with it and making use of it, constitutes a particular compromise between, on the one hand, the factors of sensible experience that are accessible to us all, albeit interpreted differently, and, on the other, a mode of aggregating existing beings that is adapted to historical circumstances. The fact is that none of those compromises, however worthy of admiration some may be, can provide a source of instruction valid for all situations. Neither nostalgia for forms of living together, the muted echoes of which are conveyed to us by ethnographers and historians, nor the prophetic wishful thinking that animates certain quarters of the scholarly community offers an immediate answer to the challenge of recomposing into viable and unified groups an ever-increasing number of existing beings needing to be represented and treated equitably. It is up to each one of us, wherever we may be, to invent and encourage modes of conciliation and types of pressure capable of leading to a new universality that is both open to all the world’s components and also respectful of certain of their idiosyncrasies. We might then hope to avert a distant point of no return when, with the extinction of the human race, the price of passivity would have to be paid in another fashion: namely by abandoning to the cosmos a nature bereft of its recorders simply because they failed to provide it with genuine modes of expression.




