[]

[Image]

GENDER AND POWER

Society, the Person and
Sexual Politics

R. W. Connell

Polity Press

Copyright © R. W. Connell 1987

The right of R. W. Connell to be identified as author of this work has
been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988.

First published in 1987 by Polity Press in association with Blackwell
Publishers Ltd.
Reprinted in 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998

Transferred to Digital print 2003

Editorial office:
Polity Press
65 Bridge Street
Cambridge CB2 1UR, UK

Marketing and production:
Blackwell Publishers Ltd
108 Cowley Road
Oxford OX4 1JF, UK

All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the
purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher.

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the
condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which
it is published and without a similar condition including this condition
being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

ISBN: 978-0-7456-6527-6 (Multi-user ebook)

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.

Typeset in 11 on 12 pt Baskerville by Photo-graphics, Honiton, Devon

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Marston Lindsay Ross International Ltd,
Oxfordshire

By the same author

Staking a Claim: Feminism, bureaucracy and the state (1989), with S.
Franzway and D. Court

Teachers’ Work (1985)

Which Way Is Up? Essays on sex, class and culture (1983)

Making the Difference: Schools, families and social division (1982),
with D. J. Ashenden, S. Kessler and G. W. Dowsett

Ockers and Disco-Maniacs: Sex, gender and secondary schooling (1982),
with S. Kessler, D. J. Ashenden and G. W. Dowsett

Class Structure in Australian History (1980), with T. H. Irving

Socialism and Labor (1978)

Ruling Class, Ruling Culture: Studies of conflict, power and hegemony in
Australian life (1977)

Twelve to Twenty: A study of teenagers in Sydney (1975), with W. F.
Connell, R. E. Stroobant, K. E. Sinclair and K. W. Rogers

The Child’s Construction of Politics (1971)

Politics of the Extreme Right: Warringah 1966 (1967), with F. Gould

Contents

Preface

1   Introduction: Some Facts in the Case

A teenager and her family

The public world: wages, education, jobs

Violence, prejudice, the state

Part I: Theorizing Gender

2   Historical Roots of Contemporary Theory

Secular morality

Science and radicalism

Sex roles and syntheses

Feminism and gay liberation

Reaction and paradox

3   Current Frameworks

Extrinsic theories: from ‘class first’ through ‘social reproduction’ to
‘dual systems’

Sex role theory

Categorical theory

Towards a practice-based theory

4   The Body and Social Practice

The knot of natural difference

Transcendence and negation

Practical transformations of the body

Part II: The Structure of Gender Relations

5   Main Structures: Labour, Power, Cathexis

Structure and structural analysis

Labour

Power

Cathexis

A note on ‘system’ and composition

6   Gender Regimes and the Gender Order

Institutions

The family

The state

The street

The gender order

A note on the definition and institutionalization of gender

7   Historical Dynamic

Historicity and ‘origins’

The course of history

Crisis tendencies

Part III: Femininity and Masculinity

8   Sexual Character

Unitary models and sex difference research

Masculinity/femininity scales

Multiple models: from typology to relationship

The effect of structures

Hegemonic masculinity and emphasized femininity

9   The Mystery in Broad Daylight: Gender Formation and Psychoanalysis

Socialization

Classical psychoanalysis: the dynamic unconscious

Existential psychoanalysis: the project

10 Personality as Practice

Personality, society and life history

The historical dynamic in personality

Politics of personality

Part IV: Sexual Politics

11 Sexual Ideology

Discourse and practice

Ideological processes

Cultural dynamics

Ideologists and interests

12 Political Practice

The scope of sexual politics

The articulation of interests

Working-class feminism

Liberation movements: birth and transformation

13 Present and Future

The present moment

Strategies

Concluding notes on the world to which a social theory of gender might
lead

Bibliography

Index

Preface

The radical movements of the 1960s and 1970s opened debates about a
range of practical issues to do with sex and gender, ranging from sexual
expression to economic inequality, police violence against gays, and
rape. Naming these issues, the new feminist and gay politics also posed
theoretical questions and began to grow a theoretical language: ‘sexual
politics’, ‘oppression’, ‘patriarchy’.

By the mid 1970s when these terms were common currency, it was clear to
anyone willing to listen that women’s liberation and gay liberation
required a profound change in our ways of understanding society. Sexual
politics brought to light patterns of power, interest and conflict which
made little sense in terms of socialist class analysis, conventional
economics, political science pluralism or sociological functionalism. A
theoretical revolution in the social sciences was called for.

This has been slow in coming. It was not clear what kind of theory would
be adequate to understand the world of sexual politics. Attempts were
made to adapt existing ideas. A quiet academic backwater, ‘sex role’
research, suddenly found itself enormously popular and influential.
Biology was roped in to explain matters the biologists themselves hardly
dreamed of. Rival schools of thought emerged within feminism, debating
the universality of patriarchy, the usefulness of psychoanalysis, the
impact of capitalism, the significance of men’s sexual violence.
Theorists of gay liberation searched for inspiration through
psychoanalysis, Marxism, anticolonialism and the emerging theories of
discourse. By the early 1980s one influential school of feminism was
abandoning the basic theoretical assumption of ten years before, the
fundamentally social character of gender.

This book is an attempt to resolve some of the difficulties raised by
these controversies and to propose the outline of a systematic social
theory of gender. That is a generous ambition and one person’s work can
only be a fragment of the enterprise. But given the state of the problem
it seemed timely to try out a large synthesis, to suggest how the
different issues about gender might fit together. The argument,
accordingly, ranges over a very wide field and the research has led me
into some unexpected corners – from the archaeology of ancient
south-west Asia (trying to get some grip on the evidence for feminist
‘origins’ arguments) to the lesser-known followers of Freud. It is
inevitable that some parts of the analysis are thin, and some are
relatively abstract or speculative. When there was a choice I put more
time into problems that seemed relatively neglected, such as the
institutionalization of gender, than into issues now widely studied,
such as sexual ideology.

The basis of the synthesis, the logical starting-point, is the nature of
social reality itself. Arguments about gender are plagued by an
assumption that what is biological or ‘natural’ is somehow more real
than what is social. For instance it was often suggested in the early
1970s that sex roles were ‘artificial’ because they were socially
created (by media, schools or whatever). There was a sense that if you
poked a finger at them it would go right through. Since then a good many
fingers have been poked and they did not go through. Sexist stereotypes
are still with us, showing impressive toughness and resilience. Social
process has its own power to constrain, its own resistance to
dissolution. And yet it is entirely human. The oppression of women and
gays is a matter of human agency, not of nature.

How to get a good understanding of these qualities has been a central
issue in social theory over the last thirty years, and an uncommonly
difficult one. The debates around structuralism in the 1970s got badly
hung up on a contradiction between the impersonality and the humanness
of social process. There is, however, an approach emerging in social
theory that has a more convincing answer, though it is still not widely
known outside a technical readership. One of its sources is the theory
of practice derived by philosophical critiques of mainstream Marxism;
another is the dualist or recursive models of the relation between
structure and practice developed in theoretical sociology; and a third
is the contextual analysis of the self, personal action and
intersubjectivity developing in social psychology.

There is no commonly accepted term for this approach; I will call it the
‘theory of practice’ for short. It seems to me consistent with the best
current research on gender and sexual politics, and to offer resolutions
of some of the dilemmas the theory of gender has run into. Accordingly
the general approach of the book is to bring together the theory of
practice with the problems of sexual politics. This is far from being a
one-way trade, an ‘application’; it has involved reformulations of both.
One of the unexpected outcomes was a demand for a practice-based
approach to personality, which grew equally from a general principle of
historicity, the findings of psychoanalysis and the experience of sexual
liberation movements.

The reasons for undertaking the enterprise were partly that I wanted to
understand the problems myself and partly that theory is important, at
least in the long run, for practical politics. Bad theories will do
harm. There are enough dilemmas and strategic conflicts in sexual
politics to make a decent theory of gender a tangible asset for
progressive politics of many kinds.

But theories don’t grow on trees; theorizing is itself a social practice
with a politics. Most of the radical theorizing of gender has been done
by women or by gay men. I am a heterosexual man, married, middle-aged,
with a tenured academic job in an affluent country – in world terms one
of the very rich and secure. I owe an account of what I am doing here.

There is a view put by the 1970s ‘men’s movement’ in the United States
that ‘men are equally oppressed’. This claim is demonstrably false. Some
of the relevant evidence is set out below in chapter 1, which is
intended as an introduction to the facts of gender inequality for those
not already familiar with the issue.

Men in general are advantaged by current social structure, heterosexual
men more so than others. What the debate about ‘men’s liberation’
nevertheless showed is that there are costs for men in their social
advantages, sometimes serious ones. It also showed that there are some
groups of men who can recognize injustice when they see it and are far
from comfortable with the position they have inherited.

For me, this discontent had several sources. I have been uneasy with
conventional masculinity almost as long as I can remember, certainly
since I was a teenager. I am not sure why; there may be an answer in
what Dorothy Dinnerstein says in The Mermaid and the Minotaur about the
men who became student activists in the 1960s. At all events my
attachment to masculinity was sufficiently fractured to make me sit up
and take notice when the women of that generation mobilized in their own
liberation movement. I read books like Shulamith Firestone’s Dialectic
of Sex as well as those of the ‘Freudian Left’ and listened to a great
deal of discussion about feminist principles and programs. A commitment
to a socialism that stressed the theme of equality rather than textbook
Marxism was probably important. Certainly important was the fact of
living with a woman who was working on projects like setting up a
women’s health centre, and the fact of working in university departments
alongside people engaged in feminist research.

I became convinced fairly early that the main feminist arguments about
inequality and oppression were right. Somewhat later, I became convinced
that they required a thoroughgoing reconstruction of socialist politics
and the social sciences. Later again, that gay liberation raised crucial
theoretical questions that were part of the same set of issues. Finally,
that this was also the business of heterosexual men, who have some
specific jobs to do (e.g. in the politics of masculinity) but also ought
to be involved in the general analysis of sexual politics.

That is not necessarily easy to do. On the one hand men’s settled ways
of thinking have to be disrupted. The slow progress in getting issues of
gender recognized in the mainstream of academic disciplines like
history, economics or psychology, long dominated by men, illustrates the
resistance. On the other hand there are currents in feminist thought
which do not welcome men’s involvement, and there is a fine line to
tread between intruding on women’s business and sharing the work on
common problems. Even sympathetic men writing about feminism have
attracted some pretty fierce responses. I do things in this book that a
purist might not do, such as discussing the strategies of feminist
movements. The reason is that no one of either sex can make an extended
analysis of sexual politics without touching on these issues.

The number of heterosexual men working on these issues is still small. I
don’t think there is anything in itself admirable about being a
dissident. I look forward to the day when a majority of men, as well as
a majority of women, accept the absolute equality of the sexes, accept
sharing of childcare and all other forms of work, accept freedom of
sexual behaviour, and accept multiplicity of gender forms, as being
plain common sense and the ordinary basis of civilized life.

If the number of people working to turn these principles into practice
is to grow into settled majorities, there have to be good reasons why
people will accept them as principles. These reasons need not all be the
same. Sexual politics, like politics in other fields, is a matter of
constructing coalitions. For some groups the reasons flow
straightforwardly from a collective interest in change. The catch is
always with heterosexual men, whose collective interest – as the
evidence through the book confirms – is broadly to maintain the existing
system. What reasons for change have enough weight, against this
entrenched interest, to detach heterosexual men from the defence of
patriarchy? There are, in my experience, five.

(1) Even the beneficiaries of an oppressive system can come to see its
oppressiveness, especially the way it poisons areas of life they share.

(2) Heterosexual men are often committed in important ways to women –
their wives and lovers, mothers and sisters, daughters and nieces,
co-workers – and may desire better lives for them. Especially they may
see the point of creating more civilized and peaceable sexual
arrangements for their children, even at the cost of their own
privileges.

(3) Heterosexual men are not all the same or all united, and many do
suffer some injury from the present system. The oppression of gays, for
instance, has a back-wash damaging to effeminate or unassertive
heterosexuals.

(4) Change in gender relations is happening anyway, and on a large
scale. A good many heterosexual men recognize that they cannot cling to
the past and want some new directions.

(5) Heterosexual men are not excluded from the basic human capacity to
share experiences, feelings and hopes. This ability is often blunted,
but the capacity for caring and identification is not necessarily
killed. The question is what circumstances might call it out. Being a
father often does; some political movements, notably the environmental
and peace movements, seem to; sexual politics may do so too.

These are, at least, among the reasons for this book. It is also
motivated by personal experience. Over the last fifteen years I have
tried to work through issues of sexual politics with other people in my
household, my workplaces and the labour movement. Some of this has been
very difficult indeed and has convinced me, as no theoretical writing
could, of the sheer intractability of gender relations. It has also
convinced me that relationships and customary practices do change, that
collective projects of reconstruction are possible, and that oppositions
of interest can be worked on and sometimes worked through, within such
projects.

If social research is to have major value for that enterprise, it must
do something more than show where we have come from or describe where we
are now – useful as those jobs are. It must also concern itself with
strategic issues: with where it is possible to go and how it is possible
to get there. It is easy to speculate on these matters, difficult to
produce well-founded arguments. Much of the literature on gender cannot
do this job because of the way its theory is constructed. It has been
one of my main aims to develop forms of analysis that are credible as
social theory and which also key in to strategic argument. This is
behind the following analyses of interest articulation in sexual
politics, crisis tendencies at the level of the whole society, and the
means of reconstructing personality ‘from below’. A social theory should
also help to formulate the general goals of politics. I think the kind
of theory developed here can do this, and the book ends with a
discussion of what the ultimate outcomes of progressive sexual politics
might be.

This book is the product of ten years’ work, not all of which has
proceeded smoothly in one direction. My first attempt to get the issues
together was an unpublished essay of 1976 called ‘Another Coup d’Etat
Among Men’ (Robin Morgan’s joke about socialist revolutions), which
sketched a theory of ‘hegemonic sexuality’ as a meeting-ground for
socialism and feminism. About that time I began work with Dean Ashenden,
Sandra Kessler and Gary Dowsett on a study of social inequality in
secondary schooling, eventually published as Making the Difference and
Ockers and Disco-Maniacs. We started with class inequality but developed
an interest in gender and sexuality among teenagers. The interviews and
case studies from this project have been important in my thinking ever
since and are discussed at several points in this book. How femininity
and masculinity are realized among adults, especially in the workplace,
became a major theme in the study of teachers that grew out of the same
project, Teachers’ Work. In 1979 I began very hesitantly to work on
issues of masculinity, attempting a self-analysis à la Karen Horney and
writing about the politics of my own relationships and experience of the
body. Less hesitantly I began a series of essays on the theory of
patriarchy and how to connect it with socialist theory. The few
publishable products of these two enterprises were collected in Which
Way is Up? from which the idea of this book developed. The detailed
studies in that book on the concept of social reproduction, Sartre’s
theory of practice, the connection of patriarchy and capitalism and the
nature of role theory, underlie parts of the argument here, as indicated
in the notes. In the 1980s the work on masculinity turned into two new
projects. One was a theoretical study, done with Tim Carrigan and John
Lee and published as ‘Toward a New Sociology of Masculinity’, which
reworked social-scientific studies of masculinity in the light of gay
liberation, psychoanalysis and feminism. The other is an empirical study
of changes in contemporary masculinity, done jointly with Pip Martin and
Norm Radican, which is still in the field. These two projects underlie a
good deal of the discussion of personality in Part III.

My work on these issues has been strongly influenced by the work of
other people at Macquarie University. Rosemary Pringle’s work on
sexuality, on gender and capitalism, and the industry studies that
became Ann Game and Rosemary Pringle’s Gender at Work, have been a
constant point of reference. Sue Kippax introduced me to the new social
psychology; Sheila Shaver to the intersections of gender with welfare
policy. I have learnt a great deal from several doctoral students with
whom I have worked as supervisor: Teresa Brennan, who introduced me to
feminist psychoanalysis; Clare Burton, whose book Subordination develops
a detailed critique of socialist-feminist thought; Tim Carrigan’s work
on gay liberation theory; Carol O’Donnell’s work on labour markets in
The Basis of the Bargain; and the late Di Court, whose work on feminism
and the state highlighted the problem of the central structures of
power. The continued interest of several generations of undergraduate
students has been both a stimulus to do the work and a test of what was
produced.

The final stages were made possible by research assistance from Thea
Welsh, who is responsible for much of the detail in chapter 1, and Pip
Martin, on questions ranging from the membership of the Soviet Communist
Party to the recent history of Sydney theatre.

Many people have given feedback to working papers and drafts. I have
been helped particularly by comments from Glynn Huilgol, Elizabeth Reid
and Hester Eisenstein. Gary Dowsett, Lynne Segal, Rosemary Pringle, John
Iremonger and Venetia Nelson read and criticized the whole manuscript.
The bulk of the typing in the last few years has been done by Helen
Easson, as it was in earlier stages by Heather Williams; the project
would not have moved without their skill and critical interest. And I am
deeply grateful for the tolerance and friendship of Robyn Dasey, in
whose house the whole first draft was written.

Part of the work for this book was funded by the Australian Research
Grants Committee with a grant for a study called ‘Theory of Class and
Patriarchy’. Grants for purely theoretical work are sufficiently rare
that this should perhaps be celebrated. Part has been funded by
Macquarie University Research Grants and by two periods of study leave
from Macquarie University.

My greatest debt by far is to Pam Benton, who has been involved with the
project through its whole development and at all its levels –
intellectual, practical and emotional. I would like to dedicate the
product to our daughter Kylie, in the hope that we can get enough right
in this generation to make the world she grows up in a more equal, safe
and rational place: less patriarchal and more human.

The plan of the book is straightforward: an introductory sketch of the
facts of gender inequalities; three chapters on theories of gender;
three chapters on gender as social structure; three chapters on gender
as personality; and three chapters on politics and ideology. This plan,
however, risks exaggerating the separateness of the parts. A central
theoretical idea is that the social and the personal depend on each
other and in an earlier draft of the book the chapters on personality
came before the chapters on social structure. I would emphasize that
Parts II and III should each be read in the light of the other.

Referencing is a problem with a complex and wide-ranging text, so I have
invented my own (condensed) version of the Harvard system. The names of
authors are mentioned in the text without dates and the details can be
found in the alphabetical bibliography at the back. Any ambiguity about
which work of a particular author is cited is explained in the
bibliographical notes at the end of each chapter, which are compiled
section by section. Here also are references which would have been
awkward to include in the main text and discussions of some
technicalities which would have interrupted the flow of argument. These
notes refer, as in the conventional Harvard system, to the bibliography;
with the exception of the notes to chapter 1, which give directly the
sources of statistical data used in that chapter alone.

NOTES

For an example of the trouble a man can get into when writing about
feminism, see the criticisms of David Bouchier’s The Feminist Challenge
by Janet Bujra and others (1984). For the gender dimension of our
educational research see Kessler, Ashenden, Connell and Dowsett (1982,
1985).

1

Introduction: Some Facts in the Case

This chapter attempts to show why a social analysis of gender is needed
for a comprehension of personal life, politics and society as a whole.
It makes out a prima-facie case for the enterprise. Accordingly the
facts are set out here with little commentary. Their interpretation is
provided by the rest of the book.

The first part of the chapter takes one person – an Australian teenager
called Delia Prince – as a point of departure and explores how her
circumstances and choices are shaped in terms of sex and gender. Delia
has not been chosen to represent a particular ‘type’; the point is,
rather, that the same kind of analysis would be needed to understand any
individual life. The second part of the chapter looks at the
collectivities Delia lives in: city, state, country, world. Here I
discuss some of the statistical and institutional evidence about sex
inequality and sexual politics. This too is illustrative. The topic is
vast and only a fragment of the evidence can be recited in a single
chapter. But it is perhaps enough to demonstrate the scale and
importance of the issues.

A Teenager and her Family

Delia Prince (the name is a pseudonym) is one of the teenagers my
colleagues and I interviewed in 1978, along with their parents and
teachers, in the research project later published as Making the
Difference. The research was an attempt to understand the circumstances,
in school, family and workplace, that lay behind the massively greater
drop-out rate from working-class high schools compared with ruling-class
secondary colleges.

Delia was one of a sample of students from a working-class outer suburb,
where she lives with her two parents, older sister and older brother.
Like a large proportion of the Australian working class the family owns
its own house, a comfortable brick-veneer one, set back behind a high
fence. The house was built mainly by Delia’s father and a great deal of
her mother’s energy over the years has gone into keeping its interior
gleaming and its garden attractive.

Delia, fifteen at the time we interviewed her, is a cheerful if rather
quiet person, past puberty, and already equipped with a steady
boyfriend. From her parents’ point of view she is doing well, especially
as she has come through some serious medical problems and periods in
hospital. She ‘chatters’ with her mother in the kitchen about what goes
on at school, does her share of housework without much grumbling and,
unlike many of her peers who sneak out at night, observes the family
rules about when she can go out. ‘Basically just a normal kid’ is her
mother’s summary. Certainly Delia seems everyone’s picture of a nice
girl.

She loves animals and so would like to become a vet. That is, if she
gets good enough marks at school; otherwise she will try for a clerical
job in a bank. Her school test results at present are no better than
moderate; she is having trouble with maths. She gets along easily with
most of her teachers, though there are a couple she has disliked. From
their point of view she is not very visible – not a problem, not a star.
Apart from her parents’ wishes and her own vague ambition to be a
veterinarian, there is nothing much to attach her to the school. She
confesses that she would prefer to leave this year, though she expects
to go on to the School Certificate assessment and leave at sixteen.

‘Just a normal kid’, yes; but where does that ‘normality’ come from? How
is it produced? And isn’t there a little too much of it? If we push back
behind the somewhat bland appearance of Delia’s adolescence, some more
complex and tension-laden processes might come into view.

To start with the economic circumstances of Delia’s life, Fred Prince,
her father, is a tradesman with a certified skill. He does not use this
trade in his current job working for a public authority as leading hand
in maintenance, in charge of a gang of five men. He left his trade a
good many years ago to cash in on the television boom, setting up a
small business installing aerials. Working very long hours he made
enough money to buy a block of land and starting building a house. He
eventually gave that job up because it kept him away from the family too
much, and went back to work for wages. Rae, Delia’s mother, also has a
paid job. She is clerk, typist and office dogsbody for a small business
selling motor parts. As a young woman in the late 1950s she started
clerical work in a bank but was dismissed, as a matter of bank routine,
when she married. She took other jobs and kept up paid work even when
the children came along, in order to finance the house. Her current job
is (theoretically) part time. She does the family’s cooking and
cleaning, washing, ironing and most of the childcare.

While there is a strong element of ‘tradition’ in this arrangement, it
is also economically rational for the Princes to organize their
employment this way. The base rate of pay in Fred’s occupation is $10 a
week more than in Rae’s, and actual earnings differ much more than that
because of overtime and various penalty rates. Equally important in a
recession, Fred’s job is much more secure. He is a member of a strong,
though not exceptionally militant, trade union, run by men with
experience much like his own, which has established virtually lifetime
tenure for jobs at his level. Rae is covered by a union also run by men
(though about two-thirds of its members are women). As it happens, this
is a union dominated by conservative Catholic men who are not very keen
about women being permanent members of the work-force at all. It has not
established any rights of tenure or redundancy entitlements in jobs like
hers.

When I first arrived at their house to arrange the interviews, Fred came
to meet me with his hands covered with oil. He had been stripping down
his lawnmower which had broken down because he was trying to mow wet
grass in time for a christening party. Rae was inside the house cooking
for the party. As this illustrates, Delia is growing up among clear-cut
definitions of what is men’s work and what is women’s, at home as in the
workplace. The sense of what work is appropriate for a woman feeds into
Delia’s ideas of possible futures. This is evident in her sex-typed
interest in animals, and her idea of an alternative as a bank clerk,
which is modelled directly on her mother’s work history.

Despite a formal commitment to ‘equal opportunity’, her schooling does
little in practice to change these ideas about work and the assumptions
about marriage to which they are closely tied. Most of Delia’s female
friends and peers expect to get married fairly young and have children
quite soon. So does she; she can even name the age – twenty – at which
she expects to get married. There are some feminist teachers at her
school who have different notions of what women might aim for. But as
their ideas centre on ‘careers’ for women and advancement through higher
education, they only make much sense to the girls in the ‘A’ stream –
who are the only ones, in a working-class school, likely to have any
chance of going to college or university. Delia is not one of them.

Yet Delia’s future is not being constructed in a closed system. There
are changes going on, even in small details. Her mother Rae, for
instance, has taught Delia’s brother, as well as the two girls, to cook.
On larger issues there is significant tension, even contradiction. Rae
herself had done well at school and was obliged to leave before she
wanted to, to help her widowed mother. She had wanted to become a nurse
but her boyfriend (Fred) did not like the idea, so she gave it up. Her
mild comment, ‘it’s my only regret now’, is the nearest she gets in the
interview to expressing anger against Fred.

Even more striking is the fact that Rae kept a job when the children
were young. This was for a ‘good’ reason, to pay for the house, but
still violated an almost universal Australian doctrine that mothers
should stay home with their pre-school children – a doctrine duly
recited and endorsed by Delia. Rae was defensive and ‘guilty’ (her word)
about this and has probably come in for a lot of criticism from
relatives. She seems to have tried to compensate by being the perfect
wife-and-mother ever since. One result is overload, doing a full-time
job at home and a nearly full-time job at work. At thirty-eight she
already looks worn and her manner is a little stressed and abrupt. Even
Delia, with perception unusual in a fifteen year old, thinks that the
job is good for Rae but that she is working too hard.

Both Rae and Fred have a clear idea of what a good family is. Both have
sacrificed something in their own lives to make it possible and both
have invested a lot of emotion and energy in trying to produce it.
Delia, the youngest child, is now the focus of that process. Where Rae’s
mother had never spoken of sex, Rae and Fred have organized ‘round-table
sex talks’ with their children. They have tried to be more humane than
their own parents without losing control of the kids. They closely
monitor what is going on in the teenage peer groups. Fred heard rumours
of ‘sex, drugs, playing up in toilets’ at the school, so he went and
challenged the teachers about it, to be reassured that Delia and her
sister were not involved. Earlier this year Rae leant that Delia was in
a group that smoked and got drunk at weekends; she exerted herself,
successfully, to separate Delia from them. Yet Fred and Rae are not
opposed to Delia having an active social life. The boyfriend is not only
approved of, but, astonishingly, he seems to have been chosen by the
parents. At least they introduced him to Delia.

Behind this constant management of the children is a structure of
authority that makes Fred, very definitely, the ‘head of the household’
and Rae the second-in-command. He is self-confident in public, she is
not. He contrasts his own behaviour with that of his father, ‘a hard
man’ (read: violent) who would belt even an eighteen year old for bad
manners at table. Fred reports with some complacency that he has
thrashed each of his children once, hard, and never needed to again. Now
he is able to control them by ‘applied psychology’. We did not ask if
Rae was included in the thrashings. (Statistics on domestic violence
suggest that at least a quarter of all wives have been assaulted by
their husbands at some time.) Fred puts a lot of energy into coaching
local junior football teams and is president of their club; Rae is the
treasurer. He takes, as a right, a couple of nights out for beers with
the boys each week. Rae, even if she felt it the thing to do, does not
have the time.

Clearly this is only the beginning of an analysis of Delia’s
circumstances. It is perhaps enough to show that what lies behind her
relationship with school and intentions about leaving, the original
question in our research, is a very complex interplay of personal and
social forces. Much of this has to do with her family’s class situation,
as educational sociology has long insisted. But as much has to do with
the fact that she is a young woman, growing up in a setting where
relations between women and men work in a particular way.

We cannot understand Delia’s life without having a way of understanding
the division of labour between women and men in her household, in other
families she encounters, in Rae’s and Fred’s workplaces and in the
school. We need to understand the power relations between husbands and
wives, between men and women in trade unions and companies and in
voluntary organizations like the football club. We need to understand
how Rae’s femininity and Fred’s masculinity are constructed, how Delia’s
sexual awakening is being managed, how images of femininity are conveyed
to her. We cannot understand Delia without having some grasp of the
tensions and contradictions in these processes and the ways they change
between generations.

These are not independent issues. They interact; indeed they define a
sphere of social life that is strongly patterned. As soon as this is
recognized, it is obvious that the pattern is not peculiar to Delia, Rae
and Fred. What happens in their milieu is part of a much wider set of
social processes, which must be analyzed to understand what is happening
in Delia’s life. Let us turn, therefore, to evidence about these
patterns on the larger scale.

The Public World: Wages, Education, Jobs

The division of labour in Delia’s household and the kinds of jobs her
mother and father hold outside, have roots in the conventional images of
man-as-breadwinner and woman-as-home-maker. They also have a hard
material base. We do not have Fred and Rae Prince’s tax returns but the
general position is known. In 1978, the year of these interviews, the
average wages for adult full-time employees in Australia were $239 a
week if they were men, $183 if they were women. That is to say, a decade
after the Equal Pay Case that established a notional policy of sex
equality in pay rates, women got 77 per cent of what men got. By 1985
this had moved up to 82 per cent.

These figures greatly overstate the general level of equality. In the
mid-1980s more women than men earn less than a full wage because they
are less than full-time workers. About 36 per cent of employed women in
Australia are part-timers (Rae Prince being one), compared with 6 per
cent of employed men. Taking all employed people, women’s average
earnings are 66 per cent of men’s (1985 figures). Further, a higher
proportion of women workers earn no wage because they are are
unemployed, and many more women than men have very low incomes because
they are dependent on a pension or welfare benefit. Figures for 1981/2
show that 1.97 million women have social security as their main source
of income compared with 0.78 million men. The result is that the average
income of women who have any income at all is 48 per cent of the men’s
average (1981/2). And even that overstates the degree of equality, since
a higher proportion of women have no income at all. Adjusting for that,
the average income of all women is 45 per cent of the average income of
all men.

Statistics on wealth are harder to come by, as wealth is better
concealed. But there is no doubt at all that men control the major
concentrations of wealth in the Australian economy. The magazine
Business Review Weekly compiles, from a miscellany of sources, an annual
list of the 200 richest people in the country. In the 1985 list just
four of the listed names were women.

Australia has a reputation for putting women down; are these figures
exceptional? There are no systematic statistics on men’s and women’s
incomes on a world scale. But there are many pointers to the state of
affairs in individual countries. A recent International Labor Office
study of manufacturing industries in twenty countries, for instance,
shows that women’s wages are less than men’s wages in every country
studied. As examples:

  -------------- -----------------------------
                 Women’s wages as % of men’s
  West Germany   73
  Japan          43
  Egypt          63
  El Salvador    81
  -------------- -----------------------------

Figures for Eastern European economies show much the same pattern as in
Western Europe:

  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------
                   Women’s median fulltime earnings as % of men’s
  Czechoslovakia   67
  Poland           67
  Hungary          73
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------

A comparison of Latin American countries uses a different measure,
setting cut-off points and showing what percentages of women and men
fall above and below them. These figures show the percentages falling in
the lowest income category in each country:

  --------------------------- ------- -----
                              Women   Men
  Colombia (all employees)    47%     38%
  Chile (non-agricultural)    27%     7%
  Panama (non-agricultural)   34%     6%
  --------------------------- ------- -----

Clearly the pattern of unequal income is international, though the level
of inequality varies from place to place.

One of the reasons for these differentials (though certainly not the
only one) is unequal access to education and training. There are
relatively systematic international statistics on literacy and
participation in schooling. Though the overall levels of literacy
claimed have to be taken with a certain scepticism, there is no reason
to doubt the overall pattern of sex differences that emerge within each
country.

To get a global picture in these and following comparisons, I have taken
countries from six broad groupings: (1) United States (a group in
itself); (2) EEC + Japan; (3) Soviet Union and Eastern Europe; (4)
China + India; (5) second-tier capitalist; (6) poorest.

Access to jobs outside subsistence agriculture – as well as other
sources of social power – is very much affected by whether you have been
taught to read and write. Almost everywhere in the world, more men than
women have been. Table 1 shows a selection of illiteracy rates, the
percentage of the population reported illiterate.

Access to higher-level jobs is very much affected by advanced education.
Men generally get more of this than women. The figures in table 2 are
percentages of the adult population who have post-secondary education.

The differences in earnings shown on page 7 are compounded by massive
differences in the numbers of women and men able to earn any income at
all. There are systematic figures on this, because of the close interest
taken in the size and composition of the ‘labour force’ by official
agencies concerned with economic development. The World Bank, for
instance, has statistics on what percentage women make of the (paid)
labour force in every country, and has even totalled them across four
groups of countries (the categories neatly reflecting the Bank’s own
preoccupations). The figures are: for ‘developing countries’, 25 per
cent; for ‘capital-surplus oil-exporting countries’, 5 per cent; for
‘industrialized countries’, 35 per cent; for ‘centrally planned
economies’, 45 per cent. Examples of women’s share of the total labour
force in countries selected from the six groupings defined earlier, are
shown in table 3.

Table 1 Percentage of population reported illiterate

  Country             Women (%)   Men (%)
  ------------------- ----------- ---------
  (1) United States   Not given   
  (2) Italy           7           5
  (3) Poland          2           1
  (4) India           81          52
  (5) Brazil          26          22
  (6) Indonesia       42          23

Table 2 Percentage of adult population with post-secondary education

  Country             Women (%)   Men (%)
  ------------------- ----------- ---------
  (1) United States   28          37
  (2) Japan           10          19
  (3) Poland          4           7
  (4) India           0.3         2
  (5) Brazil          3           5
  (6) Egypt           1           5

Table 3 Women’s share of the total paid labour force

  Country             Percentage share
  ------------------- ------------------
  (1) United States   38
  (2) West Germany    36
  (3) Soviet Union    50
  (4) China           38
  (5) South Korea     33
  (6) Colombia        25

Only in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and some parts of Black
Africa, is women’s participation in the paid labour force close to that
of men. In the rest of the world, men’s participation rates run at
roughly twice those of women. The differences are startling in Arab
countries, where it is exceptional for more than 15 per cent of the paid
labour force to be women; here men’s participation rates are from five
to twenty times as high as women’s.

A low labour-force participation rate certainly does not mean that large
numbers of women do no work. What it means is that their work is not
paid. They work mainly outside the cash economy, in housework,
childrearing, subsistence agriculture, or labour for a husband or father
who markets the product.

This is one aspect of an economic segregation between women and men that
also runs through the money economy. In Australia, for instance, men
hold 86 per cent of the jobs as administrators, executives and managers,
but only 28 per cent of clerical jobs; 88 per cent of jobs in trades,
process work, labouring and mining and 47 per cent of jobs in sales
(1983 figures). A study by the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), covering the richer capitalist countries, shows
that this pattern is international: ‘The coefficient of female
representation shows that women are most under-represented in
administrative and managerial occupations in all countries … Women are
over-represented in clerical occupations in all countries … They are
also over-represented in service occupations in all countries.’ When the
broad groupings are broken down, as the OECD study also notes, the
degree of concentration can be even more striking: ‘For example, in the
United States in 1978, 97 per cent of registered nurses and 94 per cent
of elementary teachers within this group were women, while 91 per cent
of industrial engineers and 99 per cent of airplane pilots were men.’

One reason why women rarely appear near the top of the economic tree is
that in a capitalist economy the ability to accumulate wealth is very
much dependent on one’s ability to command credit. There is reason to
think that lenders – banks and other financial institutions – do not
extend the credit to women that they do to men. The New South Wales
(NSW) Anti-Discrimination Board, currently studying this issue, cites
cases such as this in the early 1980s: ‘A married couple … had a joint
cheque account with the same suburban bank. They separated and then took
out individual accounts with the same bank. They both overdrew. The
man’s cheques were honoured though he overdrew by $1500. The woman’s
cheques were bounced although she overdrew by only $300.’

Direct discrimination in terms of sex, marital status and the assumption
that a husband is necessarily ‘head of the household’ and therefore a
wife is not an independent agent, is compounded by the fact that several
categories of people who are usually not given credit at all consist
mainly of women. This includes people dependent on welfare payments and
those with no current cash income. The difficulties this situation
creates for women in getting finance to buy a house are familiar in the
experience of women’s refuges.

Violence, Prejudice, the State

The lack of alternative housing is one of the reasons women may stay in,
or return to, a violent marriage. Domestic violence is a very large part
of all violence. It is difficult to get reliable statistics, but a good
many pointers exist. A study of four police stations in different
suburbs of Sydney in 1977–8 showed that calls to domestic assaults
exceeded calls to other assaults – in some areas by a factor of three.
(The notorious reluctance of police to intervene in domestic violence
has some basis in the risk to the police themselves: in the United
States about 20 per cent of police deaths in the course of duty occur in
such cases.) A widely quoted study in Scotland found that 25 per cent of
violent crimes reported to the police were assaults against wives and
girlfriends. A national sample survey in the United States in the
mid-1970s reported that 28 per cent of couples acknowledged at least one
violent incident and estimated that the true figure was closer to 50 or
60 per cent. In a recent phone-in in Victoria 22 per cent of women had
experienced domestic violence but did not report it. While violence by
women against men is far from negligible, the majority of serious
domestic assaults are by men against women.

This is part of a larger pattern of violence against women. Rapes
reported to the police in Australia rose from around 600 a year in
1972–3 to over 1,200 in 1981–2. In the United States the figure rose
from 47,000 in 1972 to 79,000 in 1983. There is reason to think that
these figures are still very much understated and that most rapes are
not reported to the police. An alternative approach is to conduct a
survey of the general population asking people if they have been victims
of various crimes. One such survey, done on a very large scale by the
Australian Bureau of Statistics in 1983, estimated 26,700 sexual
assaults on adult women during a year, including 8,600 rapes or
attempted rapes. (Attacks on teenagers would have to be added to this
figure.) This gives a rate of five sexual assaults for every 1,000 adult
women, which may not seem very many until it is seen in its context of
very widespread intimidation at a lower level, from wolf-whistles and
shouted jokes to sexual harassment in workplaces. A number of the
mothers we interviewed in Delia Prince’s suburb will not let their
daughters go out on the neighbourhood streets at night because of the
fear these assaults generate.

Homosexual men also have reason to fear assault in public places – and
one of the main groups they have to fear are the police. There are no
official statistics on these matters, but police violence on a
considerable scale has been carefully documented for New York from 1960
through a twenty-year period in which the growing political strength of
gays led to a decline in the attacks. The murder of Dr George Duncan in
Adelaide in 1972 was almost certainly the result of an entertainment for
off-duty police which consisted of bashing homosexual men and throwing
them in the River Torrens; Dr Duncan could not swim.

Other groups also are involved in attacks on homosexuals. A 1985
phone-in conducted by Gay Hotline in Sydney (sponsored jointly by the
police) over two days received calls describing fifty-three episodes of
assault on homosexual men. In almost all these cases the attackers were
groups of teenage boys or very young men, a fact that raises disturbing
questions about the role of violence and homophobia in the construction
of masculinity.

These attacks occur in a context of general hostility towards
homosexuals that ranges from discrimination in housing to legal danger.
Antagonism to lesbians is less explicit than to gay men – there is a
tendency to make lesbians socially invisible. Nevertheless it becomes
very clear in such cases as a lesbian mother fighting a custody battle
in the courts. Lesbianism itself is liable to be offered as evidence
that a woman is unfit to have custody of a child. Gay men face the
criminal law because of their sexuality. In most of Australia it is
still illegal for adult men to commit ‘the abominable crime of buggery’
or ‘indecent assault upon a male person’. In 1985 the state of
Queensland even legislated to prevent hotels from serving beer to
‘sexual deviants or perverts’, meaning gays, along with ‘drug dealers’
and ‘child molesters’. This degree of legislative stigmatization is
exceptional; the attitudes underlying it are not.

Statistics on the operation of these laws are patchy but an indication
is given by a study of Sydney court cases by the NSW Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research. This showed 100 to 200 prosecutions a year in
the 1940s, rising to 400 to 500 prosecutions a year from the mid-1950s
to the late 1960s. Great peaks and troughs (117 cases in 1966, 1,204 in
1968, a lull in the early 1970s) reflect changes in the intensity of
policing. In the mid-1970s, when Sydney was well on the way to
recognition as one of the ‘gay capitals’ of the world, the rate was
rising again. In 1975 NSW courts processed 300 homosexual prosecutions
under the Crimes Act and Summary Offences Act (plus others, their number
uncertain, under the Child Welfare Act).

Police surveillance in pursuit of these laws merges into police
harassment. ‘Decoy’ squads on homosexual beats produce a stream of
individual prosecutions; there were said to be two such squads operating
in Sydney in the mid-1980s, one in Adelaide. Much more publicity is
gained by large-scale police raids on homosexual bars and baths, such as
the 1977 raid on the Truxx bar in Montreal (146 arrested), the 1981 raid
on bath houses in Toronto (304 arrested), or the 1983 raids on Club 80
in Sydney (over 100 arrested, though few charged). These patterns of
intervention in turn merge into the violence already discussed.

While there are clear patterns of domestic assault and sexual assault
against women and of violence against gays, there are other patterns of
violence which affect men more drastically than women and heterosexual
men as well as gays. The 1983 Australian national survey already
mentioned estimated 113,000 assaults in a year against women and 278,000
assaults against men. In the same year there were 294 reported homicides
in Australia: 41 per cent of the victims were women and 59 per cent were
men. In the United States the 1978 rate of assaults per 1,000 people was
12 for women and 22 for men. In 1981 the United States had 23,600
homicides: 21 per cent were of women and 79 per cent were of men. In
that year the rate of death by homicide per 100,000 people was 3 for
white women, 13 for black women, 10 for white men and 65 for black men.

Those charged with or convicted of violent crime are overwhelmingly men.
For instance, in NSW in 1983 some 519 people were convicted in the
higher criminal courts of homicides, assaults and like crimes; 93 per
cent of them were men. A study of homicide in NSW over a 50-year period
found that between 80 per cent and 85 per cent of those charged were
men. In the United States in 1983, 87 per cent of the people arrested
for murder were men. In the same year men were 87 per cent of those
arrested for aggravated assault, 88 per cent of those arrested for
arson, and so on through other crimes of violence. Figures for other
recent years are very similar.

So far as the official and semi-official figures go, then, it appears
that men are more commonly than women the victims of serious
interpersonal violence, and even more commonly the perpetrators.

The same is true of the institutional violence represented by the
police, the prison system and the military. At the census of 1981
Australia had 30,200 police officers; 94 per cent of them were men. In
June 1983, the most recent figures, there was a national prison
population of 10,200; 96 per cent were men. The United States in 1983
had a prison population of 224,000; 93 per cent were men. This pattern
too is international. The following figures are the percentage of
prisoners in 1974 who were men:

  -------------- -----
  Canada         97%
  West Germany   97%
  Japan          98%
  Italy          95%
  -------------- -----

The situation in the military is similar. In June 1984 the Australian
army, navy and air force between them had a total strength of 71,600, of
whom 93 per cent were men. A comparison of the major NATO forces in
1979–80 shows the same pattern:

  --------------- -------
  United States   92%
  France          95%
  West Germany    99.9%
  Britain         95%
  --------------- -------

The dominance of the military by men was even more complete in the past.
The United States armed forces, for instance, were 99 per cent men in
1960, 1965 and 1970. The percentage of women began to creep up in the
early 1970s, with a formal policy of expanding women’s role in the
military starting in 1973. In most armies, nevertheless, women are
forbidden to have a combat role. In anti-aircraft units in Britain
during World War II women were allowed to do every job, including aiming
the guns at the German planes – but not to pull the trigger.

What of those who control the machinery of state, who direct the police,
the bureaucracies, the soldiers? It is notoriously difficult to locate
actual power-holders with any precision, but a reasonable first
approximation is possible, by looking at three groups from whom some key
power-holders are certainly drawn: judges, generals and members of
national parliaments (see table 4). The statistics on parliaments are
relatively easy to get, and are shown for countries chosen from the six
groups defined earlier. Figures for judges and generals are scrappy but
illuminating. As a change, the figures given in this table are the
percentages of women in the groups named.

Table 4 Women at upper levels of the state

  Country             Date          Body                              Percentage
  ------------------- ------------- --------------------------------- ------------
  Parliaments                                                         
  (1) United States   1984          Congress                          4
  (2) Japan           1985                                            4
  (3) Soviet Union    1985          Supreme Soviet                    33
  (4) India           1985          (federal)                         9
  (5) Australia       1985          (federal and state)               9
  (6) Colombia        1975                                            3
  Judges                                                              
  (1) United States   1985          state and federal courts          7
  (2) Britain         1984          high, circuit and county courts   3
  (3) Soviet Union    1984          People’s courts                   36
  (4) India           1986                                            2
  (5) Australia       1985          all federal courts                5
  Generals                                                            
  (1) United States   early 1980s                                     0.6
  (2) Japan           1986                                            nil
  (3) Italy           1986                                            nil
  (4) Australia       1986                                            nil

The Soviet Union looks rather good on these figures. But in the
communist systems power resides more in the Party than the parliament –
and in the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
the participation of women in 1981 was 4 per cent.

At the end of an excellent review of the world-wide evidence on women in
politics ten years ago, Kathleen Newland argued that a global change in
the political position of women was under way. Legal equality (for
example the right to vote) was now established and there was extensive
participation in grass-roots politics. ‘Yet women have only rarely
surfaced among the leaders in politics. They are nearly absent from the
positions where policy is hammered out, where decisions are made, where
real power resides.’ Ten years later it seems that not a great deal has
changed. The levers of state power are still in men’s hands.

The facts just recited are a very small fragment of the evidence now
available on the social positions of women and men and on relationships
surrounding different forms of sexuality. Though some of the details
will be relevant to later steps of the argument, just one conclusion
needs to be drawn here. The patterns of gender and sex that appear
through this evidence are not just an important feature of human life;
they are specifically social. They involve inequalities of income, the
working of institutions, the distribution of power, the division of
labour and other distinctively social facts. Whether these social facts
have non-social causes will be considered in chapter 4.

Two assumptions or working hypotheses underpin the argument that
follows. First, that the facts set out in this chapter are connected
with each other; that is, we are dealing not with a shapeless heap of
data but with a social structure, an organized field of human practice
and social relations. This hypothesis is needed to get the analysis
under way, though the evidence cited already suggests that it is sound,
given the way similar patterns reappear across different fields of
social life. A general concern of the book, and the specific topic of
Part II, is how this structure can be understood.

There is no convenient name for this subject. Terms like ‘sexual
politics’ and ‘patriarchy’ are useful in pointing to parts of it but not
to the whole. An American conference in the mid-1970s managed to invent
a whole new science of gender and call it ‘dimorphics’; luckily no more
was heard of that. Gayle Rubin wrote of ‘the sex/gender system’, which
is better but begs questions about what exactly a ‘system’ is. Kate
Young and her co-authors speak of ‘the social relations of gender’, the
most precise term but an awkward phrase. ‘Gender relations’ is a
reasonable abbreviation and I will use it as a name for the whole
domain.

The second assumption is that the two ‘levels’ of fact discussed in this
chapter – personal life and collective social arrangements – are linked
in a fundamental and constitutive way. It makes no sense to theorize one
without also theorizing the other. I introduced this chapter with a case
study, not to humanize the statistics, but because of this basic point
about method. The large-scale structures of gender relations are
constituted by practices such as those Delia Prince and her family are
engaged in. At the same time their practice cannot float free; it must
respond to, and is constrained by, the circumstances which those
structures constitute.

This is an abstract point in theory, but it is also a tangible reality.
A final point about Delia will illustrate this. Delia told us she wanted
to be a veterinarian. Her parents knew of this and were willing to bear
the cost of her training, not a small matter for them. When we returned
to that school several years later to report back and follow up, we
learnt how things had turned out. Delia had left school at sixteen, as
she had predicted; and she had found a job. It was a notable one both in
terms of the general sexual division of labour and the specific history
of her parents’ marriage. She was not a veterinarian but a veterinary
nurse.

There would be value in thinking through a life history in greater
depth, as will be argued in Part III; but it is also important to know
that conclusions go beyond the one case. Accordingly I will leave the
Princes at this point and move on to other sources in later chapters.
The approach to personal life that their interviews helped to develop
nevertheless remains basic to the treatment of historical,
psychoanalytic and other evidence.

It has been difficult, and remains difficult, to get the field of gender
relations into focus. Strong emotions are involved. For many people it
is threatening even to see these patterns as social. It is comforting to
think the patterns are ‘natural’ and that one’s own femininity or
masculinity is therefore proof against challenge. Western intellectuals,
by and large, have helped this evasion. The grand systems of philosophy
and social analysis, from Thomism through Marxism to functionalism and
systems theory, have taken the gender arrangements of the day pretty
much for granted. Conventional politics marginalizes ‘women’s issues’
equally firmly.

Nevertheless feminism, gay liberation and the research they have
stimulated, have now made a case that cannot be ignored. A vast field
has been opened up and existing theory and practice must be
reconstructed in the light of it. The habit of mind that treats class,
or race, or North-South global relationships as if gender did not
matter, is obsolete – and dangerous. For the facts of gender do not go
away. Aid programs to Third World countries, by ignoring gender in
principle, in fact give resources to men rather than to women.
Industrial and nationalist militancy that ignores questions of gender
reinforces men’s violence and the patterns of masculinity that lie
behind it. The question of human survival, in the face of a global arms
race and widespread environmental destruction, requires us to understand
a play of social forces in which gender has a major part.

NOTES

Introductory

(p. 1). On how easy it is to fall into stereotypes about ‘typical
girls’, see Griffin’s book of that name (1985).

A Teenager and her Family

(pp. 1–6). This study is based on interviews from the research described
in Connell, Ashenden, Kessler and Dowsett (1982). Sec two papers with a
focus on gender and education: Connell et al. (1981) and Kessler et al.
(1985).

The Public World: Incomes and Wealth

(pp. 6–7). Statistics on Australian earnings and work-force from the
Australian Bureau of Statistics (hereafter ABS) Catalogue 6101.0, Labour
Statistics, (1978), p. 71; and from ABS Cat. 4101.0, Social Indicators,
4 (1984), pp. 171, 192, 213, 214. The adjustment for people with no
income is based on 1981 census figures for women and men aged fifteen
and over, in ABS Cat. 2443.0, Census – Summary Characteristics of
Persons and Dwellings, (1983). The ILO study is summarized in Women at
Work, 1 (1983), pp. 4–5. Eastern European figures quoted by Molyneux
(1981). The Latin American study, with figures dating from 1968–72, is
summarized in Latin American and Caribbean Women’s Collective (1980), p.
182.

Education, Labour Market and Finance

(pp. 8–11). Figures on illiteracy and post-secondary education
(recalculated) from UNESCO Statistical Yearbook, (1984), tables 1.3 and
1.4: various years for different countries. Labour-force participation
statistics from the World Bank’s World Tables, (1980), pp. 460–5.
Australian occupational segregation figures from Social Indicators,
(1984), p. 178; for a review of segregation in the Australian labour
market see the Women’s Bureau report on The Role of Women in the
Economy, (1981), pp. 22–33. International data and quotations from OECD
document Women and Employment, (1980), p. 42.1 Newland (1980) is an
excellent short introduction to the sexual division of labour on a world
scale. Material on financial discrimination from Niland (1983) and
report in the Australian, (4 February 1983).

Crimes of Violence

(pp. 11–14). Domestic violence statistics: United States, Straus (1978),
p. 446. Scotland, Dobash and Dobash (1979). Police station figures from
Report of the NSW Task Force on Domestic Violence (1981). This report,
and Scutt (1983), compile the scattered Australian evidence. Rape
statistics: Australia, Year Book Australia, (1985), p. 221. United
States, Statistical Abstract of the United States (1985). National
sexual assault estimate from ABS Cat. 4505.0, Crime Victims Survey,
Australia, 1983, Preliminary, (1984). Homicides and assaults: ABS Cat.
4505.0; ABS Cat. 3303.0, Causes of Death, (1983); ABS Cat. 4502.1,
Higher Criminal Courts, NSW, 1983; NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and
Research longitudinal study on homicide by Wallace (1986); Statistical
Abstract of the US, (1980, 1985).

Homophobia

(pp. 12–13). Sydney and NSW statistics on court cases in Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research (1978/9), pp. 10, 33–7. Patterns of oppression
of homosexual people are documented in the remarkable report of the NSW
Anti-Discrimination Board (1982). Canadian raids documented in Body
Politic, 94 (1983); 105 (1984); 117 (1985). New York beatings and other
harassment are documented by Rosen (1980–81). Gay Hotline phone-in 19 to
21 July 1985 report by Police Gay Liaison Unit (NSW Police Community
Relations Bureau press release).

Police, Prisons, Military

(p. 14). Australian figures from Social Indicators, (1984), pp. 263,
273. United States figures from Statistical Abstract, (1980, 1985).
International comparisons on prisons from Heron House Book of Numbers
(London: Pelham Books, 1979), p. 323. Military figures: Australia, Year
Book Australia, (1984), p. 45; NATO, Chapkis (1981), p. 88; United
States Statistical Abstract, (1980), p. 375.

State Office-holders

(pp. 14–16). Newland (1975) is an excellent general source on women’s
participation in the political system, though narrowly defined; the
quotation is from p. 33. Other sources of figures quoted: Australia,
Federal Court Library; Sawer (1985). United States, Stille (1986);
Hacker (1983) and Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, (10 November
1984). India, Japan and Italy, letters from respective embassies. Soviet
Union, Perchenok (1985). Britain, Central Office of Information, Women
in Britain, (1984).

Part I

Theorizing Gender

2

Historical Roots of Contemporary Theory

There is no widely accepted framework for understanding the facts set
out in chapter 1. There are several conflicting ways of looking at them.
The aim of the next three chapters is to come to grips with these
approaches and derive from them a systematic basis for understanding
gender.

The first step is to ask where they came from and how they gained their
present shape. The outline in this chapter is far from being a complete
history of ideas. That would be a massive undertaking in its own right.
Yet we need some kind of historical framework, on the principle that
social theory never occurs in a vacuum. It must always be understood,
and evaluated, as itself a practice with a context.

Secular Morality

Social-scientific theories of gender are a Western invention, as far as
I know, and definitely a modern one. Other civilizations have had their
own ways of dealing with human sexuality and the relations between the
sexes. As Indian eroticism and Chinese family codes illustrate, these
can be as sophisticated and elaborate as anything the West has created.
But they are different kinds of cultural formation.

Nor was this perspective part of European culture from the start. Sex
and gender in the writings of medieval and Reformation intellectuals
were, by and large, items in a debate about the moral relationships
among men, women and God. Such a framework was not necessarily a
constricting one. It could recognize the complexities of passion and
treat them with great subtlety. Witness the theme of frustrated love
from the romance of Tristan and Isolde, through Dante’s story of Paolo
and Francesca, to Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet. Yet the well-spring of
these stories was much more often a dilemma of conflicting obligations
than a curiosity about motive. Similarly the discussion of sex by
theologians and philosophers was intended to lay down what people ought
to do, rather than consider why they did something else.

The first major change in this framework followed the corrosion of the
belief that God laid down a path for women and men to follow. Among
intellectuals of the Enlightenment we find the same topics as before,
but now secularized. There is a debate about the moral justification of
prevailing gender arrangements and – especially in the newly invented
literary form of the novel – drama about the lives of people who bent
the rules. The framework of a secular moralism, with Society in the
place formerly occupied by God, could admit a fair range of positions,
among them early feminism and libertarianism. The shock of the French
Revolution pushed this debate suddenly in a radical direction. In both
France and England clear statements of the ‘rights of women’ were
published in 1791–2, hard on the heels of the ‘rights of man’. The text
best known to English-speaking readers, Mary Wollstonecraft’s
Vindication of the Rights of Women, laid heavy stress on the distortion
of women’s moral character by the oppressive conditions under which
women lived. The same historical moment saw the bitter satire of
conventional sexual morality by the Marquis de Sade in Justine, who went
on in the monumental Juliette to explore the libertine sexuality that
became possible when divine law was wholly replaced by human will.

For a good while these remained the high-water marks of sexual
radicalism. The reaction against the French Revolution was legitimist in
sexual as well as class terms. Most nineteenth-century intellectuals
were hostile to Wollstonecraft and Sade if they knew of them at all. But
the secularization of the moral argument about gender did stick. In the
high tide of liberalism it took the form of a doctrine of equal rights,
a claim for citizenship. When the first political mobilization of women
on a significant scale began, at the Seneca Falls convention in the
United States in 1848, it was centred on this doctrine. Within the
liberal and utilitarian framework it became increasingly difficult to
see any objection to women’s citizenship. When John Stuart Mill wrote in
The Subjection of Women, ‘Under whatever conditions, and within whatever
limits, men are admitted to the suffrage, there is not a shadow of
justification for not admitting women under the same’, the phrasing
marked a decisive shift in the terms of argument. The logical
presumption was now for equality. By the turn of the century in some
colonies of settlement on the fringes of the capitalist world (Wyoming,
Utah, New Zealand, Colorado, South Australia, Idaho), white women did
have equal voting rights, and the struggle for the suffrage in countries
of the industrial centre was well under way.

To speak of a ‘secular moralism’ is not to deny that religious moralism
continued. It is a striking fact that nineteenth-century North American
feminism only became a mass movement when tied in with religion,
especially in the form of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union. It is
equally striking how the reaction against feminism and gay liberation in
the United States in the late 1970s was closely tied to fundamentalist
Protestantism. The history of ideas about gender is far from being a
succession of neatly defined stages. However radical a new development,
earlier frameworks are carried forward with it.

Yet the Enlightenment did see a basic restructuring of the field of
argument and by the end of the nineteenth century a second restructuring
was under way. The doctrine of equal rights fuelled a feminist
mobilization in Europe and in North America and other colonies of
settlement. By the 1920s women in these countries had searched out,
attacked and often broken the worst of their formal or legal
disabilities, most notably in suffrage, property ownership and access to
education. At the same time the concept of equal rights led to a
different kind of question. If the subordination of women was not
natural or just, how had it come about? How was it sustained? These are
no longer questions of ethics but empirical questions – and in the
framework of secular moralism, empirical questions about ‘society’. The
logical consequence of the doctrine of rights, then, was a social
science of gender.

In one sense this had been evident from the start. Wollstonecraft spent
much of her time discussing how women’s moral character was formed. She
attributed women’s character to their education, in the broad sense, and
argued for reforming both. In the same vein early socialists like Robert
Owen noted how women’s and men’s characters were distorted by oppressive
conditions and deduced a need for educational as well as economic
reform. A thread of sex egalitarianism ran through the Utopian socialist
movement of the early nineteenth century. It became part of the
mainstream socialist tradition through the writings of August Bebel and
Friedrich Engels. In Engels this current met the speculative history of
kinship being constructed by theorists like Morgan (Ancient Society) and
Bachofen (Mother Right). Engels’s famous Origin of the Family, Private
Property and the State rested on ethnography that was soon superseded
and as historiography was obsolete when it was written (see chapter 7
below). But it remained important because it crystallized once and for
all the idea of relationships between men and women as a social system
with a definite historical trajectory. The argument dramatized the
differences between gender relations in the remote past, in known
history and in the hoped-for future. Engels tied the trajectory of
gender to the dynamics of class, but the basic idea did not depend on
this link.

What Engels still took for granted, as did all the reformers of that
generation, was the naturalness of the categories of ‘women’ and ‘men’,
and indeed the conventional attributes of women and men. Radical
doctrines of equal rights could easily coexist with highly conventional
views about ‘true womanhood’, about the proper work of women and men and
about their heterosexual destiny. Women’s suffrage campaigners at the
turn of the century routinely argued that the public realm needed the
moral uplift, domestic virtues and nurturance that were the natural
attributes of women. Along this track it was easy for upper-class
feminism to merge into charity or moral surveillance of the poor, in the
kindergarten movement and campaigns for infant health and mothercraft
centres, eugenics, domestic science teaching and the like.

Science and Radicalism

These assumptions of naturalness were nevertheless challenged from
several directions. One was evolutionary biology. Charles Darwin’s
Descent of Man in 1874 offered a detailed account of ‘sexual selection’
as a mechanism of evolution alongside the ‘natural selection’ emphasized
in the Origin of Species. In his unemphatic style Darwin took the issue
of sex out of the hands of theologians and moralists and made it a
question of observation and comparison of the behaviour of different
species. More, biologists became interested in why sex existed at all,
and gradually developed an account of the evolutionary advantages given
by sexual reproduction. Though one spin-off from Darwinism has been the
‘naked ape’ claim that men’s supremacy over women is an evolutionary
law, in the long term the effect has been unsettling for patriarchy.
Merely by offering explanations of sexual behaviour, evolutionary
biology entrenched the idea that these patterns were in need of
explanation, that they were somehow problematic.

The scientific impact on the field of argument deepened with the advent
of doctors interested in sexuality and gender and the creation of a
semi-medical speciality which later came to be called ‘sexology’.
Medical and medico-legal case histories provided the first base for an
exploration of the forms of human sexuality as a natural phenomenon. The
first monument of this work was Krafft-Ebing’s Psychopathia Sexualis
(first edition 1886, numerous expanded editions later), which catalogued
with horrified fascination the many forms of ‘degeneracy’ from
transvestism and homoeroticism to eating shit and liking to be whipped.
The anthropology of sexual variation was developed much more lovingly by
Havelock Ellis, whose Sexual Inversion, the first volume of Studies in
the Psychology of Sex to be published, appeared in 1897. But the central
figure in this movement of thought was undoubtedly Sigmund Freud.

Particularly in ‘Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality’, Freud’s
arguments wrecked the notion of natural fixed characters for the two
sexes. His emphasis on ‘bisexuality’ in human emotions, and his
insistence on the importance of conflict within emotional life, made it
difficult to see any pattern of sexual character as completely settled.
More, in his analyses of the ‘Oedipus complex’ he showed how patterns of
emotion in adulthood could be grasped as resolutions of the conflicts of
development, and how different childhood situations could twist and
reconfigure every aspect of emotional life.

Freud’s importance in the history of ideas was not so much in
popularizing the theme of sex, which a good many others were also doing.
It was in providing a method of research – ‘psychoanalysis’ itself –
which generated masses of new information about emotional life and human
development, and led to a focus on the life history as the unit of
analysis rather than the species, the body or the syndrome. The
psychoanalytic life history forced attention to the details of
relationships, the configurations of families, in short to the social
contexts of emotional growth. Psychoanalysis thus produced detailed and
sophisticated accounts of femininity and masculinity as psychological
forms constructed by social processes. Ironically this was not Freud’s
intention – he clung to the hope of biological explanations of
psychology – but the logic of his methods led inevitably towards the
social.

The concept of bisexuality was one of Freud’s devices for understanding
homosexual attraction. This was a standing problem for accounts of
gender which based everything on biology or on the attraction of
opposites. And it was a ‘problem’ whose salience was increasing, as the
late nineteenth century sharpened the social definition of ‘homosexuals’
as a group apart. This was partly by new forms of criminalization (one
of whose first victims was Oscar Wilde), partly by medical definitions
of homosexual behaviour as pathology and partly by the political and
cultural response of homosexual people themselves. Authors such as Karl
Ulrichs in the 1860s and 1870s, and more famously Magnus Hirschfeld from
the 1890s on, had one foot in scientific sexology and the other in the
movement to liberalize social attitudes and laws. Hirschfeld’s
Scientific Humanitarian Committee expressed the blend nicely. The
immediate outcome was a naturalistic theory of homosexuality, the idea
of a ‘third sex’. This ran counter to the direction Freud was taking,
and so far as it supposed a physiological basis for homosexual
preference, can now be regarded as falsified. It was a politically
defensive idea, a reply to denunciations of homosexuals as moral
degenerates. Yet in the context of the early twentieth century it had
force as the only explanation of the stability of homosexual desire over
a lifespan. In this sense it added to the voices questioning the
taken-for-grantedness of the dichotomous sex categories.

Freud lacked, notoriously, a theory of social structure. If the
conventional family were taken as a given, both his analysis of
psychosexual development and his medical treatments could become a
defence of the patriarchal status quo. They certainly did among his
followers, especially after the emigration of psychoanalysis to North
America in the 1930s. Freud himself was a kind of libertarian but not a
political radical – and it was mostly among radicals that the
conventional family, and especially its division of labour, came into
question.

The issues raised by the Utopian colonies in the early part of the
century, and by socialist theorists of the mid-century, gained extra
force in the context of the ‘new unionism’ of the 1880s and 1890s, the
unionization of unskilled workers. Attempts to form unions of working
women ran into obstacles that were not met when unionizing men. Partly
this had to do with direct resistance from men: unions controlled by men
often would not accept women members. It also had to do with the
specific kinds of paid work that women were usually employed to do, in
domestic service and food and clothing industries, and with the demands
placed on them for work in their own homes by husbands and other
relatives.

Women in the socialist movement, for example Clara Zetkin, argued that
socialist ideas and practices must be rethought to deal with the
oppression of working-class women. They assumed that the sexual division
of labour could be changed and began organizing to do it. In the first
decade of the twentieth century strong women’s movements developed in
the socialist parties in Germany, the United States and elsewhere. Under
their pressure, working-class organizations cautiously began exploring
co-operative childcare, public laundries, communal living arrangements
and community-controlled education as practical forms of the
socialization of childcare and housework. For a short while this became
the policy of the revolutionary government in the Soviet Union, urged on
by Alexandra Kollontai.

It did not last. With Stalinism in the Soviet Union and the freezing of
Western socialism after the 1920s, these policies were completely
marginalized. (By 1937 George Orwell could include ‘feminists’ with
sandal-wearers, nudists and vegetarians in a list of unwanted cranks
haunting socialist conferences.) Socialist feminism had, nevertheless,
made a theoretical breakthrough. It had placed what we now call the
‘sexual division of labour’ on the agenda for analysis and explanation,
as firmly as the question of sexuality had been placed there by Darwin
and the sexologists.

Sex Roles and Syntheses

The ebbing of the radical tide in the 1920s drained practical urgency
from these debates about gender. In the next generation the main
developments were academic. The ‘woman question’ in politics had already
produced a response from the new sciences of psychology and sociology.
One line of research asked what were the psychological differences
between women and men and how they were caused. Starting in the United
States about the turn of the century, ‘sex difference’ research
gradually accumulated in huge quantity, though highly variable quality.
In the 1930s this tradition intersected with the new technology of
standardized attitude and personality tests, in attempts to measure
‘masculinity/femininity’ directly as a psychological trait.
Paper-and-pencil scales of masculinity and femininity (M/F) were devised
and soon put to work diagnosing gender deviance.

Gender-scaling was on the face of it neutral as to the sources of the
characteristics being ‘scaled’. Academic social science was addressing
that question on other terms. Jessie Taft developed the idea of women’s
cultural marginalization, an approach notable because it placed power
and exclusion at the centre of a social analysis of gender. The main
line of academic thought, however, followed another path with the
propagation in the 1930s of the concept of ‘social role’. The notion of
a socially provided script for individual behaviour, first learned and
then enacted, was easily applied to gender.

By the 1940s the terms ‘sex role’, ‘male role’ and ‘female role’ were in
use. By the end of that decade American sociologists such as Mirra
Komarovsky and Talcott Parsons had spelt out a functional theory of sex
roles and the cultural contradictions surrounding them. These ideas
converged with the growing industries of counselling, marriage guidance,
psychotherapy and welfare case work. The concept of a normative ‘sex
role’ and various patterns of ‘deviance’ from it became enormously
influential, providing a practical warrant for intervention to
straighten out deviants, and theoretical justification for the ‘helping
professions’ as a whole. ‘Sex role’ has remained the central category of
academic thought about gender ever since, with the sex-difference
literature gradually slipping under the ‘role’ rubric as well.

In the meantime psychoanalysis had stirred anthropology in new
directions. Freud and his follower Geza Roheim argued that the Oedipus
complex was universal, some form of it appearing in every culture. In
the 1920s and 1930s writers like Bronislaw Malinowski in Sex and
Repression in Savage Society and Margaret Mead in Sex and Temperament in
Three Primitive Societies drew on their own fieldwork to argue a general
case for a connection between social structure and the emotional dynamic
of sexuality. Malinowski, truer to Freud, centred his argument on the
functional necessity of repression and the elaboration of kinship
customs as a means to that end. Mead was more interested in the
emotional colouring of a whole culture, and her approach was formative
in the ‘culture-and-personality’ school of American anthropology.
Perhaps the most important effect of their work was simply to document
the range of ways in which different cultures dealt with sex and gender.
The exotica of life in the Trobriand Islands, Samoa and New Guinea
dramatized for Westerners the idea of social scripting; it was difficult
in the face of this to take any aspect of gender relations for granted.

By the mid-century a number of intellectual currents were converging and
the stage was set for reflective synthesis. Three theorists published
major works, covering remarkably similar issues, within five years of
each other; one starting from field anthropology, one from theoretical
sociology and one from existential phenomenology. With them the social
analysis of gender took its contemporary form.

Mead’s Male and Female, Talcott Parsons’s essays in Family Socialization
and Interaction Process and Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex had very
different intellectual programs and politics. That perhaps makes what
they had in common more notable. All took a psychoanalytic view of the
making of personality. All tried to integrate this (though on different
terms) with analysis of the division of labour conceived mainly in terms
of sex roles or gender roles. Parsons was most systematic about this, as
‘role’ had become a fundamental term in his general sociology. In all
three authors the sense of the social contingency of sexual character
and gender relations had gone very deep. Mead’s deliberate
cross-cultural contrasts dramatized the point most. But it was also
assumed by Parsons, who in earlier essays had laid emphasis on the
modernization of the female role in American society, and by de
Beauvoir, who attempted a phenomenology of different kinds of
femininity. Yet all three theorists tried to limit the free play that a
complete sociologizing of gender would imply. Parsons did this by appeal
to functional imperatives of society, Mead (the most conservative on
this issue) by appeal to some rather ill-defined biological regularities
in human development and de Beauvoir by the self/other structure of
relations between men and women. All three defined gender patterns
mainly in terms of relationships within the nuclear family, which all
took to be, effectively, universal.

What de Beauvoir saw, and the others did not, was the dimension of power
running through these relationships. Mead and Parsons, to put it in a
phrase, synthesized the field of gender around the idea of custom and
social stability. De Beauvoir synthesized it around the subordination of
women.

In the short term the former was the more influential approach.
Parsons’s analysis of the family, particularly his distinction between
‘expressive’ and ‘instrumental’ roles, laid the basis for a conservative
sociology of gender which took its place in the great expansion of
American social science in the 1950s and 1960s. Its themes were the
necessity of the nuclear family, the problems of personal adjustment to
sex roles and techniques of intervention to keep the family in good
repair. With ‘family’ and ‘sex role’ conflated, the actual focus of most
of the resulting research was women as wives-and-mothers (the ‘female
role’). Sex-difference and gender-scaling studies continued and were
generally taken to confirm the role paradigm. Despite Parsons’s
prestige, the area remained rather an academic backwater during these
decades. It produced some notable pieces of field research, such as
Komarovsky’s Blue-Collar Marriage and Young and Willmott’s Family and
Kinship in East London. While these studies had considerable influence
in social work and sometimes on social policy, they had little impact on
social theory or the intellectual world of social science in general. It
was not until the arrival of the new feminism at the end of the 1960s
that a wider interest in gender was kindled, and then it was Simone de
Beauvoir’s perspective that became central.

Feminism and Gay Liberation

In the context of this history, the research and the theoretical work
inspired by feminism and gay liberation in the 1970s was not as novel as
many activists believed. A number of its concerns were already widely
debated: the nature of femininity, the power relations between women and
men, the socialization of children, the dynamics of desire. The domain
of the argument, we may say, had been mapped out. Yet it would be
equally wrong to see the new wave of theorists as simply replaying old
themes, or as rediscovering an eternal feminism. The history sketched
above has seen several transformations within a field of debate, and
this is basically what happened around 1970. There was a reconfiguration
of a wide intellectual field around the themes of power and inequality.
Its impulse was a reconnection between theory, which had become largely
academic, and radical politics. The existence and strategic problems of
sexual liberation movements defined the central issues for a new
generation of theorists. The theory of gender thus became, to a degree
it rarely had before, a strategic theory, centering on how, and how far,
the social relations of gender could be transformed. Even if most of the
issues were long-established, they were now being questioned with an
intensity and depth that made the analysis of gender the most disturbing
force on the whole cultural scene.

One of the first effects of feminism on academia was simply to increase
the volume of sex-role and sex-difference research. In 1969 sex-role
studies accounted for 0.5 per cent of articles published in sociology
journals; by 1978 they accounted for 10 per cent, around 500 titles a
year. Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin’s massive compilation The
Psychology of Sex Differences, which cautiously advanced social-moulding
ideas, shows the volume of research being done in the United States in
the early 1970s. In 1975 a specialized journal appeared, called Sex
Roles. The field subdivided into specialities: socialization (Maccoby’s
interest); men’s roles as distinct from women’s (Joseph Pleck’s in The
Myth of Masculinity); androgyny (popularized by Sandra Bern); and
therapies concerned with gender adjustment (‘assertiveness training’ for
women, and for men a kind of masculinity therapy promoted by
growth-movement psychologists such as Herb Goldberg in The Hazards of
Being Male).

With the exception perhaps of the androgyny literature, there was not
much intellectual novelty in this literature (for reasons to be explored
in chapter 3). There was however a highly significant politics. The sex
role approach provided the theoretical ideas that underpinned liberal
feminism, the most influential form of feminism in the United States at
least. Betty Friedan in The Feminine Mystique (1963) criticized Parsons
and Mead, but her call for women’s emancipation was made from within the
same framework. What is needed for reform, in Friedan’s argument, is a
change of women’s identity and expectations.

In liberal feminism generally, women’s disadvantages are attributed to
stereotyped customary expectations, both held by men and internalized by
women. These stereotypes are promoted through families, schools, mass
media and other ‘agencies of socialization’. In principle the
inequalities can be eliminated by breaking down the stereotypes: for
instance by giving girls better training and more varied role models, by
introducing equal-opportunity programs and anti-discrimination
legislation, or by freeing labour markets.

A large volume of literature appeared in this vein, much of it academic
but a good deal of it focusing on policy. Sex role theory rapidly became
the theoretical language of feminist reform within the state, such as
the influential 1975 Australian Schools Commission report Girls, School
and Society and the 1980 OECD report Women and Employment. It was even
discovered that freeing sex-role conventions might be good for men. Such
was the claim of the ‘men’s liberation’ movement in the United States in
the mid 1970s, through publicists like Jack Nichols, the author of Men’s
Liberation.

The more radical wing of the feminist movement soon moved beyond the
concept of ‘sex roles’ and the strategy of changing expectations. These
ideas were seen to be inadequate because they missed the significance of
power in gender relations. Women’s Liberation groups argued that women
are oppressed because men have power over them; and that changing the
situation of women means contesting, and eventually breaking, this
power. Analyses that started from these assumptions initially found much
less acceptance in academia and very little in the bureaucracy. They
became common in the social movement and drew from movement experiences
of political campaigning and consciousness-raising groups.

In its simplest form the power analysis of gender pictured women and men
as social blocs linked by a direct power relation. This implies as a
strategy for change a direct mobilization of women emphasizing their
common interest against that of men. There have been varying accounts of
the relation between the two blocs. Christine Delphy’s The Main Enemy,
with French farming households in mind, stressed the economic
exploitation of wives by husbands. American theorists tended to bypass
economics for politics. Shulamith Firestone in The Dialectic of Sex saw
a collective power-play by men with the childraising family as its
central institution; sexual reproduction rather than housework was the
key. Mary Daly in Gyn/Ecology pictured a global patriarchy sustained by
force, fear and collaboration. Radical-feminist analyses of rape, such
as Susan Brownmiller’s Against Our Will, and of pornography, such as
Andrea Dworkin’s Pornography: Men Possessing Women, have generally
followed this model.

A rather more complex line of argument treated the power of men and the
subordination of women as effects of imperatives outside the direct
relationship between the two. The more general form of this argument
started from the need for ‘social reproduction’, that is, the
reproduction from generation to generation of social structures as well
as bodies. This was the perspective of Juliet Mitchell’s Psychoanalysis
and Feminism, strongly influenced by Marxist and anthropological
structuralism. It was also the perspective of a more humanist
psychoanalysis in Dorothy Dinner-stein’s The Mermaid and the Minotaur.
Dinnerstein’s argument deduced both the power of men and the
acquiescence of women from women’s monopoly of early childrearing –
itself seen as a technical imperative through most of human history. The
theory of social reproduction has recently been given its most
sophisticated statement by Clare Burton in Subordination. Her argument
connects the cross-cultural analysis of women’s subordination to the
critique of education and the theory of the state – the latter theme
treated surprisingly little in radical feminism generally.

To most socialist feminists the question was not the reproduction of
society in general but of capitalism in particular. The exploitation of
women was connected with capitalism’s drive for profit and its general
need to reproduce itself: pressures that led to a sex-divided work-force
and the oppression of the housewife. These arguments too were linked
with ideas about movement strategy. While sectarian Marxists argued
against a separate women’s movement of any kind, the majority of
socialist feminists worked for an autonomous women’s movement which
would connect with other movements of resistance to capitalism,
especially the labour movement.

Socialist feminists directed attention particularly to the situation of
working-class women. A long argument arose in the 1970s about the
economic significance of their unwaged work at home as a hidden subsidy
to capital. The ‘domestic labour debate’ eventually petered out in a
morass of Marxist exegetics, though not before a ‘Wages for Housework’
campaign had given an industrial dimension to feminist critiques of the
family. Another, and eventually more fruitful, line of attack was on the
politics and economics of women’s waged work. At first sight this
appeared as an issue of simple discrimination, or an aspect of the
economists’ ‘dual labour market’. But studies like Louise Kapp Howe’s
Pink Collar Workers gradually revealed the gendered economy as a system
of segregation, control, exploitation and social struggle of
awe-inspiring scope and complexity. In recent research like Ann Game and
Rosemary Pringle’s Gender at Work, Cynthia Cockburn’s Brothers and
Machinery of Dominance, and Carol O’Donnell’s The Basis of the Bargain,
the workplace is treated as a major site of sexual politics in its own
right. It can be analysed as an institution, as the point of junction
between labour markets and the distribution of income, or as the object
of ideology and education.

The problem of the general conditions for the reproduction of capitalism
led back to sexuality and the family. Here arguments converged from
feminism, from the ‘Freudian Left’, from the ‘New Left’ and
counter-culture of the 1960s and from gay liberation. Texts like David
Cooper’s The Death of the Family inverted the conventional sociology of
the nuclear family, presenting it as an authoritarian institution and
the main tool by which a repressive society could control sexuality and
create conformist populations. Feminists in the early 1970s widely
considered the family to be the main site of women’s oppression. Lee
Comer’s Wedlocked Women was perhaps the sharpest statement of the
analysis of marriage, housework, motherhood and family ideology that
sprang from this.

The most radical departure in the critique of the family was made by
theorists of gay liberation. Sex-role theory and socialist theory alike
presumed that the vast majority of people were naturally heterosexual;
even the early homosexual rights movements had accepted that. The new
movement did not. An early slogan declared ‘Every straight man is a
target for gay liberation’. The changed assumption, and the energy of
gay politics in the early 1970s, led to a remarkable surge of
theoretical work in several countries. The Australian Dennis Altman in
Homosexual: Oppression and Liberation, the Italian Mario Mieli in
Homosexuality and Liberation, and the ‘gay Left’ in England and the
United States all developed variants of a critical theory of sexuality.
They generally saw the family as the factory of heterosexuality, meeting
capital’s need for a labour supply and the state’s need for
subordination. The repression of homosexual desire, while certainly part
of a general authoritarianism, thus had quite specific reasons. Yet it
was necessarily imperfect; and imperfectly repressed desire was a prime
source of the hatred directed against homosexual people. The liberation
of homosexuality was therefore not the traditional campaign for equal
rights for a persecuted minority. It was the cutting edge of a more
general liberation of human potential.

Whether this blend of Marx, Freud and gay activism could be linked to
the feminist critique of patriarchy, and if so on what terms, was a
major concern of gay theorists through the 1970s. One of the
difficulties was the analysis of masculinity. Early gay liberation
theorists treated gayness in men as a kind of dissent from masculinity.
This became less and less credible with the spread of ‘gay machismo’ and
the ‘clone’ style in the homosexual subcultures of the late 1970s and
early 1980s. A strong current in radical feminism emphasized the
differences between lesbianism and men’s homosexuality and wanted no
truck with gay men. By the early 1980s gay theory, like feminist theory,
was internally divided. David Fernbach’s The Spiral Path emphasizes the
theory of patriarchy, the importance of violence and the patriarchal
state, treating homosexual men as necessarily effeminate. Dennis
Altman’s The Homosexualization of America focuses on the new sexual
communities and the terms on which they can create solidarity and defend
themselves. A third tendency, strongly influenced by Michel Foucault,
questions the very notion of ‘homosexual identity’ as a form of social
regulation, and sees progress in the deconstruction of homosexuality
itself.

Reaction and Paradox

As radical theories of gender multiplied and divided, and strategies for
change became more sophisticated and controversial, a counter-current of
reaction also gained strength. Its highlights included the rise of the
anti-abortion movement in the 1970s, the narrow defeat of the Equal
Rights Amendment in the United States, the squeeze on the welfare state
(and therefore services to women) in most capitalist countries, and the
international moral panic created around AIDS in the 1980s.

The theoretical expression of this movement has been patchy. Its
doctrine is most often religious dogma, or a decayed Darwinism asserting
that men’s and women’s conventional roles reflect biological necessity
and that social variation from this must be pathological. The more
sophisticated forms of biological reductionism, like Steven Goldberg’s
The Inevitability of Patriarchy, appeal to genetic or hormonal
differences between women and men – in Goldberg’s case to explain an
‘aggression advantage’ men have over women, which in turn explains their
social positions.

Biological reductionism has been a popular genre in the age of the
territorial imperative, the naked ape and the rise of ‘sociobiology’;
but it was not an adequate response to radical arguments pitched at the
level of the social. Conservatism too was obliged to develop a social
theory. In texts like the American historian Peter Stearns’s Be a Man!
the emphasis is on social tradition and civility: the nuclear family,
somewhat idealized, becomes the basis of a civilized and equable way of
life. Compared with this urbane conservatism a more urgent note is
struck by the New Right theorist George Gilder. In Sexual Suicide Gilder
develops an analysis of the mother-child bond as the basic social
linkage, which leaves men (as fathers) floating loose. The family as an
institution is essential to prevent the destruction of social order by
unbound men; and society must provide the economic and managerial roles
for men. Anti-feminist conclusions are thus deduced from a strictly
social analysis. There is an echo of Parsons’s functionalism in this
argument; as in the neo-conservative economists who explain the
conventional family as the outcome of choices by two rational
individuals each bent on maximizing their own welfare.

The state of the field in the mid-1980s is a paradox. The impulse of the
last two decades has produced a mass of factual research and a lively
theoretical debate, including some theorizing of very high quality
indeed. It is difficult to think of any other field of the social
sciences where work as penetrating and original has been going on. Yet
as the social theory of gender has blossomed, the differences between
lines of thought have become more distinct, the conceptual and political
distances greater. Current theories of gender are not converging. Rather
they present incompatible accounts of the issues, sometimes by marking
off separate parts of the field. To move on, it would seem, it is
necessary to move back, to reconsider the foundations of the theories
now on offer. This is the business of the next chapter.

NOTES

The account in this chapter has been put together from a great many
sources; even so I am conscious of its tentative and preliminary
character. The main primary sources are the books and papers mentioned
in the text. For discussion and interpretation see the following:

Early Feminism and Sexual Radicalism

(pp. 24–6). On the origins of liberal feminism see Martin (1972) and
Rosenberg (1982). The view of Sade as a sexual radical is debatable;
justification can be found in Carter (1979) and Thomas (1976). On early
socialist feminism see Taylor (1983).

Sexology and Psychoanalysis

(pp. 27–8). Weeks (1985) gives an excellent summary of the history of
sexology. His Coming Out (1977) is fundamental to the history of
homosexual movements. For the bases of my interpretation of
psychoanalysis see ‘Dr Freud and the course of history’ in Connell
(1983). For the encounter with the Left and with anthropology see
Robinson (1972).

Socialist Feminism

(pp. 28–9). For the general story see Rowbotham (1974). Conditions of
women’s unionization are explored in exceptional detail for the city of
Hamburg by Dasey (1985). On the strength of the women’s movement in
turn-of-the-century socialism sec Dancis (1976) on the United States.
Its impact in the Russian Revolution can be traced in the writings of
Kollontai (1977). Orwell’s famous sneer is in The Road to Wigan Pier,
(1962), p. 152.

Academic Theorizing

(pp. 29–32). Klein (1946) is a pioneering and still useful account of
the development of academic thinking about gender; Rosenberg (1982)
gives more detail on early sex difference studies. The emergence of
sex-role theory is sketched in Carrigan, Connell and Lee (1985). For its
classic statement – apart from Parsons – see Komarovsky (1946, 1950).

‘Second-Wave’ Feminism and Gay Liberation

(pp. 32–7). The recent development of radical theory is itself hotly
disputed. Notable beginnings in charting this history have been made by
Hartmann (1979) and Burton (1985) on Marxist feminism; Molyneux (1979)
on the domestic labour debate; Eisenstein (1984) and Willis (1984) on
American radical feminism; Walter (1980) and Carrigan (1981) on gay
liberation theory.

3

Current Frameworks

This chapter tests the major frameworks for the social analysis of
gender that have emerged from the history just discussed. The focus is
on the general logic of different kinds of theories rather than on
particular applications or particular concepts.

I take this rather formal approach as it seems the best way to get a
grip on the possibilities for theoretical growth, to define both the
potentials and the inherent limits of existing frameworks. This leads to
a rather unusual classification of theories. Commonly recognized
‘schools’ of thought turn out to contain logically disparate theories.
Socialist feminism for instance contains several of the types of
theories discussed below. The concept of ‘patriarchy’, approached in
this way, does not stand for a particular school at all. It appears in
several logically different forms of theory and takes on different
meanings according to its context.

Three distinctions are basic to what follows: (a) between extrinsic and
intrinsic accounts of the determinants of sex inequality; (b) within
intrinsic theories, between those that focus on custom and those that
focus on power; (c) within power theories, between those that see
categories as prior to practice and those that see categories as
emerging from practice. I start with extrinsic theories, not because
they are less sophisticated but because they do seem the least promising
for the general project of a theory of gender.

Extrinsic Theories: From ‘Class First’ through ‘Social Reproduction’ to ‘Dual Systems’

Chapter 2 noted the divergence between feminist theories that saw direct
power relations between men and women as the main determinant of women’s
oppression, and those that looked elsewhere. The most influential
extrinsic theories (apart from biological determinism, which will be
discussed in chapter 4 and is not a form of social theory) have been
Marxist analyses that locate the fundamental determinants of women’s
oppression in class relations, the capitalist system, or the ‘relations
of production’ understood in class terms.

The simplest version of this idea is the view that ‘women’s liberation
depends on the class struggle’ because capitalism is the root cause of
all social inequalities and class struggle against capitalists is
therefore primary. In Women’s Liberation, Class Struggle, an American
booklet circulated in the early 1970s, Karen Miles summarized a
widespread view of how women’s oppression serves the ruling class.
Capitalists get higher profits because women workers get lower wages;
sexism divides the working class; women’s oppression maintains the
family, which in turn maintains capitalism. This simple synthesis of
socialist and feminist ideas proved too much for more orthodox Marxists
to digest. Recent evidence is the rousing restatement of the class-first
view by the British Trotskyite Tony Cliff, Class Struggle and Women’s
Liberation. At remarkable length (the book is one of the longest
analyses of modern feminism yet published by a man) Cliff argues that
there can be ‘no compromise’ between Marxism and feminism: the latter is
a bourgeois deception of honest working women. Essentially similar views
are official doctrine in the Soviet Union and China, one of the few
points on which these regimes still agree. In China the regime has tried
to break women free from the extended patriarchal family by substituting
the ideal of a harmonious nuclear family, with the sexual division of
labour remaining unchallenged. The Soviet regime is equally complacent
about women shouldering the social burden of childcare and other work in
the home. Policy on sexual politics has been consistently subordinated
to the twists and turns of the class line.

As theory, these views give little to bite on. The priority of class
struggle is, as Christine Delphy comments on similar arguments in
France, ‘a postulate, a dogma’. There is an obvious objection: the
subordination of women started long before capitalism, occurs in all
classes under capitalism, and has continued in countries that have
ceased to be capitalist. The fact that women of different classes have
different interests is of great importance. But it does not need a dogma
of the theoretical priority of class to recognize this.

Nevertheless, the seeds of a much more powerful analysis were present in
Miles’s remarks about the family. In the middle and later 1970s this was
developed by a number of theorists, particularly in Britain, under the
influence of structuralist Marxism.

The central idea was that the family, sexuality or gender relations at
large were the site of the reproduction of ‘relations of production’. A
particular pattern of relations of production (which mainly means class
relations in industry) is taken in Marxist theory to define a ‘mode of
production’ (capitalist, feudal, etc.). A mode of production provides,
so to speak, the backbone of a whole historical epoch. These relations
of production could not exist without being reproduced, from day to day,
year to year, generation to generation. This need calls into existence
social processes centering on the family, domestic life and the raising
of children. Different theorists gave somewhat different accounts of
these processes. Juliet Mitchell saw patriarchy as the sphere of
ideology, inserting people into their slots in the world of production.
Other English theorists traced a whole new set of social relations here,
the ‘relations of reproduction’. There was agreement, nevertheless, that
these processes or this sphere was the main determinant of the
subordination of women.

Social reproduction theory in this form represented a major advance over
simple class-interest theories of patriarchy and offered a synthesis of
several important lines of thought. ‘Reproduction’ could be understood
as bearing children to fill places in production and servicing the tired
worker at the day’s end. Here theory could connect with the basic facts
of life documented by working-class women themselves, in
autobiographical writings from Margaret Llewelyn Davies’s Life As We
Have Known It to Gwen Wesson’s Brian’s Wife, Jenny’s Mum. Alternatively
‘reproduction’ could be seen as a matter of culture and psychology, of
‘socialization’, making square people to fit square holes in capitalist
industry. This picked up themes that were familiar in socialist
critiques of the ways education and culture were distorted to fit the
needs of capitalism. When Andrew Tolson argued a connection between
competitive masculinity and the functional requirements of capitalism,
the material was new but the form of argument was very familiar to
socialists.

Above all, reproduction theory argued a systemic connection between the
subordination of women and economic exploitation in capitalism. The link
was seen as embedded in a whole integrated structure of social
organization, not in particular interests or groups. The
bourgeoisie-as-devil faded from the picture. This allowed the tremendous
complexity of the issues to be recognized; some subtle and important
researches resulted. But it also made the target of reform seem much
more formidable and less vulnerable than the politics of the early 1970s
had assumed. There was more than a flavour of pessimism about social
reproduction theory.

As this is true of reproduction approaches in other fields of social
analysis, such as Bourdieu’s work on education and Althusserian class
theory, it is likely that it flows from some general feature of the
approach. It is, I think, inherent in the concept of ‘social
reproduction’ itself, which makes sense only if an invariant structure
is postulated at the start. History enters the theory as something added
on to the basic cycle of structural reproduction. For history to become
organic to theory, social structure must be seen as constantly
constituted rather than constantly reproduced. And that makes sense only
if theory acknowledges the constant possibility that structure will be
constituted in a different way. Groups that hold power do try to
reproduce the structure that gives them their privilege. But it is
always an open question whether, and how, they will succeed.

‘Social reproduction,’ therefore, is an object of strategy. When it
occurs, as it often does, it is an achievement by a particular alliance
of social forces over others. It cannot be made a postulate or
presupposition of theory. And the concept cannot take the explanatory
weight that reproduction theories of gender place on it.

The second major difficulty in these approaches is making a convincing
connection between the needs of capitalism and what is specific about
gender. It is clear enough that if capitalism is to continue, its
dominant groups must succeed with some kind of reproduction strategy.
But it is not at all obvious that doing this must produce sexual
hierarchy and oppression. Much the same might be argued (and sometimes
is) about racial and ethnic hierarchies or about hierarchies of age.
There is historical evidence, known to early socialists like Engels and
Bebel, that in some respects capitalism has broken down existing
patriarchal customs and given women greater personal freedoms and more
chances for equality. Recent experience in countries like the United
States and Australia shows that the feminist attack on the restrictions
on women’s lives and careers may unlock their talents for capitalist
purposes. Witness the co-optations not only documented but celebrated in
magazines like Ms and Portfolio. Clearly the relationship between
capitalism and patriarchy is not simply functional. The fit is looser,
the relationship more contradictory, than reproduction theory has
supposed.

In trying to bridge this gap, Marxist-feminist reproduction theory
sought explanatory principles mainly in cultural theory: Lacan’s
reworking of psychoanalysis, Lévi-Strauss’s structural anthropology and
various developments of semiotics. A consequence of this was a strong
tendency to treat gender relations as a truncated structure by
comparison with class relations. In some versions, social reproduction
and patriarchy were regarded as occurring entirely in the realm of
ideology, and not part of the sphere of production at all. In other
versions ‘reproduction’ was connected with a social division of labour,
but only one kind of labour, housework. This sense of gender relations
as being less comprehensive than class relations underpinned a view of
the history of gender which saw its major turning-points in terms of a
class periodization of history. For in Marxist theory it is the history
of class relations in production that defines the ‘modes of production’
and the transitions between them.

In this tendency to truncate the concept of patriarchy the logic of
reproduction theory led steadily away from the developing practical
concerns of socialist feminists. In Australia and Britain at least there
was increasing involvement in the late 1970s and early 1980s with issues
that were very much about the material world and the sphere of
production: women’s employment, wage rates, unionism, health care, state
regulation and like matters. At the same time there was an increasing
flow of research studies, inspired by socialist-feminist concerns but
not by reproduction theory, into women’s experience in factories and
labour markets. Studies like Claire Williams’s work on open-cut mining
towns in Australia and Ruth Cavendish’s work on a motor vehicle
components factory in Britain, rapidly demonstrated that gender
relations and sexual divisions were deeply embedded in the production
system of advanced capitalism – the traditional heartland of class
theory. The clear implication is that gender relations are not a
truncated structure. Gender is part of the ‘relations of production’,
and has been from the start; it is not just mixed up in their
reproduction.

Along this track lay a different answer to the question of how
capitalism and patriarchy were connected. Socialist feminists in several
countries in the 1970s pointed in this direction. Mariarosa Dalla Costa
and Selma James wrote that ‘class exploitation has been built upon the
specific mediation of women’s exploitation’. Barbara Ehrenreich argued
that socialists must see women at the heart of the working class. Anja
Meulenbelt contested the idea that the class struggle was the ‘general’
struggle and feminist organizing was a diversion. Nancy Hartsock argued
for a fundamental rethinking of the category of class in the light of
gender issues.

To start with, these arguments were unrelated; but they had in common
the implication that gender relations are parallel to, interacting with,
and in some sense constitutive of, class relations. Heidi Hartmann’s
paper ‘The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism’ and Zillah
Eisenstein’s collection Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist
Feminism, both published in 1979, crystallized an approach that came to
be called ‘dual systems theory’. The basic idea is that capitalism and
patriarchy are distinct and equally comprehensive systems of social
relations which meet and interact. The present form of their interaction
is the social order which Eisenstein calls ‘capitalist patriarchy’.
Understanding the contemporary world requires the simultaneous analysis
of its class and gender structures. The analysis of gender requires in
principle an intrinsic theory logically independent of the theory of
class.

In terms of our present knowledge of gender, this is better founded than
social reproduction theories. It is consistent with the fact that gender
relations appear in all domains of social practice and pre-date
capitalism and possibly class societies of all kinds. The approach meets
Meulenbelt’s practical criterion of giving full weight to women’s
experience of sexual politics, without abandoning the politics of class.
Yet it has two considerable difficulties. One is the idea of a ‘system’.
It is not immediately clear what makes the patriarchal ‘system’
systematic, and in what sense capitalism and patriarchy are the same
kind of thing. The other difficulty is how to understand the
‘interaction’ between capitalism and patriarchy. The link may be seen as
a boundary exchange (in the sense of Parsons’ systems theory), or as a
more-or-less chance intersection of structures. Neither idea gives much
grip on the task that socialist-feminist theory is presumably for, that
is, explaining oppression and developing a strategy of liberation.

These difficulties are substantial. It is unlikely that formulations of
the class and gender problem like Hartmann’s and Eisenstein’s can stand
in their present terms. Yet the overall direction they are taking does
seem right. If we regard them as first approximations within a general
type of theory their potential can be developed in new ways. The first
thing required is an adequate intrinsic theory of gender. Accordingly
the rest of the chapter considers the main versions of intrinsic theory.

Sex Role Theory

The literature on ‘sex roles’ is very large. It is also more than a
little confused, especially over the differences between ‘sex roles’,
‘sex differences’ and ‘sexual character’. An example is the well-known
research on androgyny by Sandra Bern, which attempts to measure
psychological traits of masculinity and femininity. Her questionnaire is
entitled the ‘Bern Sex Role Inventory’ though it does not include
questions about roles in any strict sense of the term. In literally
hundreds of other studies, information on sex differences is presented
with a loose assumption that role phenomena explain the differences
observed. So it is often quite difficult to specify exactly what theory
is contained in ‘sex role’ literature.

There is, nevertheless, a definite body of social theory organized
around the concept of ‘role’. While formulations of the concept (which
go back to the 1930s) differ in detail, most have five points in common
which form the logical core of role theory. The first two state the
essential metaphor, an actor and a script:

1 an analytic distinction between the person and the social position she
occupies;

2 a set of actions or role behaviours which are assigned to the
position.

The other three state the means by which the social drama is set in
motion and held to its script:

3 Role expectations or norms define which actions are appropriate to a
given position;

4 they are held by people occupying counter-positions (role senders,
reference groups),

5 who enforce them by means of sanctions – rewards, punishments,
positive and negative reinforcements.

These concepts are the tools by which role theory attempts a general
analysis of social interaction. Broadly, role theory is the approach to
social structure which locates its basic constraints in stereotyped
interpersonal expectations.

This paradigm can be applied to almost any type of human behaviour, and
in either very general or very narrow terms. Textbooks make a point of
this range, listing examples of roles ranging from the breadth of
‘speaker of a language’ to the narrowness of ‘astronaut’ (cases given in
Bruce Biddle’s Role Theory). Accordingly the role paradigm can be
applied to gender relations in various ways. In one direction the
‘roles’ can be very specific. Mirra Komarovsky’s work on the family for
instance attempts detailed descriptions of role behaviour in courtship
or marriage. In a more recent text called Role Structure and the
Analysis of the Family a group of American sociologists list a
remarkable number of roles they have discovered inside the American
family, including the ‘childcare role’, the ‘kinship role’, the ‘sexual
role’, the ‘recreational role’, not to mention the ‘provider and
housekeeper roles’ (which are, happily, complementary). What such lists
mainly demonstrate is the vagueness of the role paradigm.

Most applications of role concepts to gender are of a different kind.
Their basic idea is that being a man or a woman means enacting a general
role definitive of one’s sex – the ‘sex role’. There are, accordingly,
always two sex roles in a given context, the ‘male role’ and the ‘female
role’; less commonly but equivalently called ‘man’s role’ or ‘woman’s
role’, the ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine role’, etc.

This way of talking about gender is attractive in several ways. First,
it allows a shift away from biological assumptions about sex
differences, emphasizing that women’s and men’s behaviours are different
because they respond to different social expectations. Some of the most
fruitful research stimulated by role ideas has looked at the way these
expectations are defined in the mass media. The constricted character of
media images of women is striking, a point noted in the 1960s by Betty
Friedan as part of ‘the feminine mystique’ and repeatedly confirmed in
media studies since.

Second, sex role theory connects social structure to the formation of
personality, an important and difficult theoretical task. Proponents of
general role theory such as Ralf Dahrendorf claim that the concept
‘falls on the borderline of sociology and psychology’. More exactly it
offers a simple framework for describing the insertion of individuals
into social relations. The basic idea is that this occurs by ‘role
learning’, ‘socialization’ or ‘internalization’. Thus feminine character
is produced by socialization into the female role, masculine character
by socialization into the male role – and deviants by some kind of
failure in socialization.

This argument leads to an interest in the people and institutions
responsible for the learning, the so-called ‘agencies of socialization’:
mother, family, teachers, peers, media. Another large body of research
inspired by sex role ideas has explored the different treatment of girls
and boys by these ‘agencies’, the ways models of femininity and
masculinity are conveyed to children, and (in a few cases) what happens
when the messages are mixed. In the most sophisticated versions of sex
role theory, such as Talcott Parsons’s, the concept of socialization is
linked to psychoanalytic ideas about the structuring of the unconscious.
Usually, however, sex role theory is seen as an alternative to
psychodynamic explanations such as Freud’s, and the focus is firmly on
overt influences and overt behaviour.

Third, sex role theory offers principles for a politics of reform. If
the subordination of women is largely a result of role expectations that
define them as helpmates or subordinates, their characters as passive or
expressive (rather than instrumental), then the obvious path forward is
to change the expectations. A great deal of energy in contemporary
feminism has gone into just this kind of enterprise. It is formalized in
counter-sexist curricula in schools, antidiscrimination laws, equal
opportunity policies in the labour market and ‘affirmative action’
campaigns. Though broadly the territory of liberal feminism, this goes
beyond the classical liberal focus on the individual, as the sex role
concept points to the collective dimension of social stereotyping. As
Alison Ziller, the Director of Equal Employment Opportunity for the NSW
government, observed: ‘an affirmative action plan … means that remedy
for discrimination does not rely on grievance procedures initiated by
individuals’.

These virtues are substantial. Accordingly, sex role theory must be
taken seriously as an intrinsic theory of gender for reasons beyond the
sheer volume of its literature. Yet these virtues are bought at the
price of very serious conceptual difficulties.

The problems begin with what many role theorists see as their greatest
strength, the emphasis on the social via the concept of ‘expectations’.
Role theory is often seen by psychologists as a form of social
determinism, stressing the way individuals are trapped in stereotypes.
Stereotyped interpersonal expectations are indeed social facts. They are
made effective, in role theory, by the idea that other people reward
conformity to them and punish departures from them. In role jargon, the
occupants of counter-positions sanction role performance. Little boys
are praised for being assertive, ridiculed for being girlish, and so on.
But why do the second parties apply the sanctions? This cannot be
explained by their role expectations; if so, role theory reduces to an
infinite regress. It quickly comes down to a question of individual will
and agency, revolving around choices to apply sanctions. The social
dimension of role theory thus ironically dissolves into voluntarism,
into a general assumption that people choose to maintain existing
customs.

Ultimately, then, role theory is not a social theory at all. It comes
right up to the problem where social theory logically begins, the
relationship between personal agency and social structure; but evades it
by dissolving structure into agency.

What happens in sex role theory is that the missing element of structure
is covertly supplied by the biological category of sex. The very terms
‘female role’ and ‘male role’, hitching a biological term to a
dramaturgical one, suggest what is going on. The underlying image is an
invariant biological base and a malleable social superstructure. This is
why discussion of sex roles constantly slides into discussion of sex
differences. The implicit question in sex role analysis is what
particular superstructure has been created in such-and-such
circumstances, and how far the biological dichotomy still shows through.

The result of using the role framework, then, is an abstract view of the
differences between the sexes, and between their situations, not a
concrete account of the relations between them. As Suzanne Franzway and
Jan Lowe observe in their critique of sex role theory in feminism, the
role literature focuses on attitudes and misses the realities that the
attitudes are about. The political effect is to highlight the pressures
that create an artificially rigid distinction between women and men, and
to play down the economic, domestic and political power that men
exercise over women.

As some critics have observed, we do not speak of ‘race roles’ or ‘class
roles’ because the exercise of power in these areas of social life is
more obvious to sociologists. With ‘sex roles’, the underlying
biological dichotomy seems to have persuaded many theorists that there
is no power relationship here at all. The ‘female role’ and the ‘male
role’ are tacitly treated as equal. They are of course different in
content, but reciprocally dependent on each other (‘complementary’),
made of the same ingredients, and (in the eyes of the mid-1970s liberals
who created a critical literature on the ‘male role’) equally oppressive
of the human being within.

For an account of power, role analysis substitutes a theory of norms.
Anne Edwards has observed how drastically sex role theory simplifies the
complexities of gender: reducing all masculinities and femininities to
one dualism; sweeping all women into one feminine role, which in turn is
equated to being a housewife and located in the family. Most sex role
theory is not constructed around problems raised by field observation,
but as analysis of a normative standard case.

This standard case is, typically, an abstract model of a nuclear family
with a conventional sexual division of labour. It is ‘standard’ in the
sense that most people’s lives are presumed to be like it, with a
minority being deviant. It is ‘normative’ in two senses. First, it is
presumed that people in general regard it as the proper way to live – so
it defines actual role expectations. Second, theorists regard it as the
proper (or socially functional or biologically appropriate) way to live.
Much of the intuitive, common-sense appeal of sex role literature arises
from the blurring of these ideas. Thus when the sexologist John Money
writes of the ‘proper’ path of psychosexual development, the effect is
to stigmatize any departure from it (including homosexual choice) as
pathological, and to reinforce the idea that conventional
heterosexuality is a good thing both for the person and the society.

A crucial difficulty is that what is normative, i.e., expected or
approved, is not necessarily standard, i.e., actually the way things
usually happen. Perhaps especially not in the case of sexuality.
Research has produced a series of upsets. The Kinsey studies are the
most celebrated, finding frequencies of homosexual behaviour in the
American population that normative sex role theory has never come to
terms with. Data on premarital and extramarital heterosexuality make
further trouble. Data on intra-family violence are also difficult to
absorb: sober estimates by Straus and others that more than 50 per cent
of American families have experienced domestic violence suggest a very
large gap between what is morally approved and what actually happens.
Statistics on household composition show that the
mother-father-two-kids-cat-and-dog nuclear family routinely invoked by
priests, presidents and advertising copy-writers, is not the majority
form of household now and perhaps never was. The normative pattern of
husband-as-breadwinner and wife-as-home-maker, still powerful in
ideology, has been undermined in fact by economics: as shown in chapter
1, around a third of the world’s paid workers are women, while a good
many men are not in the labour force. Role theorists who do close-up
field research, like Komarovsky, have to push the data very hard to get
anything like the theoretical model of ‘roles’ out of it.

If we distinguish what is normative from what is common, instead of
blending them together, new and important questions emerge. It becomes
possible to see what is ‘normative’ not as a definition of normality but
as a definition of what the holders of social power wish to have
accepted. This raises questions about whose interests are embodied in
the ‘norms’; how far the daily life of other people represents
resistance to those interests; and what potentially normative principles
might emerge from currently non-normative but widespread practices.

Sex role theory has a way of accommodating departures from the normative
standard case, through the concept of deviance. This term is out of
favour as a result of sharp criticisms of ‘labelling’ in welfare
practice, but it persists in role theory because it is logically
required by the normative concept of ‘role’. Euphemisms are available –
inadequate self-concept, nonconformity – but it is no surprise when a
role theorist like Biddle roundly talks of ‘deviant behaviour’, ‘deviant
identities’, ‘causes of maladjustment’, and contrasts them with
‘successful role learning’.

The dominance of the normative standard case in sex-role literature,
plus the concept of deviance, have a distinct effect. They create the
impression that the conventional sex role is the majority case, and that
departures from it are socially marginal and likely to be the result of
some personal eccentricity, produced by imperfect or inappropriate
socialization. Lesbianism, men’s homosexuality, chastity, prostitution,
marital violence and transvestism are all liable to this treatment.
Again the role framework eliminates the element of power from gender
relations. It also eliminates the element of resistance to power and
social pressure, the fact of social struggles – open or covert – going
on around definitions of sexuality and gender.

Here, in thinking about the conflict of interests, the use of sex-role
theory in feminism is most limiting. The conceptualization of sexual
politics as role reform – as updating, liberalizing, or expanding the
‘female role’ (and in the men’s movement version the ‘male role’ also) –
means that there is no social theory of the reforming movement as such,
no conception of the constitution of collective interests within gender
relations. The motive of role reform is individual discomfort in the
existing version of the sex role. When comfort is achieved, there is
nothing to carry either the politics or the analysis forward.

The lack of a theory of movement and social struggle reflects, at a
deeper level, the lack of a way of grasping social contradiction and
formulating a social dynamic. The sex role framework is fundamentally
static as social theory. This is not to say that role analysts ignore
change. Far from it. Modernization of the female role was a leading
theme in one of the first important statements of sex role theory, by
Talcott Parsons in 1942. Shifting expectations have been a leading issue
in North American discussions of the male sex role in recent decades.
Changing definitions of the female role are the central theme in
academic social science’s response to feminism.

The point is that sex role theory cannot grasp change as history, as
transformation generated in the interplay of social practice and social
structure. Structure is given to sex role theory in the form of
biological dichotomy. And the ultimate voluntarism of the practical side
of role concepts prevents the formulation of a concept of social
determination. As a result, change is always something that happens to
sex roles, that impinges on them. It comes from outside, from society at
large, as in discussions of how technological and economic changes
demand a shift to a ‘modern’ male role. Or it comes from inside the
person, from the ‘real self demanding a relaxation of the constricting
sex role. The role itself is always being pushed. Sex role theory has no
way of grasping change as a dialectic arising within gender relations
themselves. As an intrinsic theory of gender it is therefore limited in
a fundamental way.

To sum up, four basic considerations oblige us to abandon sex role
theory as a framework for the social analysis of gender: its voluntarism
and inability to theorize power and social interest; its dependence on
biological dichotomy and its consequently non-social conception of
structure; its dependence on a normative standard case and systematic
misrepresentation of resistance; and the absence of a way of theorizing
the historicity of gender.

To recognize these weaknesses, as Edwards notes, does not prevent
fruitful research on stereotypes of femininity and masculinity, that is,
on sex roles as social constructs, cultural ideals, media contents and
so forth. (I will take up these questions in chapter 11.) But as Edwards
also argues, it is necessary to look for ways of theorizing the domain
of sex and gender that give more attention to social institutions and
social structures.

The critique of sex roles has nevertheless given some useful pointers
towards what such a theory should be. Plainly one of the issues it must
be able to grasp is the formation and conflict of social interests that
occur in gender relations. I will now turn to approaches that make this
their central concern.

Categorical Theory

Accounts of gender that do give a major place to power and conflicts of
interest have generally expressed this awareness through a particular
form of theory. It has no familiar name, partly because its logic cuts
across such familiar divides as the conflict between cultural feminism
and socialist feminism. I will call the approach ‘categorical’.

Its major features are, first, a close identification of opposed
interests in sexual politics with specific categories of people. Jill
Johnston’s definition of men as ‘the natural enemy of women’ is a
pungent example. Second, the focus of argument is on the category as a
unit, rather than on the processes by which the category is constituted,
or on its elements or constituents. Third, the social order as a whole
is pictured in terms of a few major categories – usually two – related
to each other by power and conflict of interest. If sex role theory
tends to dissolve into individualism, categoricalism resolutely stays
with the big picture and paints it with a broad brush.

In sex-role theory a common terminology blurs logically distinct
concepts; here the same basic idea is expressed in many different terms.
Early women’s liberation theorists borrowed from political economy and
anthropology. Roxanne Dunbar argued that women were a lower ‘caste’,
while Shulamith Firestone wrote of ‘sex class’, modelling her argument
self-consciously on Marx. Academic feminists borrowed terminology from
academic social science. Alice Schlegel and Janet Chafetz wrote of
‘sexual stratification’, while Myra Strober registered ‘the birth of a
new science, dimorphics’. The term seems to have been coined as a joke;
the fact that it was taken seriously shows how desperate was the need
for a theoretical framework. Similarly the discussion of ‘patriarchy’ in
radical feminism from the mid-1970s was commonly based on a categorical
theory of gender, as in Susan Brownmiller’s well-known argument that
rape is ‘a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all
women in a state of fear’.

Chafetz, who has gone furthest in formalizing this approach as social
theory, is particularly clear about its major presupposition. Women and
men can be treated as ‘internally undifferentiated general categories’.
Analysis takes the categories for granted while it explores the
relationship between them. Categorical theories of gender differ from
each other mainly in the accounts they give of this relationship.

In one line of thought it is essentially a relation of direct
domination. Dunbar and Firestone were among the pioneers of this
approach. Newer versions such as Mary Daly’s picture of global
patriarchy have focused on men’s violence towards women as its essence.
The treatment of pornography and rape in cultural-feminist analyses by
authors like Susan Griffin and Andrea Dworkin is closely connected.
Pornography is regarded as an expression of the violence in male
sexuality and a means of domination over women; rape as an act of
patriarchal violence rather than sexual desire.

The academic literature on ‘sexual stratification’ generally takes a
more abstract and open-ended approach, assuming no more than that the
relationship between the categories is unequal. This has been the
framework of a great deal of empirical research (some cited in
chapter 1) mapping the unequal material resources of women and men and
their unequal life-chances. As theory this is slender. But it has raised
questions about the correlates or conditions of different levels of
inequality between the sexes. Chafetz for instance conducted a
cross-cultural survey to see what general conditions (economic
development, environment, religion, etc.) were linked to high or low
levels of inequality in ‘the overall status of women and men’.

Here Chafetz verges on an extrinsic approach to gender. Categoricalism
in fact provides the model of gender for most of the extrinsic theories
discussed above. Analyses of the sexual division of labour, for
instance, have usually set up the gender categories as a simple line of
demarcation in economic life, adding complexity by mapping the twists
and turns of this line in different societies. Only a minority have
concerned themselves with what Margaret Power called ‘the making of a
woman’s occupation’ (my italics), a question which, by making the
process of constructing categories a central issue, leads away from the
abstract logic of categoricalism.

Similarly, much of the discussion of ‘relations of production’ has
little to say about practice at the point of production. Notionally
about social relations, actually it uses such concepts mainly to
demarcate categories. Ultimately the person and personal practice can be
eliminated from the equation altogether, as happened in French
structuralism. Theoretical attention is focused on the social place or
category into which the individual is inserted. Along these lines one
can arrive at a strongly categorical theory of gender which is not
biological-determinist. The ‘places’ in Juliet Mitchell’s and Gayle
Rubin’s structuralist models are socially defined and the male-female
opposition they stress is socially constructed. Much the same is true of
the semiotic analyses of gender that appeared from the late 1970s on.

In other cases the social basis of categoricalism is a simplified
normative model of the family. This is true of most of the
Marxist-feminist literature on ‘domestic labour’. It is also true of
Christine Delphy’s more original analysis of patriarchy as an economic
system. Here the categories are constructed by the social institution of
marriage, and the core of the relation between them is the husbands’
appropriation of a surplus from the wives’ unpaid labour. Yet another
example is Chodorow’s psychology of femininity, consciously based on an
attempt to find a social rather than a biological underpinning for the
psychoanalytic account of children’s emotional development. Here the
sexual division of labour in childcare is the core of the relationship
between the categories.

For all the sophistication these authors show in developing social
frameworks, the overall map of gender they produce is not too different
from one based on a simple biological dichotomy. Categorical thinking
about gender is most obvious when the categories can be presumed to be
biological and the relationship between them a collective or
standardized one. Thus Brownmiller’s ‘rape … all men … all women’, or
Dworkin’s ‘pornography: men possessing women’. It is worth noting that
biological reductionism does not necessarily produce categoricalism. In
some of the literature on transsexualism, for instance, researchers are
interested in biological bases for deviance from conventional
categories. But theories of biological bases or ‘biogrammars’ usually
lead to categoricalism in one of its strongest forms. For most authors
assume (wrongly) that reproductive biology divides humans neatly into
two distinct categories.

Categoricalism came from a number of sources: structuralism, biologism
and the sheer rhetorical appeal of large plain categories for mobilizing
political action. It has remained important because it met the need for
a clear-cut alternative to liberal feminism and role theory. For some
problems, treating gender in terms of ‘internally undifferentiated
general categories’ is perfectly adequate as a first approximation. The
descriptive literature on sex inequalities in income, education,
occupation and health is certainly successful in these terms.

The trouble starts when the first approximation becomes the end of the
analysis; when the categories ‘women’ and ‘men’ are taken as absolutes,
in no need of further examination or finer differentiation. For there
are problem areas where this will not work at all, and others where the
approach rapidly becomes misleading. Analysis couched in terms of a
normative standard family is perhaps the commonest example. A good deal
of feminist research on welfare has gone towards exploding the
assumptions that underpin so much official welfare and economic policy:
that everyone (or nearly everyone) lives in a nuclear family, that all
women have (or should have) a man supporting them, that having children
presupposes having a husband.

Another form of categoricalism focuses on a representative individual.
The treatment of ‘male sexuality’ in much of the literature on violence
against women is a case in point. So is the argument that explains
pollution, indiscriminate exploitation of resources and the threat of
nuclear war, by the personal aggressiveness and ruthlessness of the
typical man.

The insight underlying this argument is certainly correct. A
power-hungry and emotionally blunted masculinity is part of the social
machine that is wrecking the environment, that has for instance
devastated half of the beautiful island of Tasmania by wood-chipping and
hydroelectric development. Historical research like that of Brian Easlea
has traced the themes of masculinity, control and power in the growth of
the sciences and technologies that culminated in the nuclear bomb. But
to theorize this as the direct outcome of masculinity is to miss the
point of the social machinery that makes a given form of masculinity
environmentally destructive. (In other periods of history aggressive
masculinity did not result in a radically degraded environment.) It
misses the social arrangements that give a particular kind of
masculinity a hegemonic position in sexual politics and that marginalize
others. And in many arguments it misses the social processes that
construct this kind of masculinity in the first place.

The analysis of gender through a representative individual is one case
of what Hester Eisenstein calls ‘false universalism’. She poses the
issue in these terms:

  To some extent, this habit of thought grew inevitably from the need to
  establish gender as a legitimate intellectual category. But too often
  it gave rise to analysis that, in spite of its narrow base of white,
  middle-class experience, purported to speak about and on behalf of all
  women, black or white, poor or rich.

Theory framed in this way has a strong tendency to lump together
different periods of history and different parts of the world. Texts
like Mary Daly’s Gyn/Ecology and Kathleen Barry’s Female Sexual Slavery
recite patriarchal atrocities from wife-burning in India, genital
mutilation in Africa, foot-binding in China, to pornography in the
United States. These are offered on the assumption that each is an
example of the same underlying structure. In such theories the
world-wide dimension of gender becomes a universal common structure of
patriarchy.

The conviction that every country and every period shows the same
structure has led Western feminists arguing on these lines into
classically ethnocentric positions. As critics like Kalpana Ram have
pointed out, an account of suttee based on racist Western sources that
present Indian women as passively suffering atrocity, and which takes no
account of their resistances, mobilization, or purposes, does justice
neither to the issue nor to Indian women. It is possible to combine a
clear recognition of the exploitation and subordination of women, and
the fundamental character of the social changes needed to correct it,
with an equally strong recognition of the specific ways in which
subordination is embedded in different cultures, the different forms it
takes and the different strategies therefore required. Such a case is
argued for instance by the Draft Report of the 1979 workshop on feminist
ideology and structures held in Bangkok by the United Nations Asian and
Pacific Centre for Women and Development. But this leads away from
categorical theory.

It is possible to incorporate class, race or nationality into a
categorical theory of gender, if these structures are treated in a
categorical way too. It involves cross-classification on several
variables at once – a very familiar move in quantitative social science.
The basic operation is logical multiplication, and the result is a grid
on which people can be located. A simple two dimensional
cross-classification is central to Tolson’s work on masculinity, for
instance:

[Image]

A three dimensional cross-classification underlies recent discussions of
the triple oppression of non-Anglo working women:

[Image]

Any number of dimensions can be added. They become harder to picture on
paper, but can easily be handled by computers.

Yet the more sophisticated the cross-classification becomes, the more
firmly is the analysis embedded in a static logic of categories. And
this intensifies the difficulty categorical theory has in dealing with
divisions that arise within the field of gender itself; that is,
divisions that have to do with the constitution of the gender
categories.

The most notable problem is the politics of sexual object-choice.
Heterosexism and homophobia must be regarded as one of the key patterns
in gender relations. It is very difficult to come to grips with
heterosexual dominance while using a categorical model of gender. One
might set up a new cross-classification, with ‘homo/hetero’ crossing
‘female/male’. But there is no obvious reason in categorical analysis
why this division should matter in the first place. Cross-classification
confuses the issue, since that operation logically equates women’s
homosexuality with men’s homosexuality. There is every reason to think
there are important differences between them, not only in the forms of
their expression but in the ways they are initially constituted. As the
chequered experience of lesbians in the gay liberation movement shows,
the solidarity of women and men against oppression from straight society
cannot be taken for granted. That is to say, the logical
cross-classification does not correspond in any simple way to the
constitution of a social interest.

Categorical theory often stresses conflict of interest, but has
difficulty with the way interests are constituted and the ways people
contest the structures that define interests. Its recognition of social
conflict is highly schematized. Over a range of issues, categoricalism
underplays the turbulence and contradictoriness within the social
process of gender.

The political consequences are important. Of the two main varieties of
categorical theory, the academic or stratificationist leads to a
politics of access, for instance trying to raise the number of women in
political leadership positions, in the law or in business management. It
does not generate any particular reasons to question the social
arrangements that create those positions. To this extent its practical
consequences are little different from the strategy of role reform in
liberal feminism.

The women’s liberation movement certainly has called conventional power
arrangements into question, and so do the more radical categorical
theories of gender. Their tendency, however, is to pose this as an
all-or-nothing issue. Rather like the ‘big bang’ theory of revolution
implicit in Marxist structuralism, categoricalism projects a distant
future and a distant past where there is no oppression, but tends to
assimilate everything in the grim present to manifestations of male
power and female subordination. The effect is to offer women a
metaphysical solidarity (‘all women …’), an omnipresent enemy (‘all men
…’), and a strong implication that struggle in existing relationships is
pointless, since the structure and the categories are universal. Since
most women do not have the conditions in their own lives for substantial
withdrawal from relationships with men, the practical result is an
unresolvable dilemma within feminism. Tension around themes of purity
and guilt has been tangible in the movement for a number of years.

Towards a Practice-based Theory

In the final analysis, categoricalism can recognize power but deletes
from its analysis the element of practical politics: choice, doubt,
strategy, planning, error and transformation. The ‘battle of the sexes’
comedy in traditional popular culture is a vision of sexual politics
with just this kind of deletion. From one year to the next husbands err,
wives nag, mothers-in-law carp, girls flirt, boys will be boys and so on
for ever amen. Whatever people attempt, nothing ever changes. In more
sophisticated categoricalism practical politics is marginalized by logic
rather than by humour. In texts like Gyn/Ecology a particular line in
sexual politics is seen as a logical necessity springing from the inner
nature of patriarchy, rather than as a choice of strategy.

Choice always implies doubt, and the possibility of going wrong. To give
full weight to the practical character of politics, while holding to the
recognition of power that is categoricalism’s advance over role theory,
is the most general requirement of the next steps in the theory of
gender.

This requires a form of social theory that gives some grip on the
interweaving of personal life and social structure without collapsing
towards voluntarism and pluralism on one side, or categoricalism and
biological determinism on the other. In modern writing about gender this
has been done best in fiction and autobiography. In books like Doris
Lessing’s The Golden Notebook, Anja Meulenbelt’s The Shame is Over,
Patrick White’s The Twyborn Affair, Nadine Gordimer’s Burger’s Daughter,
there is a strong sense of the constraining power of gender relations
(and other structures like class and race), a sense of something that
people fetch up against. Yet this ‘something’ is neither abstract nor
simple, being real in other people and their actions, with all their
complexities, ambiguities and contradictions. And this reality is
constantly being worked on and – in ways pleasant and unpleasant –
transformed.

In very general terms, we know how to build this kind of understanding
into social theory, since parallel problems have arisen in other fields.
In class analysis they arose in a debate between ‘structure’ à la
Althusser and ‘history’ à la Thompson. In theoretical sociology they
arose in the polemic of symbolic interactionism and ethnomethodology
against systems theory and functionalism à la Parsons; and more recently
in the debates about Lévi-Strauss and structuralism. The outlines of a
solution can be found in the work of Sartre, Kosík, Bourdieu, Giddens
and other theorists who have focused on the interconnections of
structure and practice. In principle, categoricalism can be resolved by
a theory of practice, focusing on what people do by way of constituting
the social relations they live in. In principle, voluntarism can be
overcome by an attention to the structure of social relations as a
condition of all practices.

Though no theory of gender has been formally couched in these terms,
some feminist and gay liberation theorists, and a larger number of field
researchers, have made a beginning with this kind of analysis. Their
work is not recognized as a ‘school’, and their politics are very
diverse. So it is worth reciting some examples to indicate the kinds of
bases that already exist for a development of theory in this direction.

One of the first was Juliet Mitchell. The second section of her now
somewhat neglected book Woman’s Estate described the social position of
women in terms of four ‘structures’, in each of which a particular form
of oppression is generated. This idea has important implications for the
concept of structure that will be discussed in chapter 5. Partly
influenced by Mitchell’s work, the American anthropologist Gayle Rubin
developed a formal comparative analysis of the ‘system of relationships’
by which women are subordinated to men. Though her discussion of the
‘sex-gender system’ leans toward an abstract structuralism, her 1975
paper ‘The Traffic in Women’ shows more clearly than any other study
what a systematic social theory of gender might be like.

In another famous essay, ‘Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian
Existence’, Adrienne Rich points to the importance of the social
relationships constructed by women among themselves in contradistinction
to their connections with men. Her concept of a ‘lesbian continuum’
drifts towards categorical theory but can be approached historically.
This is one of the issues taken up by Jill Matthews in her study of ‘the
historical construction of femininity’ in twentieth-century Australia.
Good and Mad Women uses the records of psychiatric incarceration to
study the impact of changing ideals of femininity in the lives of
particular women. She stresses the historicity of femininity (and by
implication of masculinity) as lived experience, not just imposed
regulation; and links face-to-face household relationships to the
large-scale patterns of demographic, economic and cultural change. On a
larger scale again, David Fernbach in The Spiral Path offers a social
and relational analysis of what is commonly seen as pre-social desire
(or antisocial behaviour). Focusing on homosexual relationships among
men, he sets the modern emergence of homosexual identity in the context
of the history of gender relations stretching back to the neolithic age.
This is speculative in many ways, but certainly a good deal more like a
real history than the myth-making about ultimate ‘origins’.

Instead of unanswerable questions about ultimate origins, root causes or
final analyses, these studies pose the question of how gender relations
are organized as a going concern. They imply that structure is not
pre-given but historically composed. That implies the possibility of
different ways of structuring gender, reflecting the dominance of
different social interests. It also implies different degrees to which
the structuring is coherent or consistent, reflecting changing levels of
contestation and resistance. Sexual politics is embedded in the
structure of gender relations at the most basic level. Structures
develop crisis tendencies which materialize in radical sexual politics.
These questions are the point of departure for the chapters of Part II,
which attempts to develop a practice-based approach to the structure of
gender relations.

But this is not the whole scope of the theory of practice, which also
points to the historicity of gender at the level of personal life. The
idea that forms of sexuality are socially constructed has emerged in the
work of radical historians and in discourse analysis and interactionist
sociology, not to mention the work of Marcuse. Femininity and
masculinity as character structures have to be seen as historically
mutable. There is nothing to prevent several forms of sexual character
emerging in the same society at the same time. Multiple femininities and
masculinities are, I would suggest, a central fact about gender and the
way its structures are lived. These questions are taken up in Part III,
which develops from several starting-points a practice-based approach to
personality.

Before launching out, however, there is one more issue to address. The
main reason why it has been difficult to grasp the historicity of gender
relations is the persistent assumption that a transhistorical structure
is built into gender by the sexual dichotomy of bodies. This is the
assumption that sex role theory finally falls back on, and most kinds of
categoricalism too. A social theory is pointless, or at best peripheral,
if it is true that the basic determinants are biological. The
relationship between the body and social practice is thus a crucial
issue for the theory of gender, which needs to be clarified before the
structure of social relations can be addressed.

NOTES

Extrinsic Theories

(pp. 41–7). Delphy (1977) p. 25 issued an unanswerable challenge to
‘class-first’ dogmatism; which rolls on regardless. On Chinese family
policy see Stacey (1979) and Croll (1983). The major statements of
social reproduction theories of gender are Mitchell (1975); Kuhn and
Wolpe (1978); Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Women’s Studies
Group (1978) and Burton (1985). My criticisms here are partly based on a
general critique of reproduction theory, reprinted in Connell (1983),
chapter 8. The difficulties in British Marxist-feminist theory are
carefully set out by Barrett (1980). For the practical campaigns of
socialist feminists in that country see Coote and Campbell (1982), and
in Australia Court (1986) and Stevens (forthcoming). The most thoughtful
criticism of ‘dual systems’ concepts I have seen is by I. Young (1981).
I have written in more detail on the link between patriarchy and
capitalism in Connell (1983), chapters 3, 4 and 5.

Sex Role Theory

(pp. 47–54). Bern (1974) and Steinmann and Fox (1974) illustrate the
blurring of sex role and sexual character; Wesley and Wesley (1977) the
blurring with sex differences. Carrigan, Connell and Lee (1985) sketch
the history of sex role ideas. My argument in this section is based on a
general critique of role theory in Connell (1983) chapter 10, and its
application to sex roles in Carrigan, Connell and Lee; and the analyses
of sex role concepts by Franzway and Lowe (1978) and Edwards (1983). Nye
et al. (1976) is the source of the list of family roles quoted. The
‘agencies of socialization’ argument is discussed in more detail in
chapter 9 below. Pleck (1981) sees role theory as alternative to
psychodynamics. David and Brannon (1976) illustrate the tacit equation
of male and female roles. Edwards (1983) provides a comprehensive
criticism of ‘deviance’ notions in sex role theory. For the theme of
change in sex roles see Lipman-Blumen and Tickamyer (1975) and Pleck
(1976). One outgrowth was a curious literature purporting to be a
history of sex roles, e.g. Branca (1978). My argument on role theory’s
failure to meet real criteria of historicity was formulated in
discussions with Tim Carrigan and John Lee.

Categorical Theory

(pp. 54–61). Johnston’s (1973) witty argument for separatism helped
establish lesbianism as a political question; the quote is on p. 276.
Willis (1984) gives an excellent history of the emergence of categorical
views of gender in the women’s liberation movement. The categorical
treatment of ‘relations of production’ reaches a peak in Bland et al.
(1978). Money (1970) is an example of biological-determinist
investigation of deviance. Raymond (1979) is a notable example of theory
being pushed towards biological essentialism by a categorical political
logic. Categoricalism as rhetoric is well illustrated in the work of
Spender (1982). Baldock and Cass (1983) and Campbell (1984) are among
many feminist studies undermining the normative model of the family. On
masculinity and aggression see Farrell (1974); Dinnerstein (1976) and
Kelly (1984); Connell (1985a) expands the argument here. Quotation on
false universalism from Eisenstein (1984) p. 132. On the complexity of
interests in gay liberation see Gay Left Collective (1980) and Thompson
(1985), chapter 3.

Practice-based Theory

(p. 61–4). On images of the ‘battle of the sexes’ see Orwell’s famous
1941 essay on the picture postcards of Donald McGill. The connection
between strategy and doubt is clearer in grass-roots radical politics
than in radical theory: compare Alinsky (1972). Thompson’s history
(1968) is more valuable as a model than his polemic against
structuralism (1978), though that has some fine moments. I have
attempted a critical evaluation of Sartre’s and Bourdieu’s theories of
practice in Connell (1983), chapters 5 and 8. Lefebvre’s (1976) pp.
73–91 criticism of the search for a ‘generative nucleus’ is important in
opening up a fully historical perspective on structures of power.

4

The Body and Social Practice

The Knot of Natural Difference

‘Female’ and ‘male’ are biological categories arising in a specific
system of reproduction. Humans share this division with a vast array of
animal and plant species. Non-sexual reproduction is characteristic of
simpler life forms, and some relatively complex ones up to the fungi,
algae and sponges. Some more complex species, like strawberries and
orchids, alternate between sexual and non-sexual reproduction. On the
whole, however, the more advanced species reproduce sexually. It seems
that the sexual division of function in reproduction has been a major
feature in the evolution of life.

In our culture the reproductive dichotomy is assumed to be the absolute
basis of gender and sexuality in everyday life. This is not true of all
cultures. But it is so strongly marked in ours that biological or
pseudo-biological accounts of gender relations have wide popular
credibility. Books like The Naked Ape, The Imperial Animal and The
Selfish Gene carry rival versions of this message to a very large
public. For many people the notion of natural sex difference forms a
limit beyond which thought cannot go. Debates about sexual politics
often end with the assertion that men and women are ultimately
different, as a self-evident proposition that closes off further
discussion. It is seen as a knock-out argument by many opponents of
feminism.

So powerful is this assumption that it has been able to co-opt
intellectual currents initially unsympathetic to biologism, such as role
theory, psychoanalysis and feminism itself. For instance, in Maccoby and
Jacklin’s The Psychology of Sex Differences it is striking how different
are the authors’ attitudes to biological and social explanations of
observed differences in traits like aggressiveness. Biological
explanations clearly have priority, when they are available, and social
explanations are residual. Freud’s method pointed the way to one of the
most radically social analyses of sex and gender yet proposed. Yet Freud
believed in ultimate biological determinism and his followers have
repeatedly drifted towards that view. Theodore Reik, for instance, rests
a very long essay on ‘the emotional differences of the sexes’ on a
simple biological determination; while Robert May in Sex and Fantasy can
think of no other organizing principle for his studies of schizophrenia,
imagination and myth than the natural difference between women and men.

Early second-wave feminism often implied that all sex differences are
socially produced. During the 1970s, as shown in Hester Eisenstein and
Alice Jardine’s The Future of Difference, a good many Western feminists
again began emphasizing difference and celebrating what was specifically
feminine. And a significant number abandoned the idea that what was
‘specifically feminine’ was socially produced. Notions of ineradicable
difference have proliferated: the idea that men are mutants from the
true (female) stock; the idea that men are ‘biological aggressors’ or
‘natural rapists’; the idea of ‘metaphysical difference’; the idea that
women as nurturers must save the world from male wars and technology.

In this chapter I will argue that doctrines of natural difference,
whatever their political complexion, are fundamentally mistaken. This is
not to contest the facts of reproductive biology, nor to deny their
interest and importance for understanding human life. What I will
challenge is the assumption that the biological makeup of our bodies is
the ‘basis’, ‘foundation’, ‘framework’, ‘essence’, or ‘mould’ of the
social relations of gender. The argument accepts that there is a strong
relation between social practice and biology; indeed ‘gender’ would be
inconceivable without it. I will propose that this relation has a very
different character from that assumed by theorists of natural
difference.

There are two main versions of the doctrine of natural difference. The
first takes society to be epiphenomenal to nature, the second sees the
two as additive.

In the first type of theory, biology (or ontology as its surrogate)
determines gender. Society registers what nature decrees – or becomes
sick if it doesn’t. The best-known examples are the pseudo-evolutionary
accounts of masculinity and femininity in texts like Desmond Morris’s
The Naked Ape, Lionel Tiger’s Men in Groups and The Imperial Animal,
George Gilder’s Sexual Suicide – the literature dubbed by Marshall
Sahlins ‘vulgar sociobiology’. The basic point of view is neatly
summarized by Morris:

  Behind the facade of modern city life there is the same old naked ape.
  Only the names have been changed: for ‘hunting’ read ‘working’, for
  ‘hunting grounds’ read ‘place of business’, for ‘home base’ read
  ‘house’, for ‘pair-bond’ read ‘marriage’, for ‘mate’ read ‘wife’, and
  so on. … It is the biological nature of the beast that has moulded the
  social structure of civilisation, rather than the other way around.

Tiger and Fox’s imagery is different but the idea is the same:

  Natural selection has produced an animal that has to behave
  culturally, that has to invent roles, make myths, speak languages and
  form men’s clubs. … Agricultural and industrial civilizations have put
  nothing into the basic wiring of the human animal. We are wired for
  hunting. … And we are wired basically on a primate model.

I have called this literature ‘pseudo-biological’ because it does not in
fact rest on serious biological investigation of human social life, as
for instance ecological studies of industry do. Rather it rests on a
series of loose analogies, which, as Marie de Lepervanche notes, are
changed by logical slides into taken-for-granted facts. The basic logic
is exactly the reverse of what it is claimed to be. The argument starts
with an interpretation of current social life (in Morris’s case an
interpretation that is sexist, ethnocentric and often factually wrong)
and reads this back into a speculative prehistory. ‘Evolution’ is called
in to justify the social patterns these authors advocate, under the
guise of explanation. Tiger, for instance, ends up talking about which
social arrangements are and are not ‘biologically healthy’ – by which he
means that they conform to his view of human evolution as a hunting
species.

It is difficult to take this literature seriously as science. The social
analysis is crude in the extreme. The understanding of ‘evolution’
itself is obsolete. The fundamental problem of understanding the shift
from organic evolution to history is obliterated by the biological
reduction. Yet these arguments are extremely popular. This is partly to
do with a touch of salacious humour (breasts as buttocks, the corporate
executive as anthropoid ape). More fundamentally it comes from their
mirror construction. They reflect what is familiar back as ‘science’,
and justify what many readers wish to believe.

A serious attempt to repair these deficiencies has been made by the
‘scientific sociobiologists’ led by E. O. Wilson. In a chapter of On
Human Nature Wilson applies the calculus of genetic advantage to show
how ‘human sexuality can be much more precisely defined with the aid of
the new advances in evolutionary theory’. It is curious how traditional
the ‘new advances’ turn out to be. Wilson’s argument recites differences
in athletic performance, studies of twins and the like to reject a
‘totally environmental explanation’ of sex differences, proffers the
universality of the family, and tries to show that homosexuality has a
genetic explanation – thus assuming that homosexuality is a unitary
trait and reverting to concepts that became obsolete in sexology seventy
years ago.

The conceptual confusions underlying ‘sociobiology’ as a school of
thought are now reasonably well understood. An impoverished
understanding of biology, and of the process of evolution itself,
underlies the slides between social institutions and biological
advantage. As Sahlins shows for Wilson’s general argument, and Janet
Sayers shows in Biological Politics for gender specifically, the
sociobiologists’ arguments ignore the fact that human action is highly
structured in a collective sense; it is constituted interactively, not
by context-free individual predispositions. A war, for instance, is a
social and institutional process within history, not the sum total of
several hundred thousand genetic predispositions towards aggressiveness.
Most strikingly, sociobiology for all its claims to scientific
explanation cannot produce for inspection the mechanisms of biological
causation. Wilson, for instance, in his essay on sex, is reduced to
speculations like this: ‘Sexual love and the emotional satisfaction of
family life can be reasonably postulated to be based on enabling
mechanisms in the physiology of the brain that have been programmed to
some extent through the genetic hardening of this compromise.’ The
triple caution (‘reasonably postulated’ – ‘enabling’ – ‘to some extent’)
shows, as clearly as language can, that Wilson here is simply guessing.
And guesswork is what this literature mostly offers on the actual
determination of social life.

This gives a particular interest to Steven Goldberg’s version of
biological determination in The Inevitability of Patriarchy. Though
somewhat dated, it is a serious attempt to do what Wilson and others
avoid, providing a detailed account of the mechanisms linking biological
difference and social inequality. It is worth examining as a type of
argument.

From physiological research Goldberg takes the finding of differences in
average blood concentrations of particular hormones, especially
testosterone, between men and women. From psychopharmacological research
he takes the findings of some differences in average performance, on
certain tests, of animals and people with differing levels of these (or
other) hormones in their bloodstream. He deduces that these hormones
cause differences in social behaviour which give an ‘aggression
advantage’ to men over women. This explains both the sexual division of
labour and patriarchal power structure. In competition for jobs of any
importance, men have the edge in assertiveness. It is rational for women
to accept a subordinated position rather than exhaust themselves in a
competition for power where they are constantly dragged down by their
hormones. Therefore we have social arrangements that allocate
home-making to women, competitive striving in the world of business to
men.

The logical error in the later stage of this argument is easy to see.
Goldberg postulates a situation of open competition in order to explain
institutional arrangements that prevent open competition. In fact, as
far as real historical evidence goes, a situation of free competition
between women and men – or among men – has never existed; it is a
rhetorical device constructed by social-contract theorists in the
seventeenth century. A more complex slide occurs earlier in the
argument. Goldberg’s argument moves from average differences in hormone
concentrations to categorical differences in social behaviour.

A difference between two groups on average is compatible with a great
overlap in distributions. So far as mainstream psychologists have
succeeded in measuring traits like aggressiveness, a great deal of
overlap between women and men is exactly what they do find (see chapter
8). It is not credible to start from
a-small-average-difference-within-a-large-overlap and deduce the
institutional exclusion of women as a group from major political
authority or economic power that is evident in the data on state and
business elites in chapter 1. This problem is sufficiently serious to
lead sociobiologists sometimes to speak of society ‘amplifying’ natural
sex differences, and thus to move towards the additive framework to be
discussed shortly.

The biological-reductionist argument, then, is too weak for at least
some of the social phenomena it tries to explain. In other respects it
is too strong. The idea that differences in hormone levels reach out
through the complex situational, personal and collective determinants of
individual behaviour to remain the ultimate determinants of its social
consequences, supposes a mechanism of hormonal control far more powerful
than physiological research has actually found. A typical conclusion by
the physiologists is stated by Anke Erhardt and Heino Meyer-Bahlburg in
a recent review of research on the ‘effects of prenatal sex hormones on
gender-related behaviour’ – an area where hormonal effects might
reasonably be expected. Some hormonal influence is probable, they
conclude, but the effects are subtle. The social events of a child’s
upbringing are plainly the major influence: ‘the development of gender
identity seems to depend largely on the sex of rearing’, not on hormonal
determination.

This might lead to a doctrine of weak biological determination of social
patterns; but even that would be speculative. It is worth noting that
over the last century a whole series of attempts has been mounted to
prove the biological determination of various forms of social
inequality. Arguments for racial differences in courage and
intelligence, the heritability of IQ, the heritability of mental
disorder, parallel the arguments for innate sex differences in
temperament and ability. In none of these cases has a mechanism been
discovered that would translate the proposed biological cause into
complex patterns of individual behaviour, let alone social institutions.
In all of them, serious questions have been raised about the validity of
the data used to establish a significant biological effect at all.

It is possible that there are some innate differences in temperament or
ability between women and men. The hypothesis cannot be ruled out
entirely. But if they exist, we can say quite confidently that they are
not the basis of major social institutions. We can also say that in
terms of human evolution they pale into insignificance beside the common
capacities of women and men. These are the human ‘species
characteristics’ of capacity for language, intellect and imagination,
upright stance, thumb opposition and manipulation, tool-making and
tool-using and extended childhood and parenting, that mark us off from
other species and are constituents of the evolutionary jump to human
society. These characteristics are shared between the sexes, and there
is no good reason to doubt that the shift from biological evolution to
history was also a shared accomplishment.

Once this shift was accomplished – and it would seem we are talking
about a process taking two or three million years – the basis existed
for a relationship between the body and behaviour that was radically
different from relationships governed by organic evolution. Biological
reductionism, in essence, is two or three million years out of date.

A variant of reductionism sees biology not as fixing individual
characteristics, but as setting limits within which social arrangements
may vary. All societies, a familiar argument runs, must reproduce
themselves and their members, and therefore must accommodate and sustain
the sexual and social relationships that produce new people. All
societies, therefore, must accommodate themselves to the biological
facts of sex. It is usually inferred that all societies must be based on
the nuclear family or some variant of it. The functionalist tone of this
argument is not hard to detect, and its classics are found in American
social science in the heyday of functionalism, such as the work of
Talcott Parsons and Margaret Mead. It is textbook orthodoxy (a) that the
nuclear family is universal, (b) because it is the social form that
responds to universal biological demands for sex and reproduction. A
society that wanders beyond these limits will collapse, or come under
terrible strain. Therefore – according to Parsons – every society has
sanctions against homosexuality, so as to reinforce the differentiation
of sex roles and protect the family.

This version of reductionism may sound more plausible than sociobiology;
at least it sounds more social. Its difficulty is that the biological
constraints proposed are so feeble that they explain almost nothing. An
enormous range of social arrangements are consistent with the occurrence
of enough heterosexual intercourse to reproduce the species. An enormous
range of economic arrangements are consistent with giving children
enough care for them to survive and grow. On the issue of sexual
object-choice it is simply not true that all societies prohibit
homosexuality. In quite a number of societies homosexuality is
institutionalized as part of the social and religious order, for example
in the New Guinea culture studied by Gilbert Herdt. The real force of
the limits-to-variation version of biological reductionism is that, like
sociobiology, it is a mirror structure, reflecting familiar social
arrangements back to the reader as what is required by nature.

The second major type of natural-difference theory drops the notion of
constraint in favour of an additive conception of society and nature.
Biology, in this line of thought, establishes a certain difference
between human females and males, but this is insufficient for the
complexity of social life. It must be added to, built upon. Society
therefore culturally elaborates the distinction between the sexes.
Clothing is a familiar example. There are modest differences in average
physique between men and women. Society exaggerates them, for instance
with garments that emphasize women’s breasts or men’s penises and makes
them categorical, for instance by putting women in skirts and men in
trousers. Different societies elaborate the distinction of sex in
different ways. Research into the variations produces the ethnography of
exotic clothing, kinship and sexual customs that has titillated Western
readers since anthropology began.

Sociobiology sometimes tilts towards an additive conception, as in
Wilson’s remark that ‘the physical and temperamental differences between
men and women have been amplified by culture into universal male
dominance’. Most commonly, however, additive conceptions of gender are
found in sex-role theory and liberal feminism. The now very large
literature on sex-role socialization proceeds with impressive unanimity
along additive lines, tracing out the ways society improves on nature’s
handiwork in shaping little girls and little boys. The very term
‘sex/role’ sums up the additive approach.

This may be turned in a critical direction, because some room for social
choice is implied. Liberal-feminist sex-role theory condemns the way the
addition is currently done, especially the imposition of derogatory
stereotypes and submissive behaviour on women. Maccoby and Jacklin put
this critical view with particular clarity:

  We suggest that societies have the option of minimizing, rather than
  maximizing, sex differences through their socialization practices. A
  society could for example, devote its energies more toward moderating
  male aggression than toward preparing women to submit to male
  aggression, or toward encouraging rather than discouraging male
  nurturance activities. In our view, social institutions and social
  practices are not merely reflections of the biologically inevitable. A
  variety of social institutions are viable within the framework set by
  biology. It is up to human beings to select those that foster the life
  styles they most value.

The most striking thing about this passage is the contradiction between
the notion of ‘a society’ as a freely choosing agent and the underlying
sense of biological constraint. If social arrangements are ‘not merely
reflections’ of biological inevitability it is still clear that Maccoby
and Jacklin think they are substantially so. This passage comes from an
argument against Goldberg’s hormonal version of biological reductionism.
But the difference at this point is slight: it is mainly that Goldberg
thinks social training should reinforce natural difference while Maccoby
and Jacklin think it should not. The framework is not greatly different.
Indeed Wilson, the high priest of sociobiology, reproduces almost
exactly Maccoby and Jacklin’s argument about societal choice on a basis
of natural difference; he professes neutrality.

The critical content of liberal feminism, then, is consistent with the
concept of natural difference. It presumes that a kind of base-level
gender distinction is left when we strip away the pancake make-up or the
Playboy philosophy. This basal difference is taken to be unoppressive
because it is natural. So, for instance, Betty Friedan in The Second
Stage can look to a post-feminist future which takes the comforting
shape of the family. For her and many others the underlying reality
includes an unchallenged heterosexuality as the taken-for-granted shape
of sexual attraction. It begins to look as if we are in the land of
mirrors again.

Objections to the idea of natural difference usually take the form of
extra emphasis on the social end of an additive conception of gender.
This is what happens when sex-role theory is used to combat crude
nativism. A notable example is the 1970s literature on masculinity,
where ape-man reductionism was challenged by role theorists.

This line of argument runs into two main difficulties. Because the
underlying conception of gender is additive, the effect of this extra
emphasis on the social is to minimize the importance of the body.
Therefore the argument loses its grip on what people do find central in
their experience of sex and gender: pleasure, pain, body-image, arousal,
youth and ageing, bodily contact, childbirth and suckling. Second, the
correct relative weighting of social versus biological determinations is
never accurately established in practice. The ‘addition’ remains an
aspiration. And the weighting cannot be assumed equal in all departments
of life. So this objection always remains a statement of opinion with no
logical force.

There are, nevertheless, two arguments against the doctrine of natural
difference that cut deeper and apply to all its forms. The first is
developed in a brilliant though little-recognized book by the American
sociologists Suzanne Kessler and Wendy McKenna. In Gender: An
Ethnomethodological Approach they demonstrate that the scientific as
well as the popular literature on sexuality and gender works within a
cultural framework in which the ‘natural attitude’ (in the technical
sense of ethnomethodology – i.e. the everyday stance) is to take gender
as strictly dichotomous and unchanging. What they call ‘gender
attribution’, the social process ‘by which we construct our world of two
genders’, is sustained despite the failure of human reality on almost
any count to be strictly dimorphic. Perhaps the most striking part of
their argument is where they examine the biological literature on
gender, which so much social analysis takes to be holy writ, and show
that this research too is founded on the social process of gender
attribution. And following this social logic, biological research
continues to create new dichotomies as old ones become untenable. A
striking example is the effort to reconstitute athletics as a strict
dichotomy. Chromosome testing was introduced to international athletics
in 1967 and used on a large scale at the 1968 Mexico Olympics. The
International Olympic Committee defines people with intermediate
chromosomal patterns as men, disqualifying them from women’s events.

So far the argument is negative, simply pointing out that our
taken-for-granted assumptions about gender dichotomy are not forced upon
us by nature. The positive side of the argument is about the social
process itself. Kessler and McKenna re-examine the anthropological
literature on berdache, institutionalized transvestism among American
Indian societies particularly. They show that when the anthropologists’
perceptions based on dichotomous gender attribution are allowed for, the
research reveals cultural worlds where gender is not dichotomous and is
not necessarily assigned on biological criteria. It can, for instance,
be chosen. Michel Foucault makes the same point in his essay on the case
of Herculine Barbin. At an earlier period in the history of Western
European culture, a strict dichotomy of sex and a lifelong commitment to
membership of one, was not presupposed in the way it is now.

Studies of transvestism and transsexualism in contemporary Western
societies provide an exceptional insight into the social construction of
gender in everyday life. Harold Garfinkel, one of the first to explore
this issue, in his case study of ‘Agnes’ stressed the amount of work
that had to be done to sustain an identity as a woman by someone
starting out as a boy. Much of this is also done by people who start out
as girls, but in that case it is hardly noticed as work – it is taken
for granted, or as being natural.

Kessler and McKenna argue that transsexualism is itself based on the
natural attitude that assumes dichotomy; what transsexuals claim is that
they are ‘really’ members of the other sex, and seek ways of correcting
the anomaly. The studies of Sydney transsexuals by Roberta Perkins show
that the situation is more complex than this. For some that is true; but
others are much more uncertain about where they belong and why. Further,
the growth of a commercial subculture of transsexual prostitution and
show business has created a new option. ‘Drag queens’ can make a living
as transsexuals. In effect a new gender category is being constructed.
Its history, some case studies indicate, has roots in the ambiguous
situation of homosexual men in the 1950s and 1960s. This in turn points
back to a tradition of thinking about homosexuality as an intersex
status – the ‘third sex’ in one version. Even in modern Western culture,
it seems, the cultural construction of gender has repeatedly failed to
produce consistent dichotomies.

To sum up, our conception of what is natural and what natural
differences consist of, is itself a cultural construct, part of our
specific way of thinking about gender. Gender is, in Kessler and
McKenna’s term, a practical accomplishment – something accomplished by
social practice. (We might add, not a completely consistent one.) This
is not a matter of some bias or error in our ideas that might in
principle be corrected by future biological research. It is a
fundamental feature of the way we have knowledge of human beings.

The second basic criticism of the concept of natural difference can be
stated more briefly, as it is a general point about the character of
human life. The idea of natural difference is that of a passively
suffered condition, like being subject to gravity. If human life were in
its major internal structures – gender being one – so conditioned, human
history would be inconceivable. For history depends on the transcendence
of the natural through social practice.

This point holds good without the bland optimism about progress that has
usually accompanied it. In a period of rising awareness of environmental
disaster and nuclear threat, it is easier to see the negative side of
the human rupture from the non-human. It is also possible to see an
expanded meaning in the idea central to the work of Gordon Childe, the
pioneer of global history as a science, that the relation between nature
and history is one of practical transformation. This means both the
transformations of the natural world by human practice (domestication of
plants and animals, smelting of metal ores, invention of steam engines,
etc.) that have sustained each stage of historical development; and the
changes of practice itself that have made great shifts of social
structure possible. Practical transformations open up new possibilities,
which are the tissue of human life. But they do this by creating new
social pressures and risks.

As shown by the title of one of his books, Man Makes Himself, Childe was
not exactly sensitive to issues of gender. Nor is gender much registered
in the recent reworking of these themes by Jürgen Habermas. But this is,
I would argue, more a consequence of the influence of sexual ideology on
social theorists, than any logical sense in which the social processes
of gender are exceptions to the principles that apply to other social
processes. There is no reason to make this exception. The body is
implicated in the processes of gender, certainly; but then the body is
involved in every kind of social practice. The natural world is
implicated in class relations, for instance through the labour process
and the function of the body as tool. This does not prevent class
relations from being historical. No more should the implication of the
body in gender relations through sexuality prevent us from seeing the
historicity of gender.

To make these points is already to imply a relation between the social
and the natural that is different from biological determination in any
form. I will now try to spell out how this relation might be understood.

Transcendence and Negation

To speak of ‘transcendence’ is to imply the production of something
qualitatively different. The social is radically unnatural.
(‘Non-natural’ might be a more neutral term but I think the stronger
overtones are correct.) Its structure can never be deduced from natural
structures. What undergoes transformation is genuinely trans-formed.

But this unnaturalness does not mean disconnection, a radical separation
from nature. On the contrary, the unnaturalness of society is sustained
by a particular kind of connection with nature – a connection through
practice. In the practice of labour, the natural world is appropriated
by human beings and transformed, both physically and in terms of
meaning. In the practices of sexuality and power, as well as certain
kinds of labour (for example nursing), the human body itself is an
object of practice.

The natural or pre-social qualities of objects are of course important
to the practices that deal with them. We do not offer coffee to a tree,
nor try to paint with sawdust. Nor should we expect someone who is
chromosomally male to give birth to a child. Where reductionism goes
wrong is in taking these qualities as determinants of the practice. This
gets things precisely the wrong way round. Practice issues from the
human and social side of the transaction; it deals with the natural
qualities of its objects, including the biological characteristics of
bodies. It gives them a social determination. The connection between
social and natural structures is one of practical relevance, not of
causation.

Thus a person with a chromosomally male body can be treated as a woman
in social practice, and sometimes is. The person concerned will still
not give birth to a child. Kessler and McKenna’s demonstration of the
primacy of ‘gender attribution’ can be seen as a particular case of the
concept of practical relevance. It describes specifically the
incorporation and transformation of certain aspects of bodies by
cognitive and interpretive practices.

‘Dealing with’ is not a neutral term. What practice produces is not what
it began with. The qualities of objects are changed, whether they are
bits of wood or human beings. The bits of wood become a chair; the human
being becomes a lover, or angry, or better educated. A transforming
practice in a basic sense negates what it starts with in order to
produce something new. This negation and supersession is the basis of
historicity. For the outcomes of practice do not sit around outside
time, but themselves become the grounds of new practice. As the Czech
philosopher Karel Kosík puts it, practice has durability through its
products and effects.

We are now in a position to formulate the non-reductionist strong
connection between biology and the social. The social practices that
construct gender relations do not express natural patterns, nor do they
ignore natural patterns; rather, they negate them in a practical
transformation. This practical transformation is a continuing historical
process. Its materials are the social as well as the biological products
of previous practice – new situations and new people.

We might say that reproductive biology is historicized in gender. This
is true so far as it goes, but is a weak formulation suggesting an
additive conception. More precisely, reproductive biology is socially
dealt with in the historical process we call gender; a history that
negates its biological materials as well as its social ones.

This is not an exotic or original idea. Gayle Rubin, for instance,
observes of the kinship structures which are taken by reductionists to
express biological imperatives: ‘A kinship system is not a list of
biological relatives. It is a system of categories and statuses which
often contradict actual genetic relationships.’ She observes of the
cultural emphasis on difference between the sexes:

  Men and women are, of course, different. But they are not as different
  as day and night, earth and sky, yin and yang, life and death. In
  fact, from the standpoint of nature, men and women are closer to each
  other than either is to anything else – for instance, mountains,
  kangaroos, or coconut palms. Far from being an expression of natural
  differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural
  similarities.

The same goes for gender relations in our society. Texts on sex roles
almost always contain a party-piece on sex-typed adornment – make-up,
clothing, hair-style and accessories. Erving Goffman’s Gender
Advertisements adds positioning and posture to the catalogue. In the
additive framework of sex role theory this is interpreted as a social
marking of the natural difference: we put girls in frilly dresses, boys
in running shorts and so on. But there is something odd about this. If
the difference is natural why does it need to be marked so heavily? For
the sex-typing of clothes and adornment really is obsessive. At some
moments it reaches quite fantastic levels. No one is likely to doubt the
femaleness of a nursing mother. Yet the front-opening dresses and
dressing-gowns marketed to nursing mothers (in shops like the British
‘Mothercare’ chain) are an absolute mass of ‘feminine’ frills, tucks,
bows, lace, ribbons and such like. When you think of the mess created by
a nursing baby, it is clear there is nothing functional about this.

In fact the social practices are not reflecting natural differences with
these diacritical marks of gender. They are weaving a structure of
symbol and interpretation around them, and often vastly exaggerating or
distorting them. As Rubin observes, social emphasis on difference
negates natural similarity. When we push further into the detail of the
social arrangements about gender, it is striking how regularly denials,
transformations and contradictions appear. Homosexual men are socially
defined as effeminate, homosexual women as mannish; in fact there are no
physical or physiological differences between homosexual and
heterosexual people. Employment practices that discriminate against
women because of presumed childcare obligations define all women as
mothers of young children; in fact most are not. Girls in early
adolescence are on average bigger and stronger than the boys in their
own school classes; yet it is just at this age that enormous pressure is
applied to make them dependent and fearful in relation to males. To
sustain patriarchal power on the large scale requires the construction
of a hypermasculine ideal of toughness and dominance; the physical image
of masculinity this produces is grotesquely unlike the actual physique
of most men. The corresponding point has often been made about images of
physical beauty in women.

At the same time another negation is taking place. The members of either
sex vary tremendously in height, strength, endurance, dexterity and so
on. As noted already, the distributions in the two sexes overlap to a
great extent. Social practices that construct women and men as distinct
categories by converting an average difference into a categorical
difference – ‘men are stronger than women’ – negate the major pattern of
difference that occurs within sexes rather than between them.

In grasping these apparently paradoxical processes, the kind of
distinction between levels of practice that Jean-Paul Sartre makes in
the Critique of Dialectical Reason is helpful. The biological
differentiation of sex in reproduction is a passively suffered
condition: men cannot bear children, infants require suckling and so on.
To these conditions correspond a limited range of practices and
consequences (of a type Sartre calls the ‘practico-inert’). People can
be lumped together in logically primitive categories through an external
logic, a logic imposed on them that places them in parallel situations
(Sartre calls this ‘seriality’) – like a queue of people waiting for a
bus, or the audience for a radio broadcast.

These however are not the gender categories as we encounter them in
social life. Indeed the practices of sexual reproduction are often quite
remote aspects of the social encounters in which gender is constructed
and sustained. This is obvious in the key case of children, who have
gender forms vehemently imposed on them long before they are capable of
reproducing, or even have much understanding of the business of
reproduction. There are other, more sophisticated, levels of practice
involved. To move to these levels requires negation of the previous
level of practice. Thus to construct the social category of ‘man’ or
‘woman’, with a common identity and interest, requires negation of the
serial dispersion characteristic of the array of parallel situations
constructed by the biological categories. This is done in practices that
create and assert the solidarity of the sex (or group within it).

This social solidarity is a new fact, in no way implied by the
biological category. It can therefore be constructed, historically, in a
variety of ways. Thus it is possible for a new type of solidarity, a new
organization of the gender, to emerge. Masculinities and femininities
can be re-constructed historically, new forms can become dominant. It is
even possible for a whole new gender category to be constructed, as with
the emergence of ‘the homosexual’ in the late nineteenth century, and
perhaps ‘the transsexual’ now. Such a development does not make sense in
any theory of natural difference as the basis of gender. It does make
sense when the significance of contradiction is grasped.

There is, therefore, a logic to such paradoxes as the gross exaggeration
of difference by the social practices of dress, adornment and the like.
They are part of a continuing effort to sustain the social definition of
gender, an effort that is necessary precisely because the biological
logic, and the inert practice that responds to it, cannot sustain the
gender categories.

The shift to a second level of practice is also found in the
psychodynamics of gender, according to some classical formulations.
Alfred Adler’s account of the ‘masculine protest’ as a key structure of
motivation, for instance, is based on the small child’s discovery of a
physical fact about its body, its organic inferiority to others. This
perception of the body is, however, transcended in the psychological
process that constructs, in over-compensation, a desire to dominate, a
striving for power. That a real transcendence has occurred is shown by
the fact that as the child grows up the psychological structure outlives
the physical conditions in which it was produced. The same is true for
‘castration anxiety’ in Freud’s psychodynamic theory, which outlives the
originally extreme disparity of force between child and parent.

The creation of the ‘new fact’ in transcendent practice in no sense
excludes the body, the biology of reproduction, bodily difference or
physical experience. To lose this connection would be to make the kind
of suppression made by patriarchal ideology when it defines menstruation
as embarrassing and unmentionable, and thus eliminates part of women’s
experience from the language. The point is that we do not need to fall
back on reductionism to keep the body and its ways in view. In practical
transcendence the body is carried forward, so to speak, into the next
transaction. It remains a presence, indeed a ferment, in the order of
things constructed by more complex social processes. Even when the
physical conditions of some social process change – as when the
psychoanalytic baby grows up – the body remains the screen on which the
well-launched dramas of power and anxiety are projected. ‘Hysterical’
symptoms like the paralyzed limb are the classic case, but depression
and dissociation are also experienced in the flesh.

Contradiction between the body and a developing practice is a continuing
fact in sexuality itself. In sexual intercourse, nobody but the most
inexperienced, insensitive or frightened person always follows the
simple bodily logic of arousal to climax. There is tension and pleasure
in working against immediate bodily demand, holding back, creating
rhythms, exploring. You can communicate pleasure to a partner by working
against your own desire in favour of hers or his; you learn the ways of
another body which does not contain your own desire or need. In this way
the immensely complex practical edifice of a sexual relationship is
built as a structure of tensions and contradictions. That is the meaning
of a union of two people as distinct from a rubbing-together of two
bodies.

Practical Transformations of the Body

Even to speak of contradiction between social process and the body is
not to have moved far enough from doctrines of natural difference and
biological determination. For this is still to treat the body as unmoved
mover, as what is fixed in relation to what is fluid, as what gives
meaning and does not receive it. The body in relation to the social
system still seems like the monster looming outside the bright lights of
the space station, alien and immovable, compelling by its sheer
presence.

That the body is intractable and recalcitrant is important. More than
one radical theorist has found in a kind of biological intransigence an
ultimate grounding for human freedom in the face of overwhelming social
powers: Herbert Marcuse on the bodily basis of Eros, Noam Chomsky on the
biological basis of speech. This may be valid as a speculation on
ultimate limits to social control; I am not sure. But it should not
imply that in general the body becomes a social agent as if from pure
nature, from some standpoint outside society. The body-as-used, the body
I am, is a social body that has taken meanings rather than conferred
them. My male body does not confer masculinity on me; it receives
masculinity (or some fragment thereof) as its social definition. Nor is
my sexuality the irruption of the natural; it too is part of a social
process. In the most extraordinary detail my body’s responses reflect
back, like the little mirrors on an Indian dress, a kaleidoscope of
social meanings.

The body, without ceasing to be the body, is taken in hand and
transformed in social practice. I do not have a systematic analysis of
this process to offer, but it may be helpful to illustrate the point.
What follows are brief notes on three examples: symbolic eroticism, the
physical sense of masculinity and the history of body politics.

  Whenas in silks my Julia goes
  Then, then (methinks) how sweetly flows
  That liquefaction of her clothes

Commenting on Herrick’s remarkable poem, Judy Barbour notes that the
force of its eroticism depends a good deal on the connotations of silk
as a sexual and status fetish, operating within a closed system of
social thought (which she calls ‘mythical’) about men’s and women’s
sexuality. Maureen Duffy makes a similar observation on Spenser’s Faerie
Queen, an erotic dream-poem in which some typical problems of
Renaissance sexuality and culture are explored and resolved in violence.
Jean Genet’s Our Lady of the Flowers is equally striking as a document
of the link between imagination and eroticism. Genet creates here a
world of erotic objects in whose ritual dances masculinity and
femininity dissolve and coagulate, now taking on sharp edges in the form
of the hard youth who combines criminality and desirability, now
ambiguous in the shape of Divine.

The importance of ritual in sexuality is familiar. In some forms of
sexuality it becomes the matrix for an amplification of the tension set
up by working against the body. Using pain, fear and humiliation,
sado-masochistic rituals with ‘forbidden symbols and … disowned
emotions’, in the words of Pat Califia, practically turn the body
against itself in the pursuit of pleasure. In the milder fetishisms
where pleasure comes with rubberized raincoats or white kid gloves, the
role of the imagination and the centrality of socially constructed
meaning – here non-verbal and built into tactile response – is very
obvious. (Even here, however, the ideological ‘naturalization’ of the
social is under way. The standard fantasy in fetish pornography is about
the unpremeditated discovery of an uncontrollable ‘natural’ response to
the fetish, whatever it is.)

Fetishism and fetish pornography work to a large extent by playing with
and recombining elements of the symbolism of gender. As sexuality, they
presuppose a connection between this symbolism and the body – social
definitions of the feel of femininity and masculinity. This physical
sense of genderedness (to coin a horrible word) needs exploration. I
will take the case of masculinity, as femininity has been analysed more
extensively.

The physical sense of maleness is not a simple thing. It involves size
and shape, habits of posture and movement, particular physical skills
and the lack of others, the image of one’s own body, the way it is
presented to other people and the ways they respond to it, the way it
operates at work and in sexual relations. In no sense is all this a
consequence of XY chromosomes, or even of the possession on which
discussions of masculinity have so lovingly dwelt, the penis. The
physical sense of maleness grows through a personal history of social
practice, a life-history-in-society.

In Western countries, for instance, images of ideal masculinity are
constructed and promoted most systematically through competitive sport.
Though adults are spectators more often than participants,
schoolchildren do play sport a great deal and are taught to regard
sporting success as a matter of deep importance. The combination of
force and skill that is involved in playing well at games like football,
cricket and baseball, and which is central even in highly individualized
sports like surfing, becomes a strongly cathected aspect of an
adolescent boy’s life. Though rejected by some (a point that will be
explored in chapter 8), for most it becomes a model of bodily action
that has a much wider relevance than the particular game. Prowess of
this kind becomes a means of judging one’s degree of masculinity.

So the concern with force and skill becomes a statement embedded in the
body, embedded through years of participation in social practices like
organized sport. And it is not a ‘statement’ that comes from the void.
Its meaning condenses some crucial features of the social structures
that environ, and participate in, those masculinizing practices. One of
these is the structure of class relations. The system of individual
competition in sport has taken on a particular form in advanced
capitalism, as recent analyses of the Olympics and the culture of sport
have shown. More directly important is the structure of power in gender
relations. The meanings in the bodily sense of masculinity concern,
above all else, the superiority of men to women, and the exaltation of
hegemonic masculinity over other groups of men which is essential to the
domination of women.

The social definition of men as holders of power is translated not only
into mental body-images and fantasies, but into muscle tensions,
posture, the feel and texture of the body. This is one of the main ways
in which the power of men becomes ‘naturalized’, i.e. seen as part of
the order of nature. It is very important in allowing belief in the
superiority of men, and the oppressive practices that flow from it, to
be sustained by men who in other respects have very little power. The
importance of physical aggression in some of the major forms of
working-class masculinity is familiar. A vignette: among a peer group of
South London boys in a particular club (where a youth worker interested
in the issue of masculinity works), the mark of friendship is hitting
each other – playfully, but hard. No one who is not a friend is admitted
to this intimacy.

The violence implicit in the physical construction of hegemonic
masculinity points directly to the social distribution of violence
outlined in chapter 1. It was noted there that at least some features of
this distribution change historically. This is one facet of a much
larger politics of the body.

Our bodies grow and work, flourish and decay, in social situations that
produce bodily effects. For instance the class system that we live in
produces malnutrition for the children of poor people, obesity from
overeating and overdrinking among the affluent. The institutionalized
racism of the Australian social order means massively higher levels of
eye disease among Aborigines than among whites: in a national study of
rural areas 38 per cent of Aborigines had trachoma compared with 1 per
cent of whites.

The politics of the body has a gender dimension as well – which is to
say, physical effects that follow from the gender structuring of social
relations. Alcoholism provides a clear example. In an Australian
national study of 1980 it was found that 14 per cent of men and 6 per
cent of women were at intermediate to very high risk levels. Another
kind of physical effect is lucidly documented in studies of the material
circumstances of working-class family life. Margery Spring Rice’s
classic Working-class Wives, for instance, traced the physical effects
on women of the division of labour that assigned them to back-breaking
daily labour in ‘the small dark unorganized workshop of the home’.

That was in Britain in the 1930s. A number of social processes gradually
altered those physical effects. One was the spread of effective and
reliable contraception. The history of contraception shows that the term
‘politics of the body’ is no metaphor. Marie Stopes, leader of the
contraception movement in early twentieth-century Britain, was a
political organizer and propagandist of genius – though not, it seems
from Ruth Hall’s biography, much of a technical expert on her subject.
From World War I through the 1920s and 1930s she fought a long and
sometimes bitter campaign to establish openly available contraceptive
services. The story in Australia shows more clearly the other side of
the struggle: that is, the mobilization of political resources against
contraception in the early years of the century by propagandists like
Octavius Beale. Fear of the ‘yellow peril’ from Asia overwhelming the
white settlements, imperial patriotism seeking to bolster the British
‘race’ against the German, fear of working-class depravity, combined
with medical mythology and a rational distrust of available methods of
contraception to fuel a widespread pro-natalist campaign. The state was,
for a while, swung to pro-natalist positions.

Concern about imperial and racial decline fed into another kind of body
politics, the attempt to cultivate physique by education. As an
organized practice in the schools, general physical education (distinct
from sport and from military drill) developed in capitalist countries in
the late nineteenth century. Some key innovations came from Sweden and
the scheme for a ‘scientific’ physical education was known elsewhere as
‘Swedish drill’. It spread through the mass schooling system in the
twentieth century, with particular vigour where interventionist states
developed a concern with the military or industrial efficiency of their
populations. Nazi schooling, in consequence, was a model of physical
education for its time. In somewhat less militarized but still
ideologically loaded forms physical education continues to be an
essential part of contemporary mass schooling.

We may say, then, that the practical transformation of the body in the
social structure of gender is not only accomplished at the level of
symbolism. It has physical effects on the body; the incorporation is a
material one. The forms and consequences of this incorporation change in
time, and change as a result of social purposes and social struggle.
That is to say they are fully historical. Symbolically, ‘nature’ may be
opposed to ‘culture’, the body (fixed) opposed to history (moving). But
in the reality of practice the body is never outside history, and
history never free of bodily presence and effects on the body. The
traditional dichotomies underlying reductionism now have to be replaced
by a more adequate and complex account of the social relations in which
this incorporation and interplay occur.

NOTES

Natural Difference

(pp. 66–77). A charming short introduction to the evolutionary history
of sex is Stevens (1984). On Maccoby and Jacklin’s privileging of
biology, note that even on the trait of aggressiveness the biological
predisposition thesis is disputable: see Tieger (1980). Vulgar
sociobiology quotations from Morris (1979), pp. 74–5 and Tiger and Fox
(1971), pp. 20, 22; scientific sociobiology from Wilson (1978). pp.
139–40, 128. Parallels between sociobiology on natural sex difference
and the pseudo-sciences of IQ and mental disease are noted in the useful
critique of genetic determination by Lewontin, Rose and Kamin (1984).
Additive quotation, Maccoby and Jacklin (1975), p. 374.

Transcendence and Negation

(pp. 78–82). The discussion of practical transcendence draws extensively
on Sartre (1976), with some assistance from Kosík (1976), whose theory
of praxis is outlined by Schmidt (1977). Kovel (1981), pp. 234–6 offers
an analysis of negation between praxis and desire that has some
similarity to the argument here, but almost entirely misses the issue of
gender – quite a feat for a psychoanalyst. Quotations from Rubin (1975),
pp. 169, 179–80.

Practical Transformations

(pp. 83–7). The social meanings in eroticism are extensively explored in
the fiction of Angela Carter (e.g. 1974). On sado-masochism see Greene
and Greene (1974) and Califia (1983), pp. 118–32; the quotation is from
another of Califia’s writings cited in Smart 3 (1984), p. 8. The social
meanings in the physical sense of masculinity are explored in Willis
(1979); Connell (1983) and Corrigan (1984). On sport and capitalism see
Brohm (1978). Data on trachoma from House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Aboriginal Affairs (1979); on alcoholism from Department of
Health (1984). Marie Stopes’s political struggles are surveyed by her
biographer Hall (1978); and Australian pro-natalism by Pringle (1973)
and Hicks (1978).

Part II

The Structure of Gender Relations

5

Main Structures: Labour, Power, Cathexis

The argument so far has traced the domain of the social theory of gender
and its gradual emergence in Western social thought. I have argued that
this theory is autonomous: it cannot derive its logic from a source
outside itself, whether natural difference, biological reproduction, the
functional needs of society or the imperatives of social reproduction.
An adequate theory of gender requires a theory of social structure much
stronger than the implicit voluntarism of role theory. But it also needs
a concept of structure that can recognize the complexities bulldozed by
categoricalism, and give some grip on the historical dynamic of gender.

Chapter 3 proposed that such a theory has already begun to emerge.
Chapter 4 showed how it might deal with the lion in the path of social
theories of gender, the question of natural difference. The next three
chapters attempt to show what the heartland of such a theory, the
account of gender as a social structure, might look like.

There is no need to search for new a priori bases. The starting-points
are at hand in the intuitive notions of social structure found in role
theory and categoricalism. To develop them in a way that meets the
criteria just stated requires three steps. First, it is necessary to
modify the underlying concept of ‘structure’ in the light of recent
developments in the theory of practice. Second, the concept of a single
structure of gender relations must be broken down into component
structures or substructures. Third, it is necessary to distinguish
between the kind of structural analysis that produces concepts like the
‘sexual division of labour’ (which I will call structural models) and
the kind that produces concepts like the ‘gender order’ (which I will
call structural inventories).

The rest of this chapter explains these steps and sketches a three-part
structural model of gender relations. Chapter 6 discusses structural
inventories at two levels: the gender order of the whole society and the
gender regimes of particular institutions. Chapter 7 explores the
historical dynamic of gender relations and the crisis tendencies of the
contemporary gender order.

Structure and Structural Analysis

The concept of ‘social structure’, though fundamental to the social
sciences, is ambiguous. Its usages range from the tight and
sophisticated models of Piaget, Lévi-Strauss and Althusser to the much
more numerous cases where anything that shows a detectable pattern at
all is called a ‘structure’. Most writing about gender is well towards
the latter end of the spectrum. Authors commonly get by with a rough
idea that there is some large-scale order in gender relations, but
little clarity beyond that.

To short-circuit what could be a very long discussion about definitions,
I will assume that the concept of structure is more than another term
for ‘pattern’ and refers to the intractability of the social world. It
reflects the experience of being up against something, of limits on
freedom; and also the experience of being able to operate by proxy, to
produce results one’s own capacities would not allow. The concept of
social structure expresses the constraints that lie in a given form of
social organization (rather than, say, physical facts about the world).
‘Constraints’ may be as crude as the presence of an occupying army. But
in most cases the constraints on social practice operate through a more
complex interplay of powers and through an array of social institutions.
Accordingly, attempts to decode a social structure generally begin by
analyzing institutions.

The most sophisticated accounts of gender relations as a social
structure, those offered by Juliet Mitchell and Gayle Rubin, focus on
the institution of kinship as the cross-cultural basis of sex
inequality. Their account of the structure underlying kinship is derived
from Claude Lévi-Strauss’s classic The Elementary Structures of Kinship,
which boiled down the enormous variety collected by ethnographers and
historians into variants of a universal basic system of exchange.
Lévi-Strauss described this as the exchange of women among groups of men
and took it to be what constituted society itself. To Mitchell and Rubin
this exchange founded the subjection of women.

The notion of ‘structure’ as a fundamental relationship that is not
immediately present in social life but underlies the surface complexity
of interactions and institutions, is shared by all varieties of
structuralism in the social sciences. It is a major advance over simple
descriptive notions of structure. But it has considerable problems, in
forms like Lévi-Strauss’s theory of kinship. The central difficulty that
has emerged from two decades of criticism is that structuralism is based
on a logic that is incompatible with the concept of practice as the
substance of social process, and hence with a thoroughgoing historicity
in social analysis. (For this concept see chapter 7 below.) Without
historicity, a politics of transformation becomes irrational.

Mitchell tries to reintroduce practice and history and thus save the
rationality of feminist politics. She does this by arguing that the
underlying structure (the exchange of women), and the patriarchal social
order it gives rise to, have been cultural universals up to the era of
capitalism but no longer need be. Mitchell’s argument was important in
the mid-1970s in providing a theoretical rationale for an autonomous
women’s movement. But it also implies that struggle against patriarchy
was irrational in all previous periods of history. This seems arbitrary,
to put it mildly. To avoid drawing such a line across history, we need
to overcome structuralism’s sharp separation between underlying
structure and surface practice.

An illustration of how a more active connection can be made is found in
another classic on kinship. Michael Young and Peter Willmott’s Family
and Kinship in East London describes the matrifocal kinship structure of
the working-class community of Bethnal Green, with Mum as the core
figure and mother–daughter relations as the axis of the family. This
structure is shown in its process of constitution, constantly being made
and remade in a very active social practice. Daughters and mothers pop
in and out of each others’ houses up to twelve times a day; they
exchange services like care in sickness, and negotiate about other
family relationships – including the daughter’s marriage. The notion of
‘structure’ here is not abstracted from practice, though it is also not
given in experience. The Bethnal Greeners have no concept of
‘matrifocality’. Being present in everyday practice, structure is
vulnerable to major changes of practice. This is shown in Young and
Willmott’s famous description of the migration to an outer-suburban
housing estate, which produced an unwanted and unintended nuclear family
pattern. As one of the migrants remarked, ‘It’s like being in a box to
die out here’.

The idea of an active presence of structure in practice, and an active
constitution of structure by practice, has now been formalized
theoretically. It is particularly clear in the ‘dualist’ accounts of
structure developed by Pierre Bourdieu and Anthony Giddens. Bourdieu’s
Outline of a Theory of Practice ties structure and practice together
mainly by an ironic emphasis on the unintended consequences of the
strategies social actors pursue. The pursuit of individual or family
strategies results in the reproduction of the social order from which
those strategies took off. Bourdieu’s approach has the great merit of
recognizing the inventiveness and energy with which people pursue their
lives – an unusual feat in theoretical sociology. But his image of
social structure depends so heavily on the idea of social ‘reproduction’
that it is difficult to reconcile with any idea of a historical dynamic,
except something that happens behind the backs of the actors. History
does happen in Bourdieu’s world, but it is not produced.

Giddens’s ‘theory of structuration’ locks structure and practice even
more tightly together. Human practice always presupposes social
structure, in the sense that practice necessarily calls into play social
rules or resources. Structure is always emergent from practice and is
constituted by it. Neither is conceivable without the other.

The balance formulated by Giddens as the ‘duality of structure’ is, of
all current frameworks for social theory, the closest to the
requirements of a theory of gender. Yet it leaves two outstanding
problems. By making the link of structure and practice a logical matter,
a requirement of social analysis in general, Giddens closes off the
possibility that its form might change in history. This is the
possibility raised implicitly by Mitchell and explicitly by the
practical politics of liberation movements; its significance for the
analysis of gender is evident. And in attempting to convey the impact of
a structure as a whole, Giddens moves sharply back towards classical
structuralism. His paradigmatic example here is the structure of
language, and this is deeply misleading for structures like gender or
class. Stressing the ‘virtuality’ of structure, an argument that sees
the context of an event as the alternatives allowed by given structural
principles, rather than seeing its context as being its history, Giddens
is back with the logic of reversible transformations that characterizes
structuralism.

Dualist models, then, need an opening towards history. The crucial point
is that practice, while presupposing structure in much the sense
Bourdieu and Giddens explain, is always responding to a situation.
Practice is the transformation of that situation in a particular
direction. To describe structure is to specify what it is in the
situation that constrains the play of practice. Since the consequence of
practice is a transformed situation which is the object of new practice,
‘structure’ specifies the way practice (over time) constrains practice.

Since human action involves free invention (if ‘invention within
limits’, to use Bourdieu’s phrase) and human knowledge is reflexive,
practice can be turned against what constrains it; so structure can be
deliberately the object of practice. But practice cannot escape
structure, cannot float free from its circumstances (any more than
social actors are simply ‘bearers’ of the structure). It is always
obliged to reckon with the constraints that are the precipitate of
history. For example, Victorian women rejecting marriage were not free
to adopt any other sexual life they pleased. Often the only practicable
alternative was chastity.

Most treatments of the social relations of gender make no subdivision of
structure. Texts like Michèle Barrett’s Women’s Oppression Today
certainly distinguish topics such as ideology, education, production and
the state. But the strong tendency in feminist thought has been to see
all such fields as manifestations of a single structure, the
subordination of women and superordination of men. Sex role theory, for
once, is in agreement.

That there might be some problem here is suggested by the remarkable
proliferation of ‘ultimate causes’ proposed for that single structure.
Evolutionary imperatives, hormonal aggression advantage, the physical
strength of men, the demands of childbearing, the universality of the
family, the functional imperatives of capitalism, the sexual division of
labour in childcare, and others, jostle each other as explanations.
Since none can be decisively established, the rival root causes cancel
each other out. So in the feminist theorizing of the later 1970s and the
1980s there is a tendency for subordination/superordination to float
free as pure phenomenon with no roots at all.

But this impasse could also suggest that the treatment of structure is
too simplified. A fundamentally different approach was proposed by
Juliet Mitchell in her first book, Woman’s Estate; indeed it was
outlined in her famous article ‘Women: The Longest Revolution’ as early
as 1966. Following the method though not the letter of Althusser’s
revision of Marxism, Mitchell divided gender relations into four
‘structures’: production, reproduction, socialization and sexuality.
Each of them, she argued, generates its own form of the oppression of
women. Each has its own historical trajectory, and at different times
may be changing at a faster or slower pace than the others. Though
Mitchell does not emphasize the point, it is implicit in her argument
that the patterns of relationship in the different structures may come
into conflict with each other. That is, the structure of gender
relations may be internally contradictory.

I would argue that the concepts of internal differentiation, historical
unevenness and internal contradiction are essential for understanding
the structure of gender relations. This aspect of Mitchell’s thought has
been remarkably neglected by later theorists, though the fourfold model
has been used to good effect in social history by Kerreen Reiger and
Michael Gilding.

One reason why the model has not been taken up in theory is that
Mitchell’s version of it was inconsistent. Production, reproduction,
etc. are not, strictly speaking, structures at all. They are types of
practice, and they overlap each other. Sexuality is implicated in
reproduction, clearly enough. Socialization – if we accept feminist
analyses of childcare as work – is a form of production. Certainly there
are structures to be discovered in these practices, but there is nothing
in Mitchell’s argument to imply that the structures active in these
domains of practice are separate ones. So Mitchell has pointed towards a
new form of structural analysis, but has not produced it.

The detailed research on women’s subordination since Woman’s Estate has
nevertheless fulfilled its promise. Studies over the past decade have
traced the outline of two substantially different structures of
relationship between women and men. One has to do with the division of
labour: the organization of housework and childcare, the division
between unpaid and paid work, the segregation of labour markets and
creation of ‘men’s jobs’ and ‘women’s jobs’, discrimination in training
and promotion, unequal wages and unequal exchange. The second has to do
with authority, control and coercion: the hierarchies of the state and
business, institutional and interpersonal violence, sexual regulation
and surveillance, domestic authority and its contestation.

To say these structures are substantially different is not to imply they
are generally separate. Indeed they interweave all the time. It is to
point to some basic differences in the ordering of the social relations
involved. As a first approximation one might say that the major
organizational principle of the former is separation or division, and of
the latter, unequal integration. The accumulation of wealth through the
production of goods and services follows a different historical
trajectory from the institutionalization of power, and has different
effects in the shaping of femininity and masculinity.

Many of the institutional and psychological issues about gender can be
understood in terms of the structures of labour and power, but not all.
The ways people create emotional links between each other, and the daily
conduct of emotional relationships, seem to follow a different, though
undoubtedly social, logic. The issues raised by gay liberation, by
psychoanalysis and by feminist arguments on sexuality, are not accounted
for by labour and power alone. In short, there seems to be a third major
structure. It has to do with the patterning of object-choice, desire and
desirability; with the production of heterosexuality and homosexuality
and the relationship between them; with the socially structured
antagonisms of gender (woman-hating, man-hating, self-hatred); with
trust and distrust, jealousy and solidarity in marriages and other
relationships; and with the emotional relationships involved in rearing
children.

The argument of this chapter now proceeds on the assumption that these
three structures are empirically the major structures of the field of
gender relations. That is to say they (a) are discoverable in current
gender research and sexual politics, and (b) account for most of the
structural dynamics currently understood. The argument does not assume
that they are the only discoverable structures, that they exhaust the
field. Nor does it claim that they are necessary structures (a claim
which in any case might land us back with the metaphysics of ultimate
causes). The argument rests on the gentler, more pragmatic but perhaps
more demonstrable claim that with a framework like this we can come to a
serviceable understanding of current history.

The general conception of social structure as the pattern of constraint
on practice inherent in a set of social relations can be made specific
in a number of different ways. The structures just outlined – the
division of labour, the structure of power and the structure of cathexis
– are examples of what I will call ‘structural models’. They operate at
a particular level of logical complexity and implicitly make comparisons
across historical situations at this level. They lead to questions like
what changed in the sexual division of labour as a result of capitalist
industrialization; or whether there is a difference in sexual power
structure between communist and non-communist states.

In the long debate about structuralism, structural modelling became the
be-all and end-all of structural analysis. There was an understandable
intoxication with structural models based on virtual transformation,
such as Lévi-Strauss’s theories of kinship and myth, Piaget’s theory of
intelligence, Chomsky’s theory of syntax. They are intellectually
powerful, and they gave order and precision to social science at a time
when it was dominated by a mixture of functionalism and muddy
empiricism. Yet they drew attention away from other possibilities for
structural analysis; and especially from the connection with history.

These possibilities have been indicated, in a rather programmatic way,
by Lucien Goldmann. His theory of ‘genetic structuralism’ never got
beyond a methodological sketch, though he gave classic practical
demonstrations of the structural analysis of culture. Goldmann showed
that it is possible to study the transformations of a complex structure
over real time as opposed to the ‘virtual’ time of structuralism – an
approach adopted in the rest of this chapter. His method in The Hidden
God also indicates the importance of a second kind of structural
analysis, the compiling of what might be called an inventory of the
structural features of a given situation.

Where structural models push towards comparisons across situations at a
given logical level, structural inventories push towards a more complete
exploration of a given situation, addressing all its levels and
dimensions. There is nothing arcane about this. Any historian reviewing
the background to a particular event, any politician scrutinizing the
current state of play or balance of forces, is compiling a structural
inventory. Any attempt to grasp the current moment in sexual politics,
to define where we have got to, any attempt to characterize the gender
relations of another culture or another time, likewise involves a
structural inventory.

Two useful concepts have been developed for this procedure. Jill
Matthews speaks of the ‘gender order’, a historically constructed
pattern of power relations between men and women and definitions of
femininity and masculinity. Following Matthews I will use this term for
the structural inventory of an entire society. The concept of the
‘gender regime’ developed in our educational research to describe the
state of play in sexual politics within a school involves the same kind
of logic on a smaller stage. I will use this term for the structural
inventory of a particular institution.

Recognizing the procedure of structural inventory does not introduce a
separate set of issues or topics. The division of labour, the structure
of power, the structure of cathexis are the major elements of any gender
order or gender regime. Structural models and structural inventories are
in principle complementary ways of looking at the same facts. In
practice they are constantly done together, with shifting emphases. This
chapter and the next discuss them separately to emphasize the logic of
analysis, but the separation is far from absolute.

Labour

The sexual division of labour at its simplest is an allocation of
particular types of work to particular categories of people. It is a
social structure to the extent that this allocation becomes a constraint
on further practice. This happens in several interrelated ways. First,
the prior division of work among people becomes a social rule allocating
people to work. An employee entering a firm is given job X if a woman,
job Y if a man. The working of such rules is found in almost every study
of paid employment that has considered the issue of gender, and this is
no primitive hangover found only in low-technology industries. The
superb ethnography of a British motor vehicle component assembly plant
by Ruth Cavendish, Women on the Line, shows an almost absolute
separation between jobs allocated to women and to men. ‘It was obvious’,
the author remarks, ‘that the only qualification you needed for a better
job was to be a man’. Motor vehicles are not the cutting edge of
technology any more, but computers certainly are. Game and Pringle in
Gender at Work show that the growth of computing has resulted in job
markets as segregated as any in the work-force. Women are hired as data
entry key-punchers; men predominate as operators, salesmen, systems
analysts and managers.

A segregation rule in operation becomes the basis of new forms of
constraint on practice, such as differential skilling. Where women and
men have been skilled or trained differentially, discriminatory
employment becomes rational from the employer’s point of view. As Carol
O’Donnell shows in The Basis of the Bargain; differential skilling and
training by sex is a very general feature of the interface between the
education system and labour markets. Through such mechanisms the sexual
division of labour is transformed into an apparently technical division
of labour, resistant to the more obvious antidiscrimination strategies.
Where men are usually better prepared or trained than women for a given
job, choosing ‘the best applicant’ will normally mean choosing a man.
The almost complete dominance of the upper echelons of universities by
men is a striking example of this indirect discrimination.

Skilling and training is one of the mechanisms by which the sexual
division of labour is made a powerful system of social constraint. Just
how powerful is revealed when a conscious attempt is made to change it.
The experience of antidiscrimination and affirmative action programs is
relevant here, and the slow progress they have made is familiar. Less
well known, but equally important, is the evidence that has begun to
accumulate about attempts to alter the sexual division of labour in
unpaid work, notably housework and childcare. This has become, as Lynne
Segal notes, an important focus of the personal politics that grew out
of the New Left in the 1970s in Britain. Paul Amato, reflecting on two
years experience house-husbanding in Melbourne, notes that the reversal
was never accepted by most men he dealt with, who felt that men should
work (i.e., housework was not work) and men should not be economically
dependent on women. One solution to the dilemma was to regard him as
successfully exploiting his wife. Clearly the conventional sexual
division of labour has strong cultural supports. A recent survey in
southern England by R. E. Pahl shows no tendency for unemployed men to
take on more housework; and the Australian study of domestic ‘role
reversal’ by Graeme Russell shows shared childcare arrangements between
husband and wife to be highly unstable.

Nevertheless the fact that there are some attempts to reverse it,
together with the creation of a new sexual division of labour in
industries like computing, indicate that the structure is not only a
constraint but also an object of practice. The research that documents
division in workplaces also documents the activity, the social labour,
that sustains it. In Ruth Cavendish’s factory, management was in the
hands of men, so was the union, and it is no accident that both
hierarchies resisted the attempt of women workers (eventually by a
wildcat strike) to alter their situation. Another British workplace
study, by David Collinson and David Knights, vividly shows the methods
that sustain the sexual division of labour in a white-collar workplace,
in this case an insurance firm. Women who look for promotion above
routine clerical work are talked out of it by men in management,
appealing to anxieties that the men themselves have done much to create.
What amounts to a complete miniature ideology of women’s psychological
unsuitability for insurance work is sustained; and the real prejudice of
managers against women is rationalized by appeal to the presumed
prejudices of customers.

The gender regimes of these two workplaces are, however, significantly
different, and it is possible that the mechanisms by which the sexual
division of labour is sustained are quite specific. Michael Korda’s Male
Chauvinism, an early American account of sexual politics in the
workplace, presents the oppression of women mainly as a consequence of
individual discrimination by bosses. This cannot be true for a situation
of collective exploitation like Cavendish’s factory. But in the New York
corporate office world from which Korda writes, where hiring and firing,
salary determination and promotion are all highly individualized, the
exclusion of women perhaps does mainly operate through the individual
sexism of corporate executives.

Beyond the individual workplace there is a wider social process that
constitutes the sexual division of labour in terms of whole categories
of workers. Margaret Power speaks of ‘the making of a women’s
occupation’ as a historical process in which new categories of work and
workers are formed. It is by no means a matter of an existing division
being mechanically reproduced. We now have case studies of individual
occupations that document this. One of the best is Eve Gamarnikow’s
study which shows how the modern occupation of trained nurse was
constructed by entrepreneurs such as Florence Nightingale. Its basis was
a trade-off that accepted the control of medical practice by men (i.e.,
doctors) in order to open a semi-professional career path to
middle-class women.

As this case shows, the construction of the sexual division of labour is
not just a matter of the allocation of work to people. It also involves
the design of the work. The argument about ‘appropriate technology’ –
machinery or techniques that are less environmentally destructive, or
cheaper, or particularly suited to Third World needs – has made it
obvious that there is never just one technique for doing a job. There
are even alternative ways of building a nuclear bomb. A socio-technical
system, such as industrial manufacturing or domestic work, can be set up
in various ways. The particular designs and practices current at a given
time therefore represent a social choice of some kind. The current
labour practice gets embodied in technology designed with given social
arrangements in mind – among them the sexual division of labour. For
instance the waterframes in the cotton mills of north-western England
and southern Scotland in the early Industrial Revolution were designed
to be operated by women and children. As T. C. Smout notes, women and
children were preferred as workers for the new factories because they
were presumed more docile in the face of unprecedented demands for
labour discipline. The factory owners faced the interesting problem of
what to do with the husbands in order to attract their preferred labour
force.

A more complex example is the technology of housework. Machines like
vacuum cleaners or washing machines are equally suited to be operated by
women or by men. The models widely sold are however designed to be used
by just one household and presuppose one permanent domestic worker per
household. This arrangement happens to be provided by the conventional
sexual division of labour and not by any other likely or practicable
arrangement. Accordingly they are always advertised with pictures of
smiling women operating them, not smiling men. It is quite possible to
design equipment for doing the same work under other social
arrangements. For instance the communal laundries operated by British
local government provided a practical alternative way of mechanizing
laundry in the 1930s and 1940s. They were squeezed out by post-war
privatization. The consumer-goods boom of the 1950s was, among other
things, a reconstitution of the domestic sexual division of labour by
new means.

These considerations imply that the idea of a ‘division of labour’ is
itself too narrow. We are dealing not just with the allocation of work,
but with the nature and organization of that work. It is impossible to
separate either fact from the distribution of the products of work –
that is, the distribution of services and income. Coming back to
Cavendish’s factory, the fierce insistence on the sexual division of
labour by the men makes more sense when we learn that the men’s jobs
were much better paid. Some of the men in the plant were paid twice what
the women got, for doing easier jobs. The women got ‘married women’s
wages’ whether married or not. This is far from being an isolated case.
As shown in chapter 1 for a country which has theoretically had ‘equal
pay’ for men and women for fifteen years, the actual average income of
women in Australia is still less than half the average income of men.

So the ‘sexual division of labour’ can no longer be seen as a structure
in its own right. It must be seen as part of a larger pattern, a
gender-structured system of production, consumption and distribution.

To think of a gender structuring of production, not just a sexual
division, allows a clearer recognition of differentiations within the
work-force that have to do with sexual politics but which operate within
the broad categories of sex. Some have to do with the marketing of sex
itself, in prostitution or the entertainment industry. But the issue is
much broader. Cases include the making of jobs like receptionist, air
hostess and secretary as a combination of particular technical skills
with a particular femininity. Particular industries, notably clothing
and theatre, are associated with homosexual masculinity. On the other
hand business management is integrated with forms of masculinity
organized around interpersonal dominance: ‘tough’ stances towards labour
are admired in business, and phrases like ‘aggressive marketing’ are
terms of approval in management jargon.

This extension of the concept, however, runs up against the concept of
the ‘mode of production’, or its near equivalent the ‘social division of
labour’, in Marxist theory. There is a good deal of literature
attempting to link the position of women to these concepts; as noted in
chapter 3, this has been the most important extrinsic theory of gender.
The barrenness of this theoretical enterprise is largely because the
theorizing has not been bold enough. Almost all this literature has
accepted the traditional definition of the ‘capitalist mode of
production’ in Marxism as a production system fundamentally defined by
class relations. Even the attempt to define a ‘domestic mode of
production’ located in the household has left the class analysis of
capitalism undisturbed.

It must now be accepted that gender divisions are not an ideological
addendum to a class-structured mode of production. They are a
deep-seated feature of production itself. They are not confined to
domestic work, or even to the division between unpaid domestic work and
paid work in industry. They are a central feature of industrial
organization too. They are not a hangover from pre-capitalist modes of
production. As the cases of computing and world-market factories show,
they are being vigorously created in the most advanced sectors of the
capitalist world economy.

A series of arguments lead firmly to the conclusion proposed by Game and
Pringle. Gender divisions are a fundamental and essential feature of the
capitalist system; arguably as fundamental as class divisions. Socialist
theory cannot any longer evade the fact that capitalism is run by, and
mainly to the advantage of, men.

This is one of the grounds for a wider rethinking of the socialist
analysis of capitalism. For the feminist argument has an interesting
parallel with the view from Third World radical movements, which have
seen capitalism mainly as a system of global inequality and imperialism.
Together they suggest a new view of capitalism, as a system for the
concentration and regulation of profits extracted by a number of
qualitatively different mechanisms of exploitation, rather than the
basically homogeneous structure implied by the concept of a ‘mode of
production’. If that is broadly correct, we no longer need the kind of
sideways skip performed by Eli Zaretsky in Capitalism, the Family and
Personal Life, proposing that capitalism took over the existing
patriarchal organization of gender or domestic life and used it for its
own reproduction. The connection is more direct. Capitalism was partly
constituted out of the opportunities for power and profit created by
gender relations. It continues to be.

Given this understanding of gender relations in production and
consumption, what are their main principles of organization? What kind
of ‘system’ are we dealing with? At this point my argument becomes more
speculative and uncertain. I offer the following as an organizing
hypothesis rather than a firm conclusion. It is, nevertheless, based on
the research on domestic and industrial labour already referred to, as
well as some practical experiences of reform. Five points in particular
seem important:

1 the sheer scale and insistence of demarcations between women’s and
men’s work, despite their technical irrationality and the impossibility
of making them complete;

2 the connection of many demarcations with issues of profitability or
labour control, or both, in the workplace;

3 the way they function to exclude virtually all women from
opportunities for the accumulation of wealth on a scale usable as
capital, or from career paths that would lead to the control of
significant capitals;

4 the importance of practices promoting the solidarity of men – often
across class lines – in maintaining these demarcations;

5 the consistency with which divisions of labour and differences of
income operate to allocate childcare to women, especially younger women.

Much of this can be understood in terms of two major principles. One
might be called the gendered logic of accumulation. The overall gender
organization of labour concentrates economic benefits in one direction,
economic losses in another, and on a scale sufficient to produce a
dynamic of accumulation in its own right. Christine Delphy identified
such a mechanism in her study of French marriages, but by confining the
issue to the household and the one-to-one marriage relation, missed the
larger possibilities of accumulation in industry. The benefits and costs
are not distributed in an all-or-nothing manner between the sexes as
blocks. The printing tradesmen studied by Cynthia Cockburn are minor
beneficiaries; the media capitalists who employ them are major
beneficiaries. Not all women are major losers, a fact of strategic
importance to feminism. Overall the benefits, opportunities and costs
are large enough to be worth fighting for, and motivate the active
practice of demarcation and exclusion by many groups of men.

There are two internal limits to the pace and scale of gender-based
accumulation. One is the fact that the division of labour, while marked,
is far from absolute. Very few women are sailors and very few men are
secretaries, but quite a lot of both are clerks, shopkeepers, sales
personnel, programmers and teachers. Much of the labour in peasant
agriculture is shared. The second is the fact that marriage is a
one-to-one relationship. There is limited scope to extract material
advantages from the labour of just one other person. So the scale of
economic inequalities resulting from labour organized through marriage
is severely limited, when compared with the economic inequalities that
can be produced by accumulation in industry. In this respect the nuclear
family form must be seen as an important restraint on sex inequality.
The current commercialization of domestic work, for instance in the
growth of ‘fast food’ outlets, is likely to increase the economic
inequalities of gender.

The second principle might be called, perhaps less happily, the
political economy of masculinity. A number of important practices have
to do with the definition of masculinity and its mobilization as an
economic resource. Ann Curthoys has argued that childcare is the basis
of the sexual division of labour and that the childcare issue is the
structural basis of feminism. This overstates the case, but the general
importance of the issue is undeniable. Curthoys acutely observes that
childcare is not just an issue for women but an issue about men: ‘the
notion that caring for young children is not a fit occupation for men is
extraordinarily deepseated’. Since men have more control over the
division of labour than women, their collective choice not to do
childcare, as Margaret Polatnick has argued, reflects the dominant
definition of men’s interests, and in fact helps them keep predominant
power. The ability of management, in many industrial conflicts, to
mobilize men workers and their unions in tacit alliances against women
workers confirms the strength of these definitions of interest. How
particular definitions of masculinity are interrelated will be discussed
later. Here I will simply note that a hegemonic pattern of masculinity,
in organizing the solidarity of men, becomes an economic as well as a
cultural force.

This force does not operate without resistance. The sexual division of
labour itself creates bases for solidarity among women. In industrial
employment the widespread exclusion of women from career grades has the
effect of giving them shared work experiences and little structural
reason to be in competition with each other. The routines of commuting
make women the daytime majority in dormitory suburbs; and studies of new
suburbs by sociologists such as Lyn Richards emphasize how important,
how carefully sought and monitored, are their relationships with each
other. Beatrix Campbell, discussing the current recession in Britain,
notes how the division of labour in childcare means that young single
mothers on state welfare benefits enter a community of women that links
very different age-groups. While none of these are blanket effects, they
do indicate a potential for self-definition or resistance.

Power

Particular transactions involving power are easy enough to observe. Mr
Barrett the Victorian patriarch forbids his daughter to marry;
parliament makes homosexual intercourse a crime; a bank manager refuses
a loan to an unmarried woman; a group of youths rape a girl of their
acquaintance. It is often difficult to see beyond individual acts of
force or oppression to a structure of power, a set of social relations
with some scope and permanence. Yet actions like the ones just listed
are not intelligible without the structure. Rape, for instance,
routinely presented in the media as individual deviance, is a form of
person-to-person violence deeply embedded in power inequalities and
ideologies of male supremacy. Far from being a deviation from the social
order, it is in a significant sense an enforcement of it.

This connection of violence with ideology points to the multiple
character of social power. Force is one important component. It is no
accident that the means of organized violence – weapons and knowledge of
military technique – are almost entirely in the hands of men, as shown
in chapter 1. Yet ‘naked force’ is rare. Much more often violence
appears as part of a complex that also involves institutions and the
ways they are organized. Power may be a balance of advantage or an
inequality of resources in a workplace, a household, or a larger
institution. By and large the people who run the corporations, the
government departments and the universities are men, who so arrange
things that it is extremely difficult for women to get access to top
positions. Organizational control is no more naked than force usually
is. Both secrete, and depend on, ideologies. The ability to impose a
definition of the situation, to set the terms in which events are
understood and issues discussed, to formulate ideals and define
morality, in short to assert hegemony, is also an essential part of
social power. Much of the critical work of feminism and gay liberation
has necessarily been devoted to contesting cultural power: for instance
cultural definitions of women as weak, or of homosexuals as mentally
ill.

That relations of power function as a social structure, as a pattern of
constraint on social practice, is in one sense all too obvious. The
constraint on practice extends to the elemental question of staying
alive. Helen Ware, in Women, Demography and Development, notes that in
rich countries, where basic nutrition is not a problem, women live
longer than men; in the poorest countries women die earlier than men.
Here, it appears, discrimination against women in forms like less food
and less medical attention is operating at a level where life is at
stake. Differential infant mortality, including infanticide of girls, is
another case in point.

It is less obvious, but also important, that the practice of those who
hold power is constrained as well. Men are empowered in gender
relations, but in specific ways which produce their own limits. For
instance, in a patriarchal gender order emphasizing monogamous marriage
there is serious tension between men about issues of adultery; a
structure that defines women as a kind of property makes men liable to
reprisals for theft. Sustaining hegemonic definitions of masculinity is
often an issue of importance, and homosexual men attract hostility
partly because they undermine these definitions.

As with labour, the structure of power is an object of practice as well
as a condition. Many accounts of patriarchy give the impression of a
simple, orderly structure like a suburban war memorial. Behind the
facade is likely to be a mass of disorder and anomaly. Imposing order
requires a mobilization of resources and expenditure of energy. What
Donzelot calls the ‘policing of families’ is just a part of this.
Research on the welfare state, such as Sheila Shaver’s study of
Australian taxation and benefit payments, shows an apparatus of social
policy that assumes women’s dependence on men and reinforces it.

Imposing order in and through culture is a large part of this effort.
One notes, for instance, the enthusiasm with which the Catholic
hierarchy – all men – emphasize an ideal of purity, meekness and
obedience for women. Its effectiveness has just been demonstrated in
Ireland where the Church has succeeded in defeating a referendum to
permit divorce. Elsewhere in the capitalist world priests are becoming
less important as ideologists of gender, journalists more so. Though
‘quality’ newspapers like The Guardian in Britain are liberal in sexual
politics, most mass-circulation journalism is unrelievedly sexist and
homophobic. The people doing this cultural and material ‘policing’ are
not necessarily the main beneficiaries as individuals. They are, rather,
participants in a collective project in which the power of men and
subordination of women is sustained.

If authority is defined as legitimate power, then we can say that the
main axis of the power structure of gender is the general connection of
authority with masculinity. But this is immediately complicated, and
partly contradicted, by a second axis: the denial of authority to some
groups of men, or more generally the construction of hierarchies of
authority and centrality within the major gender categories.

The authority of men is not spread in an even blanket across every
department of social life. In some circumstances women have authority;
in some others the power of men is diffuse, confused or contested.
Research by American feminists such as Carroll Smith-Rosenberg has
traced the history of institutions and practices which have been
controlled by women, among them girls’ education, friendship networks,
and non-market production. This insight can also be inverted. We can
identify a complex of institutions and milieux where the power of men
and the authority of masculinity are relatively concentrated. There is a
‘core’ in the power structure of gender, contrasted with the more
diffuse or contested patterns of power in the periphery.

In the advanced capitalist countries, four components of this core are
reasonably clear: (a) the hierarchies and work-forces of
institutionalized violence – military and paramilitary forces, police,
prison systems; (b) the hierarchy and labour force of heavy industry
(for example, steel and oil companies) and the hierarchy of
high-technology industry (computers, aerospace); (c) the planning and
control machinery of the central state; and (d) working-class milieux
that emphasize physical toughness and men’s association with machinery.

The connections between (a), (b) and (c) are familiar. President
Eisenhower, not a noted feminist, warned of the power of the
‘military-industrial complex’ in the United States. There is a close
analogue in the Soviet Union. In both countries, as Joel Moses observes
of the latter, there is an ‘almost complete exclusion of women from the
major policy-making centres’. These parts of the complex are tied
together by an ideology linking masculinity, authority and technological
violence, which has slowly become a focus of research. But it is their
connection with (d) that is crucial in sexual politics as a whole. This
connection gives a mass base to militarist beliefs and practices that
might otherwise be so repellent as to destabilize the governments that
rest on them. Perhaps the most striking feature of this connection is
the extent to which it is mediated by machinery, especially motor
vehicles. The gradual displacement of other transport systems by this
uniquely violent and environmentally destructive technology is both a
means and a measure of the tacit alliance between the state and
corporate elite and working-class hegemonic masculinity.

It was often pointed out by ‘men’s movement’ writers in the 1970s that
most men do not really fit the image of tough, dominant and combative
masculinity that the ideologists of patriarchy sell. That image is not
intended to fit. The celluloid heroism of a John Wayne or Sylvester
Stallone is heroic only by contrast with the mass of men who are not.
The ‘justifying’ ideology for the patriarchal core complex and the
overall subordination of women requires the creation of a gender-based
hierarchy among men. (I stress ‘gender-based’ because discussions of
power relations between men have commonly stopped after identifying
divisions of class and race.) As gay liberation points out, an essential
part of this process has been the creation of a negative symbol of
masculinity in the form of stigmatized outgroups, especially homosexual
men. In general, then, a hierarchy is created with at least three
elements: hegemonic masculinity, conservative masculinities (complicit
in the collective project but not its shock troops) and subordinated
masculinities.

Feminist thought around 1970 commonly identified the family as the
strategic site, the key to the oppression of women. If anything the
pendulum has now swung too far the other way. It has become clear that
household and kinship relations are not a test-tube case of pure
patriarchy. The family as an institution might best be regarded now as
part of the periphery rather than the core complex. Colin Bell and
Howard Newby remark that the authority of husbands requires a good deal
of bargaining and negotiation for it to be maintained in working order.
The importance of bargaining and the tensions around marital authority
are confirmed by a considerable body of close-up research on families,
from Mirra Komarovsky’s classic Blue-Collar Marriage to more recent
studies like Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain in the United States,
Pauline Hunt’s Gender and Class Consciousness in Britain, Claire
Williams’s Open Cut and Jan Harper and Lyn Richards’s Mothers and
Working Mothers in Australia. These studies also suggest a recent
historical shift, with husbands now finding it more difficult to impose
an openly patriarchal regime in the home.

The contestation of domestic patriarchy is so widespread in some
settings that it makes sense to talk of a working-class feminism, rooted
in these struggles as much as in paid employment. Marital power
struggles are often won by the wives. The research that produced the
case study of the Princes in chapter 1 also showed a number of families
where the father’s control was eroded or simply non-existent. Komarovsky
noted this in the 1950s too. I think it is important to acknowledge that
there are genuine reversals of power here. It is not a question of women
being conceded an apparent power which can then be revoked, but of the
hard relational outcomes of domestic conflicts and negotiations over
years or even decades.

It is also important to acknowledge that these local victories do not
overthrow patriarchy. Komarovsky observed among her American
working-class couples that where the wife was the controlling member of
the marriage, this could not be acknowledged publicly; a facade of men’s
authority was maintained. The general implication is that we must
distinguish the global or macro-relationship of power, in which women
are subordinated to men in the society as a whole, from the local or
micro-situation in particular households, particular workplaces,
particular settings. It is possible for the local pattern to depart from
the global pattern, even to contradict it. Such departures may provoke
‘policing’, i.e., attempts to establish the global pattern locally as a
norm. They may also signify structural tension that leads to large-scale
change in the longer run.

Cathexis

To recognize a social structure in sexuality it is necessary first to
see sexuality as social. The following analysis therefore presupposes
the argument, made in Gagnon and Simon’s Sexual Conduct, Foucault’s
History of Sexuality and Weeks’s Sexuality and its Discontents, that
sexuality is socially constructed. Its bodily dimension does not exist
before, or outside, the social practices in which relationships between
people are formed and carried on. Sexuality is enacted or conducted, it
is not ‘expressed’.

There is an emotional dimension, and perhaps an erotic dimension, to all
social relationships. However the focus here will be on what are called
‘sexual social relationships’ by the Red Collective in The Politics of
Sexuality in Capitalism; relationships organized around one person’s
emotional attachment to another. The structure that organizes these
attachments I will call the ‘structure of cathexis’.

Freud used the term ‘cathexis’ to refer to a psychic charge or
instinctual energy being attached to a mental object, i.e., an idea or
image. Here I am generalizing it to the construction of emotionally
charged social relations with ‘objects’ (i.e., other people) in the real
world. As with Freud’s usage, it is important to note that the emotional
attachment may be hostile, not only affectionate. It may also be hostile
and affectionate at the same time, i.e., ambivalent. Most close
relationships have this degree of complexity.

Of course sexual practices are governed by other structures as well.
Emma Goldman put this pungently when trying to deromanticize ‘the
traffic in women’: ‘It is merely a question of degree whether she sells
herself to one man, in or out of marriage, or to many men. Whether our
reformers admit it or not, the economic and social inferiority of women
is responsible for prostitution.’ Yet psychoanalysis and the sexual
liberation movements both point to the constraining power of patterns of
emotional attachment in their own right. It should be possible to
analyse them without falling into romanticism.

The social patterning of desire is most obvious as a set of
prohibitions. The incest taboo, and specific laws about rape, age of
consent and homosexuality, all prohibit sexual relationships between
certain people. (Strictly speaking the laws prohibit particular actions,
but the intention is to destroy the relationships.) Psychoanalytic
theories of the Oedipal crisis and the super-ego interpret the impact of
society on emotions mainly in terms of the internalization of
prohibitions. Yet the prohibitions would be pointless without
injunctions to love and marry the right kind of person, to find
such-and-such a kind of masculinity or femininity desirable. The social
pattern of desire is a joint system of prohibition and incitement.

Two principles of organization are very obvious in our culture. Objects
of desire are generally defined by the dichotomy and opposition of
feminine and masculine; and sexual practice is mainly organized in
couple relationships.

Historically and cross-culturally, sexual attachment has not always been
organized in terms of a dichotomy. Nevertheless in the rich capitalist
countries at present sexuality is firmly organized as either
heterosexual or homosexual. If it is not, we actually label it as mixed:
‘bisexual’. Though coupling is often seen as the basic structure of
attachment, the gender dichotomy of desire seems to have some priority.
When couples break up and their members form new attachments, it is
almost universal practice for the new companion to be of the same sex as
the old one, whichever that was.

In the pattern of desire that is socially hegemonic, cathexis
presupposes sexual difference. ‘Woman needs man and man must have his
mate’, as time goes by. The solidarity of the heterosexual couple is
formed on the basis of some kind of reciprocity, rather than a basis of
common situation or experience. This is in marked contrast to
solidarities generated by the structures of labour and power. The latent
contradiction here has often been noticed, indeed is a theme of romantic
literature, as well as a political issue of some importance in feminism
in the last decade. More, the sexual difference is a large part of what
gives erotic flavour to the relationship. Hence it can be emphasized as
a means of intensifying pleasure. This goes some way to explaining the
systematic exaggeration of gender differences discussed in chapters 4
and 8.

But ‘difference’ is a logical term, and social relationships are more
loaded. The members of a heterosexual couple are not just different,
they are specifically unequal. A heterosexual woman is sexualized as an
object in a way that a heterosexual man is not. The fashion industry,
the cosmetics industry, and the content of mass media are tangible proof
of this. For instance, the glamour shots on the covers of women’s
magazines and men’s magazines are pictures of women in both cases; the
difference is in the way the models are dressed and posed. Broadly
speaking, the erotic reciprocity in hegemonic heterosexuality is based
on unequal exchange. There are, as Emma Goldman noted, material reasons
why women participate in unequal relationships. The ‘double standard’,
permitting promiscuous sexuality to men and forbidding it to women, has
nothing to do with greater desire on the part of men; it has everything
to do with greater power.

The process of sexualizing women as objects of heterosexual desire
involves standardizing feminine appeal, as the term ‘fashion’ itself
implies. There is a complex of tensions and contradictions around this.
Though hostility can be and often is directed at a whole gender category
(misogyny, misandry, homophobia), attraction is not. Rather,
heterosexuality and homosexuality as structural principles are
definitions of the social category within which a partner can be chosen.
Perhaps the implication is that both are constructed mainly by blocking
out the category from which the partner is not to be drawn.

At the psychological level this implies repression and at the social
level prohibition. Both imply some attraction to the negated object.
Classical psychoanalysis made us familiar with this under the name of
‘ambivalence’. Its significance in understanding the construction of
masculinity will be discussed in chapter 9; here I want to raise its
structural implications. In The Ego and the Id Freud noted that the
‘complete Oedipus complex’ is twofold. Underneath the familiar triangle
of love and jealousy is another set of emotional relations where the
attachments run the other way: ‘A boy has not merely an ambivalent
attitude towards his father and an affectionate object-choice towards
his mother, but at the same time he also behaves like a girl and
displays an affectionate feminine attitude to his father and a
corresponding jealousy and hostility towards his mother.’ Carl Jung
proposed as a general rule that what is repressed is emotion that cannot
be expressed in social practice, with the result that the unconscious
comes to be a negative of the conscious mind and public life.

If we take these ideas seriously, it can be argued that the visible
structure of emotional relationships coexists with a shadow structure
whose sense is very different. It is a familiar fact that public
affection in a married couple often coexists with private hostility. The
Red Collective has suggested a great difference between the ‘inside’ and
‘outside’ of couple relations in general. Gay men have often suspected
that the hostility they receive is sharpened by unconscious desire.
Bringing up small children is virtually guaranteed to produce both love
and hostility on both sides and to a strong degree. Since most of this
parenting is done by women, relationships involving mothers are likely
to be highly ambivalent, a theme stressed by Nancy Friday in My
Mother/My Self.

There is so little research that gives depth-psychological information
and has a sense of social context that it is difficult to do more than
speculate on how this shadow structure is organized. All that is clear
is that the structure of cathexis must be regarded as multilevelled, and
major relationships as ambivalent, in the general case. The old cliches
about how easily love and hatred turn into each other, and the power of
fables on this theme like Puccini’s Turandot, make better sense if
sexual practices are generally based on structural relationships in
which both love and hatred are already present.

Nancy Friday’s argument points towards another principle of
organization. She remarks that when girls develop a desire for men, it
is more security than sexuality that they want. It is often said of
teenage sex that the girls want affection and the boys want sex.
Gabrielle Carey and Kathy Lette in Puberty Blues add that in teenage
peer-group life, the sex is as much for symbolic purposes as for
physical pleasure. This is probably true of adults too. The argument
connects with Herbert Marcuse’s observations in Eros and Civilization
about the development of genital primacy and the de-erotization of the
rest of the body under the rule of the performance principle. It appears
that a broad opposition has been constructed between genital performance
and diffuse sensuality. In contemporary hegemonic heterosexuality these
forms of eroticism are defined as masculine and feminine respectively.
But they need not be. In other cultures they certainly are not, as the
Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana illustrates. It is wonderfully ironic that this
compendium of mannered and leisured sensuality is now (in the West)
mainly sold in porn shops dedicated to the mighty erection and the quick
climax.

With labour and power, the structure can be the object of practice; with
cathexis, it commonly is. One of the striking things about sexuality is
that the structure itself can be cathected. Hence, for instance, the
erotic value of gender difference already noted. Hence the gender
element in narcissism, the extent to which cathexis of the self is
focused on the diacritical marks of gender. Hence, most strikingly, the
erotic circularities of sexual fetishism, where the symbolic markers of
social categories (lace handkerchiefs, high-heeled shoes, leather
jackets) or structural principles (for example, dominance) get detached
from their contexts and themselves become primary objects of arousal.

This kind of practice can be captured for profit-making or repression,
as it is by the advertising industry. But another practice directed
towards structure is possible, the attempt to rework patterns of
attachment in an egalitarian direction. Autobiographies of this
practice, like the Red Collective’s book, or Anja Meulenbelt’s account
of personal life, feminism and the Dutch Left in The Shame is Over, show
the difficulties more readily than the potentials. David Fernbach, who
argues in The Spiral Path that there is an inherent egalitarianism in
gay relationships because of their transitive structure (my lover’s
lover can also be my lover), is more sanguine.

A Note on ‘System’ and Composition

Setting out this account of multiple structures risks a new kind of
reductionism, implying a coherence and completeness in each which
earlier was denied to gender relations as a whole. Certainly the
exercise of separating structures is pointless unless there is some gain
in coherence. But it is important that none of the three structures is
or can be independent of the others. The structure of cathexis in some
respects reflects inequalities of power; the division of labour partly
reflects patterns of cathexis, and so on. In none is there an ultimate
determinant, a ‘generative nucleus’ to use Henri Lefebvre’s term, from
which the rest of the pattern of gender relations springs.

There is, however, a unity in the field, an orderliness, which needs to
be understood. People do not walk around all day with an ache in their
shoulders from the sociological cross-pressures. A gay man can be beaten
up in the streets of Sydney in a way that somehow fits with the
experience of being beaten up in New York. There is some coherence
between the division of labour in childcare, the psychodynamics of
femininity and the possibilities of women’s liberation.

My argument, briefly, is that this unity is not the unity of a system,
as functionalist analysis would imply. Nor is it the expressive unity
that would be provided by the existence of a generative nucleus. It is a
unity – always imperfect and under construction – of historical
composition. I mean ‘composition’ as in music: a tangible, active and
often difficult process of bringing elements into connection with each
other and thrashing out their relationships. It is a matter of the real
historical process of interaction and group formation. The difference
from music is not that the process lacks a composer, but that it has a
whole stack of them; and that all are inside the piece being composed,
since what is being composed is their own lives. The product of the
process is not a logical unity but an empirical unification. It happens
on particular terms in particular circumstances. At the level of a whole
society it produces the gender order to be discussed in the next
chapter.

The idea of ‘composition’ implies that a structure may be less than
perfectly formed, and a field of practice less than completely governed
by a particular structure. In short, the level of systematicity in
gender relations varies. It is possible for the processes I have called
‘empirical unification’ to work powerfully and achieve a high degree of
order, as seems to be the case for the core complex within the structure
of power. But if this is achieved, it is not the consequence of an
inherent or categorical logic, and never justifies functionalist
analysis. It is the outcome of strategy in the historical process of
group formation and interaction.

A high degree of systematicity is likely to reflect the dominance of a
group whose interests are served by a particular gender order. For
instance, the extent to which housing, finance, education and other
spheres of life are all organized around the model of the heterosexual
couple reflects the dominance of heterosexual interests and the
subordination of homosexual people. The extent to which homosexual
experience itself has been organized in heterosexual terms (‘butch’ and
‘femme’ for instance) is a striking proof of subordination. A major task
of gay-liberation politics has logically been to contest this way of
organizing homosexual experience – to ‘desystematize’ or ‘de-compose’
gender, so to speak.

It is historically possible to have a low degree of systematicity, a
good deal of incoherence and contestation. And it is possible to have
the combination of structured conflict of interest and potential for
de-composition that can be recognized as a crisis tendency. This will be
explored in chapter 7.

NOTES

Structure and Structural Analysis

(pp. 92–9). The critique of structuralism and of Bourdieu draws on
several essays in Connell (1983). The account of ‘dualist’ theory
follows discussions in a seminar course on ‘Practice, Self and Social
Structure’ held at Macquarie University in 1985; my thanks to Sue Kippax
in particular. On the logic of structuralism I find Piaget (1971)
illuminating. Giddens rejects the definition of structure as
‘constraint’ but I would argue that this can be formulated in ways that
make it simpler and at least as powerful as his model. My definition of
‘structural models’ is entirely distinct from the concept of ‘structural
modelling’ in business-oriented operations research: see e.g. Linstone
et al. (1979) and other papers in the same issue of Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, where ‘structure’ has the extremely weak
sense noted in the text and ‘modelling’ means feeding vague ideas into a
computer to make them look precise. Quotation from Young and Willmott
(1962, p. 133).

Labour

(pp. 99–106). Quotation from Cavendish (1982), p. 79. Segal et al.
(1979–80) provide a rare analysis of a sustained attempt to change
childcare in a politicized environment. Quotation from Curthoys (1976,
p. 3).

Power

(pp. 107–11). The argument here assumes the points established by Lukes
(1974) about the different forms of social power. For American
historical research tracing women’s fields of power see Du Bois et al.
(1980). Quotation from Moses (1978, p. 334).

Cathexis

(pp. 111–16). Quotations from Goldman (1972a, p. 145) and Freud (1923,
p. 33).

6

Gender Regimes and the Gender Order

Institutions

Theories of gender, with hardly an exception, focus either on one-to-one
relationships between people or on the society as a whole. Apart from
discussions of the family, the intermediate level of social organization
is skipped. Yet in some ways this is the most important level to
understand. We live most of our daily lives in settings like the
household, the workplace and the bus queue, rather than stretched out in
a relation to society at large or bundled up in a one-to-one. The
practice of sexual politics bears mostly on institutions: discriminatory
hiring in companies, non-sexist curricula in schools and so on. Much of
the research that is changing current views of gender is about
institutions like workplaces, markets and media.

When the social sciences have made the connection, it has usually been
by picking out a particular institution as the bearer of gender and
sexuality. The family and kinship have usually been elected to this
honour. Accordingly the structure of the family is the centre-piece of
the sociological analysis of sex roles stemming from Parsons and Mead.
The flip side of this election was that it allowed other institutions to
be analysed as if gender were of no account at all. In text after text
on the classic themes of social science – the state, economic policy,
urbanism, migration, modernization – sex and gender fail to get a
mention or are marginalized.

One of the most important effects of the new feminism on the social
sciences has been a comprehensive proof that this approach is untenable.
Murray Goot and Elizabeth Reid’s classic demonstration of the mixture of
gender-blindness and patriarchal prejudice in mainstream political
science is one example of a series of critiques. They range from
electoral sociology through the welfare state to class analysis, showing
not just that gender relations are present in major institutions but
also that they are systematically important to them.

I will not repeat the details of this research, simply taking the
general conclusion now firmly established. We cannot understand the
place of gender in social process by drawing a line around a set of
‘gender institutions’. Gender relations are present in all types of
institutions. They may not be the most important structure in a
particular case, but they are certainly a major structure of most.

The state of play in gender relations in a given institution is its
‘gender regime’. An example may help to clarify the idea. In the
research project in which Delia Prince was interviewed (chapter 1), we
found an active though not always articulate politics of gender in every
school. Among both students and staff there are practices that construct
various kinds of femininity and masculinity: sport, dancing, choice of
subject, class-room discipline, administration and others. Especially
clearly among the students, some gender patterns are hegemonic – an
aggressively heterosexual masculinity most commonly – and others are
subordinated. There is a distinct, though not absolute, sexual division
of labour among the staff, and sex differences in tastes and leisure
activities among the students. There is an ideology, often more than
one, about sexual behaviour and sexual character. There are sometimes
conflicts going on over sexism in the curriculum or over promotion among
the staff, over prestige and leadership among the kids. The pattern
formed by all this varies from school to school, though within limits
that reflect the balances of sexual politics in Australian society
generally. No school, for instance, permits open homosexual
relationships.

Compact formal organizations like schools perhaps have particularly
clear gender regimes, but others have them too. Diffuse institutions
like markets, large and sprawling ones like the state, and informal
milieux like street-corner peer-group life, also are structured in terms
of gender and can be characterized by their gender regimes. In this
chapter I will take up three cases. The discussions are very condensed,
and represent no more than a start with each case. I hope they will
still be enough to get some bearings on the institutionalization of
gender.

The Family

Conservative ideology speaks of the family as the ‘foundation of
society’ and traditional sociology has often seen it as the simplest of
institutions, the building-block of more elaborate structures. Far from
being the basis of society, the family is one of its most complex
products. There is nothing simple about it. The interior of the family
is a scene of multilayered relationships folded over on each other like
geological strata. In no other institution are relationships so extended
in time, so intensive in contact, so dense in their interweaving of
economics, emotion, power and resistance.

This is often missed in theorizing because of a concentration on the
normative standard case. Enough has been said already about how little
we can rely on that concept; but it is worth noting that even families
which match it to a reasonable degree are internally complex. The
emotional undercurrents in the Prince household have been suggested in
chapter 1. Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain documents the ambivalences and
complexities of conventional working-class families in the United
States. Laing and Esterson’s Sanity, Madness and the Family, dealing
with the more combustible materials of schizophrenia, shows the
extraordinary tangles that can be produced in British families by the
pursuit of respectable normality.

To understand gender and the family, then, it is necessary to unpack the
family. The three structures outlined in chapter 5 provide a framework
for the attempt.

The sexual division of labour within families and households has a
specific literature and is well recognized. Both broad types of work and
very fine details are subject to this division. In the English village
studied by Pauline Hunt, for instance, wives clean the insides of window
panes and husbands clean the outsides. The division of tasks is not
absolute, and does change with time. There are now fewer wives than in
the 1920s of whom it could be said: ‘Her husband was a steady man, but
the same as other men – went out and left her to it [i.e. to bring up
the children and run the home] to do as she liked.’

Yet not all the changes reduce sexual divisions. The autobiography of a
shepherd’s son notes that as the eldest surviving child he had ‘to be
mother’s help, to nurse the baby, clean the house, and do sewing like a
girl’. That was in England in the 1830s. There are few households now
that depend on children’s labour to such an extent and hence give boys
experience in mothering. Studies of the changing sexual division of
labour over more recent periods, like Michael Gilding’s research on the
family in Sydney up to 1940, suggest that the main effects have been
redistribution of housework among women rather than from women to men.

It is equally well recognized that the contemporary urban
family/household is constituted by a division of labour that defines
certain kinds of work as domestic, unpaid and usually women’s, and other
kinds as public, paid and usually men’s. The interplay of the structure
of production inside and outside the family changes character in
different class settings. In Mirra Komarovsky’s American working-class
families this revolves around the husband’s wage. In a study of American
bourgeois ‘lives in progress’ done at much the same time by Robert
White, the connection revolves around the husband’s career. The latter
case is an important qualification to Delphy’s picture of domestic
labour as a form of appropriation by the husband. A professional’s or
businessman’s wife may well maximise her own lifetime income by
integration into a successful husband’s career.

Most households include children for a considerable part of their
history, and this affects the division of labour in two ways.
Childrearing is itself work, and bulks large in the sexual division of
labour as a whole. Since in rich capitalist countries most care of young
children is done unpaid and in the home by their mothers, this has
particular prominence in the domestic division of labour. So it is not
surprising that R. E. Pahl’s recent study in southern England finds the
most clear-cut and conservative sexual division of labour in those
households which currently have children under five to care for. The
second point is made by the shepherd’s son already quoted: children
themselves work, both in the home and at school. This work too is
structured on gender lines. Given the points already made, it is not
surprising that the study of Sydney adolescents by W. F. Connell and
others found housework to be done by girls about twice as often as by
boys.

The sexual division of labour reflects ideas about ‘a woman’s place’;
but who defines that? As Colin Bell and Howard Newby observe, the way
families work is partly a consequence of the husbands’ power to define
their wives’ situation. The underlying interest appears to be consistent
and strong. The patriarchal pattern, with young people subordinated to
old and women subordinated to men, reappears in a long series of
sociological researches on families in different countries, together
with the ideologies of masculine authority that support it.

Research into family power-structure, by and large, has taken a
conventional approach to the definition of ‘power’ as influence in
decision-making. Other kinds of evidence suggest this is not enough. The
work on domestic violence shows that force is important in many
families. On the other hand the research on ‘schizophrenia’ by Gregory
Bateson, R. D. Laing and others indicates the fierce emotional pressures
that can be brought to bear on family members without any open command
or display of power. These cases often concern the power of mothers over
their children; but the prohibition on escape in Bateson’s double-bind
theory of schizophrenia is also reminiscent of the ‘factors preventing
women leaving violent relationships’ in domestic violence research. In
more ways than one the family can be a trap. Finally the marital sexual
relationship can itself embody power. The topic is not very thoroughly
studied but it seems likely, from evidence such as Lillian Rubin’s, that
in most cases it is the husbands who hold the initiative in defining
sexual practice.

Given some awareness of this, it is understandable that critics of
marriage like Emma Goldman should declare the husbands’ ‘protection’ of
their wives a farce. It is also understandable that one way of handling
a strong power imbalance is to build a praxis of compliance. Marabel
Morgan’s stunning The Total Woman, a Florida dream of being totally
subordinate and loving it, is at the same time a shrewd how-to-do-it
manual for this kind of practice. It is notable that her right-wing
religion and social outlook are strongly flavoured with eroticism. In
getting the husband to stay home, it is the wife’s business to
titillate:

  ‘For an experiment I put on pink baby-doll pyjamas and white boots
  after my bubble bath. … When I opened the door that night to greet
  Charlie, I was unprepared for his reaction. My quiet, reserved,
  nonexcitable husband took one look, dropped his briefcase on the
  doorstep, and chased me around the dining-room table.’

The power of husbands shows in the family, but it is certainly not based
in the family alone. Studies of the erosion of patriarchal authority by
migration, such as Gillian Bottomley’s research on Greek families in
Australia, show that domestic patriarchy is dependent on support from
its environment. Even without the drastic upheaval of migration, this
support has not always been consistent or sufficient. The family
sociologies, even in the 1950s, found some power-sharing between
husbands and wives. As noted in chapter 5 some families show a pattern
of eroded patriarchy, where a claim to authority is made by the husband
but is not successful – where wives control the household in reality.
Under the impact of the New Left and feminism in the 1970s, conscious
attempts have been made in some families and households to dismantle
power relations altogether. This has not been easy, but a certain amount
of experience about egalitarian households has now accumulated.

Marabel Morgan’s white boots point daintily towards the connection
between domestic power and the structure of cathexis. Of all aspects of
the family this is perhaps the most researched, since it is the main
subject-matter of psychoanalysis. The theory of the Oedipus complex is a
map of the emotional interior of the family. However the yield for
social theory from some eighty years of psychoanalytic investigation is
much less than the volume of evidence would suggest. This is partly
because what psychoanalysts publish in their journals is so strongly
framed by questions about therapy. But part also is a result of the
influence of the normative standard case as a presupposition in Freud’s
own writings and in most psychoanalytic thinking since.

When a psychoanalyst is led to question this norm the results can be
striking. A notable example is Anne Parsons’s study of a non-Oedipal
‘nuclear complex’ in Naples. Cultural and psychological evidence here
shows a family pattern where the mother is central, the father has
little real domestic authority and the mother-son and father–daughter
relationships are emphasized more than same-sex identifications. This
highlights the importance of cross-sex relationships in the formation of
femininity and masculinity, and suggests a kind of discontinuity in the
history of gender that bears thinking about in other contexts. The
evidence on sexual abuse similarly indicates the charged character of
cross-sex relationships within the family.

The shadow structure of cathexis suggested in chapter 5 is clearer for
the family than for any other case, again because of the concentration
of psychoanalytic research. Phyllis Chesler in About Men suggests its
importance when noting the degree of hostility between fathers and sons
that persists despite identifications. She speculates about a connection
with larger patterns of violence between men. Repressed fear and hatred
is a possible though certainly incomplete way of explaining how large
numbers of men are motivated to staff the institutions of violence. It
is not, of course, any explanation of how those institutions work on the
large scale.

At several points already the interplay between structures within the
family has been evident. Wage and career affect domestic power; domestic
power affects the definition of the division of labour; Marabel Morgan
eroticizes powerlessness. The very ideas of ‘the housewife’ and ‘the
husband’ are fusions of emotional relations, power and the division of
labour. The gender regime of a particular family represents a continuing
synthesis of relations governed by the three structures.

This synthesis is not trouble-free: the components of a family gender
regime may contradict each other. In the traditional patriarchal
household, a marked sexual division of labour actually places some
limits on the patriarch’s ability to exercise power, since women
monopolize certain kinds of skill and knowledge. Vanessa Mahler
describes a considerable degree of psychological independence for women
in Moroccan culture, where patriarchal domination is massive and the
division of labour strong. A very sharp division of labour may produce a
degree of segregation of daily life that makes it difficult to sustain
patriarchal power as a routine. This is suggested, for instance, by
Annette Hamilton about Australian Aboriginal societies.

Such contradictions mean potential for change within the family as an
institution, most likely to be realized when its context changes
markedly. The case of migration has been mentioned. Another powerful
pressure is the arrival of capitalist market relations in a
non-capitalist setting. The pressure is not all in the one direction. A
study of peasant households in Mexico by Kate Young shows a splitting of
family patterns as class stratification develops, with gender regimes
moving in different directions.

The State

Theoretical literature on the state is at the other pole from the
family: almost no one has seen it as an institutionalization of gender.
Even in feminist thought the state is only just coming into focus as a
theoretical question.

Yet reasons to address it are easy to find. The personnel of the state,
as noted in chapter 1, are divided by sex in quite visible, even
spectacular, ways. State elites are the preserve of men, with a very few
exceptions. The state arms men and disarms women. President Carter,
though supporting the Equal Rights Amendment, still announced that he
would not give women a combat role in the military. The diplomatic,
colonial and military policy of major states is formed, as noted in
chapter 5, in the context of ideologies of masculinity that put a
premium on toughness and force. The South Pacific is at present having a
textbook demonstration of this from the French, with atomic testing at
Muroroa Atoll, the bombing of the Rainbow Warrior in New Zealand in
1985, and anti-independence violence by French settlers in Kanaky (New
Caledonia).

The state engages in considerable ideological activity on issues of sex
and gender; this very diverse activity ranges from birth-control in
India and China, through the reimposition of the chador on women in
Iran, to the Soviet efforts to increase the number of women in paid
work. States attempt to control sexuality: criminalizing homosexuality,
legislating on age of consent, venereal disease, AIDS and so on. The
state intervenes in the sexual division of labour in ways ranging from
subsidized immigration to equal opportunity policies. It regulates
workplaces and families, provides schools, builds houses.

Given all this, control of the state is a major stake in sexual
politics. Accordingly the state has been a major object of strategy.
From the Seneca Falls convention of 1848 to the Equal Rights Amendment
(ERA) campaign of the 1970s, American feminism has placed demands on the
state and tried to guarantee women’s access to it. Australian feminism
has put considerable energy into gaining a presence inside the state
bureaucracy, through welfare funding and the ‘femocrats’. The main focus
of groups like the Campaign for Homosexual Equality in Britain has been
legal reform through lobbying of parliamentarians and bureaucrats. The
American New Right in its turn has attempted to roll back feminism
through control of courts and legislatures.

It can hardly be denied that the state is deeply implicated in the
social relations of gender. Alain Touraine remarks that ‘the state is
not the one who represents the metasocial guarantees of social order …
but rather the agent of a concrete historical collectivity, situated in
relation to other communities and to its own transformation.’ Yes; but
that ‘historical collectivity’ has to be defined in gender as well as
class terms. The question is how to understand the connections.

There are four arguments in the theoretical literature on the state that
might do the job. The first is the liberal theory that thinks the state
in principle a neutral arbiter, which in practice can be captured by
interest groups, in this case men. The institutional sexism of the state
is therefore a matter of the imperfect citizenship of the excluded
group, women. This approach can make sense of the main concerns of
liberal feminism, both in terms of legal equality (suffrage, Equal
Rights Amendment, equal employment opportunity) and specific welfare
needs. But it does not give any grip on the sexual division of labour
among state personnel, or on the gender structuring of state violence.
On the face of it, the approach is contradicted by the fact of state
oppression of groups of men, notably homosexual men, and by the heavier
criminalization of men’s sexuality than women’s.

This is consistent with a second approach which sees the state mainly as
an apparatus of regulation and soft domination. Jacques Donzelot’s The
Policing of Families and Michel Foucault’s History of Sexuality are the
classics of an approach now also adopted by some theorists of gay
liberation such as Jeffrey Weeks. They picture the state as part of a
dispersed apparatus of social control working through dominant
discourses as much as through force. This is useful in getting beyond
the state as an organization to its sphere of operation, making the
connection with everyday life. It also allows a recognition of the
multiple and sometimes contradictory apparatuses at work. But it is not
at all clear in this approach why the state regulates to the extent that
it does, unless it is simply prurient. Foucault and Donzelot do not
account for the constitution of interests in sexual politics.

A third approach certainly does. It defines the state as a class state
producing effects on sex and gender in pursuit of class interests. The
‘Freudian Left’ from Wilhelm Reich to Herbert Marcuse conceived of state
action in these terms, with sexuality either repressed or carefully
ventilated according to the needs of capitalism. Marxist feminism has
generally seen the state’s motivation in class terms, though seeing its
effects as maintaining men’s subordination of women. Discussions of
state action on wage levels, welfare provision and welfare ideology by
theorists like Mary Mcintosh have succeeded in getting the dimension of
political economy into the argument. But, as the discussion of extrinsic
theories in chapter 3 noted, it is not clear why gender effects are
essential for the reproduction of capitalism or the maintenance of
profit.

A fourth group of theorists tackle this head-on by arguing that the
state is from the start a patriarchal institution. David Fernbach
proposes that the state was historically created as the
institutionalization of masculine violence. Catherine MacKinnon looks at
the form of state action, in particular legal ‘objectivity’, as the
institutionalization of a male point of view, and shows how it impinges
on sexual politics in the management of cases of rape. Zillah
Eisenstein’s dual systems model sees the central state as an agent in
sexual politics at the same time as class politics, showing for instance
how Carter’s support of the ERA made tactical sense in terms of
factional divisions in the American elite. Carole Pateman proposes that
the development of the liberal state was itself underpinned by a new
form of patriarchy in civil society developing in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries.

These lines of work have the potential to deal with the full range of
issues about gender. But before they can converge there are some
difficulties, or at least complexities, to be dealt with.

When the state is considered as a repressive apparatus, it is clear that
the main objects of physical repression are men. The evidence is clear
enough in statistics like those on arrest and imprisonment in chapter 1.
There are cases where state violence is directed mainly against women,
such as the European witch craze that peaked in the seventeenth century,
and the mass rape by the Pakistani army in Bangladesh in 1971; but the
most persisting and general uses of state force are by men against men.

Yet this does not mean that state repression has nothing to do with
gender. There is a very active gender process here, a politics of
masculinity. The state both institutionalizes hegemonic masculinity and
expends great energy in controlling it. The objects of repression, e.g.
‘criminals’, are generally younger men themselves involved in the
practice of violence, with a social profile quite like that of the
immediate agents of repression, the police or the soldiers. However the
state is not all of a piece. The military and coercive apparatus has to
be understood in terms of relationships between masculinities: the
physical aggression of front-line troops or police, the authoritative
masculinity of commanders, the calculative rationality of technicians,
planners and scientists.

The internal complexity of the state is now well recognized in class
theory and is equally important in relation to gender. Actual states are
by no means consistent in their processing of gender issues. The
political leadership in New South Wales has introduced a broad
equal-opportunity program mainly directed at women; much of the
bureaucracy, which is of course run by men, has quietly resisted it.
Recent policy in a number of Western countries has been to hand more
welfare functions from the state to ‘the community’, i.e. to the unpaid
work of women; but at the same time the training of girls for paid work
has been expanded, with rising retention rates in school and new
occupational preparation programs. Equal employment opportunity programs
have been expanding in Australia at the same time that funds for
childcare, which would make them effective, have been cut. The gradual
extension of the civil rights of homosexual men via decriminalization
and antidiscrimination laws is contradicted by continued exclusion from
state employment and now by official scaremongering over AIDS. The
Canadian state has got itself into serious difficulty with the
contradiction between strong antidiscrimination provisions in the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which came into effect in 1985, and the
formal exclusion of homosexuals from the military and Mounted Police.
The patriarchal state even finds itself furíding feminism, across a
considerable spectrum from rape crisis centres through women’s units in
the bureaucracy to grants for feminist academic research. Some of this
is mere incoherence, to be expected from the sheer complexity of the
state as a set of instrumentalities. But some is real contradiction.

How can these points be built into a gender analysis of the state? They
suggest that the state is not inherently patriarchal, but is
historically constructed as patriarchal in a political process whose
outcome is open. The process of bureaucratization is central here, as
conventional bureaucracy is a tight fusion of the structure of power and
the division of labour. Together with selective recruitment and
promotion, these structures form an integrated mechanism of gender
relations that results in the exclusion of women from positions of
authority and the subordination of the areas of work in which most women
are concentrated. But conventional bureaucracy is itself under pressure,
as the huge contemporary output of management-theory repair manuals
testifies. Demands for more efficiency, for decentralization, even for
more democracy, can unhinge parts of this mechanism. It is largely in
the spaces where gender politics and organizational reform intersect
that feminists in the state have gained ground.

Power in the state is strategic because there is more at issue than a
simple distribution of benefits. The state has a constitutive role in
forming and re-forming social patterns. For instance the state at a
superficial level supports marriage through taxation incentives, housing
and so on. At a more fundamental level marriage is itself a legal action
and a legal relationship, defined, regulated and to some extent enforced
by the state. Another notable state enterprise is in the field of
fertility. Pro-natalist and anti-natalist policies have been debated and
contraceptives accordingly banned or distributed. How far state policy
has actually been successful in controlling this aspect of women’s
bodies is debatable, but there have certainly been vehement attempts,
from antiquity to the present, to do so.

In managing institutions and relations like marriage and motherhood the
state is doing more than regulating them. It is playing a major part in
the constitution of the social categories of the gender order.
Categories like ‘husbands’, ‘wives’, ‘mothers’, ‘homosexuals’, are
created as groups with certain characteristics and relationships.
Through them the state plays a part in the constitution of the interests
at play in sexual politics. They in turn react on the state through
political mobilization. The classic example is the state repression and
regulation of sexuality that played a central part in the creation of
‘the homosexual’ as a social category and personal identity. This in
turn became the basis of a politics of civil rights for homosexuals. The
same kind of cycle is very general.

The patriarchal state can be seen, then, not as the manifestation of a
patriarchal essence, but as the centre of a reverberating set of power
relations and political processes in which patriarchy is both
constructed and contested. If this perspective is sound, it makes the
historical trajectory of the state vital to an understanding of its
place and effects in sexual politics. I will finish this discussion with
a couple of hypotheses about this trajectory.

The growth of the modern state depends, as Pateman proposes, on a change
in patterns of gender relations. A key part of this is a change in
patterns of masculinity. The tradition-centered patriarchal authority
that was criticized at the level of public politics by liberal
rationalists such as Locke represented the hegemony of a particular kind
of masculinity in domestic life too. Over the period in which both the
modern state and the industrial economy were produced, the hegemony of
this form of masculinity was challenged and displaced by masculinities
organized much more around technical rationality and calculation. The
system of industrial capitalism was constructed by this shift as well as
by class dynamics; and so was the characteristic form of state
bureaucracy sketched above.

This did not eliminate other masculinities. What it did was marginalize
them: and this created conditions for new versions of masculinity that
rested on impulses or practices excluded from the increasingly
rationalized and integrated world of business and bureaucracy. Such
‘wild’ masculinities emerged through the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. In one direction, the forbidden sexual affection between men
became the basis of a homosexual masculinity labelled and stigmatized by
the state. In another direction, the forbidden violence between men
became the basis for aggressive masculinities that – given the
conditions that followed World War I – were mobilized in fascism. The
importance of front-line soldiers in the fascist movements is familiar.
Less familiar but equally significant is Hitler’s contempt for the
‘gentlemen with diplomas’ who ran the bourgeois world he despised.

The condition of women was also implicated in the process of
rationalization. There was a deepening contradiction between their
subjection to individual men in domestic patriarchy and the powerful
eighteenth and nineteenth century trend to universalize citizen rights,
closely connected with the rationalization of the state and of markets.
This contradiction was picked up in the feminisms of Mary Wollstonecraft
in England and Susan B. Anthony in the United States and pithily
expressed by John Stuart Mill. The early woman suffrage campaign was not
a diversion from ‘social’ issues (though it later came to be a means of
ignoring them); it seized on the major contradiction that the
development of the state at that point had exposed.

The winning of citizen rights by women did have profound effects on
politics, though not in reshaping party politics. Women’s organizations
have been important in some conservative parties, but women’s parties as
such have had no impact. Much more generally women were constituted as
direct consumers of state services. Through the twentieth century a
complex network of services and benefits has grown around the widows’
pensions and maternity allowances that were first provided: baby health
centres, women’s health centres, supporting mothers’ benefits, taxation
allowances and so on. As is well known, women are now the major
consumers of welfare services in toto, partly because they live longer
but also because of the ways in which state support is designed to
substitute for husbands’ wages, presupposing women’s exclusion from the
labour market. Kerreen Reiger notes how such welfare developments
provided vehicles for intervention by professional experts (doctors,
nurses, psychologists, social workers) in households, reshaping women’s
domestic work. Sheila Shaver notes that when welfare and taxation
policies are taken together as a system of transfers, the state is in
effect taking from women as individuals and redistributing to them as
someone’s mother, wife or widow. Putting these points together we can
see the state as being deeply involved in the growth of much more
mediated and abstract relations between women and men through the
twentieth century. It is tempting to link this with the growth of a mere
mediated and alienated sexuality, with commercial standardization in
advertising, pornography and mass entertainment.

The Street

The street is not often thought of as an institution. It is something we
walk and drive along, or that chickens cross. Yet a famous sociological
text is called, with only mild irony, Street Corner Society, and we
speak of ‘street-wise’ kids. It is at least a definite social milieu,
with particular social relations.

A good deal of work goes on in the street. Jobs that concern children,
like pushing them around in strollers, are almost all done by women. So
is most shopping and most prostitution. Selling of newspapers, food and
other small objects is mixed. Driving cars, trucks and buses, petty
crime and policing, repairing vehicles and the street itself are mainly
done by men. Though women have been working as bus drivers more often,
heavy trucks are still a masculine speciality.

The street is the setting for much intimidation of women, from low-level
harassment like wolf-whistling to physical manhandling and rape. Since
it is not always predictable when the escalation will stop, in many
parts of the city women rarely walk, especially after dark. The street
then is a zone of occupation by men. Concentrations of young adult men
are the most intimidating and dangerous.

Such concentrations are commonest in areas where there is high
unemployment and ethnic exclusion to go with it, like Brixton in London,
Redfern in Sydney, the South Side in Chicago. Contests of daring, talk
about sport and cars, drugs (mainly alcohol) and sexism provide
entertainment in a bleak environment. Women generally avoid this; but
since there are no women’s streets and few welcoming public buildings,
the effective alternative is the home: ‘A woman’s place …’. In outer
suburbs this effect is not as strong, but threat still occurs.

The young men who offer this threat are also subject to it. The street
is a scene of intermittent but routine conflict between different
groups, which the media call ‘gangs’, and between them and the police.
It is in fact young men who are the main victims of street violence, not
elderly people, though the elderly are kept in a chronic state of fear
about it. The police are the Great Power in street life, though in a few
cases like the Watts insurrection of August 1965 in Los Angeles they may
vanish as an authority. The reserve power of the state is still great
enough to ‘restore order’ by military means if the political leadership
is willing to pay the price, as in Belfast.

In some ways the street is a battleground; in others it is a theatre. In
an urban shopping centre the street is full of advertising displays:
shop windows, billboards, posters. Their content is heavily sex-typed
and has become more heavily eroticized over recent decades. Some
particularly crude appeals to masculine violence, like the London poster
in 1984 showing a car fired from a pistol and captioned ‘The trigger is
under your right foot’, have been forced off the street. But the
cigarette and beer ads continue in the same merry way.

The pavement is equally full of displays, though more varied. People
convey messages about themselves by dress, jewellery, posture, movement,
speech. The street is one of the great theatres of sexuality and styles
of masculinity and femininity. A bus queue or shopping crowd will show a
wide range of styles and manners, some extroverted and
attention-seeking, some dowdy or uncaring. During the cycle of a day or
week the dominant styles turn over as the population changes:
shift-workers, commuting business men, shopping mothers, after-school
teenagers, late-night lads hanging out.

The street as a milieu thus shows the same structures of gender
relations as the family and state. It has a division of labour, a
structure of power and a structure of cathexis. Similarly the local
patterning of these relationships is linked to the structure of gender
relations outside. As Emma Goldman observed, women working the street as
prostitutes are not in it for the fun; they are there because women’s
wages are low. ‘Opportunist submission’ (the phrase is Jan Morris’s) to
patriarchy may be obligatory, given the different resources that people
bring to it. Gay relationships are rarely displayed on the street
outside tightly defined areas; it could be very dangerous to do so.

At the same time there is something specific to a loosely structured
milieu like a street that distinguishes it from deeply sedimented
institutions like family and state. It gives room not only to diversity
but also to quick turnover of styles. The theatre of the street may be
experimental theatre. A recent example is young women appropriating and
making-over an aggressive style of sexuality, in punk fashions with a
good deal of black and leather about them. Something of a negotiation
goes on about new forms in gender. There are even attempts to turn this
into a conscious political practice, through feminist street theatre or
events like the gay Mardi Gras in Sydney. I suspect the dominance of the
car now prevents any full-blown new development of the street as
festival. But it is still an extremely interesting register of sexual
politics.

The Gender Order

At several points in this analysis of institutions the importance of
context has become obvious, especially the context provided by other
institutions. To compile a complete structural inventory it is therefore
necessary to go beyond a collation of gender regimes to the
relationships between them.

In some cases this relationship is additive or complementary. The
patterns surrounding women’s part-time employment are a familiar
example. The conventional division of labour in working-class families
in Western cities assigns most childcare and housework to the
wife-and-mother; and femininity is constructed in a way that defines the
work of caring for other family members as womanly. The labour market
constructed by capitalist industry and the state offers some low-paid,
low-status part-time jobs; and curiously enough most of the people
recruited to these part-time jobs are married women. This pattern of
recruitment is justified by employers on the grounds that married women
only want part-time work because of their domestic responsibilities and
only need low pay because theirs is a ‘second wage’. At home the much
heavier domestic work of women is justified by husbands because their
wives can only get part-time jobs.

The dovetailing is neat, and it is anything but accidental. The pattern
has developed particularly in the 1970s and 1980s, and in the context of
the recession represents a practical accommodation between the
institutions involved. The dovetailing of structures is produced by a
meeting of strategies: the profit-maximizing strategies of employers in
a slack labour market and the household work strategies (as Pahl calls
them) of the employees.

If this kind of fit were the normal case, we would indeed have the
tightly integrated system presupposed by categoricalism. But the gender
regimes of interacting institutions are rarely so harmonious. I know of
no starker example than ‘The Blood Vote’, a famous poem and poster used
in the World War I campaign against conscription in Australia. Two
stanzas run:

  Why is your face so white, Mother?

  Why do you choke for breath?

  O I have dreamt in the night, my son,

  That I doomed a man to death.

  I hear his widow cry in the night,

  I hear his children weep;

  And always within my sight, O God!

  The dead man’s blood doth leap.

The conflict dramatized here, between the emotional relationships of the
family and the demands of a state at war, is a common theme in pacifist
campaigns, including the current campaign against nuclear weapons. A
well-known poster reads: ‘What to do in the event of nuclear war: Kiss
your children goodbye.’

A more complicated pattern of institutional abrasion surrounds the
reversals of state policy about welfare. There has long been a conflict
between the goal of redistribution implicit in welfare policy and the
goal of stabilization implicit in the machinery of repression and
ideological control. Once internal to the state, a classic ‘steering
problem’ in the language of Jürgen Habermas, this has been externalized
by the recession as a conflict over the terms of the relationship among
state, family and labour market. The welfare conservatism of the
post-war boom, predicated on full employment, managed class and gender
tensions with a gradual extension of welfare measures. But the state was
never accepted as wholly benign. A constituency developed for the New
Right swing towards welfare cuts, labour market discipline and selective
direct repression.

Given the feminization of poverty the welfare cuts have deepened the
economic disadvantages of women, while, as we have seen, the military
and police are the preserves of men. The changing balance of advantage
in gender relations is perhaps reflected in opinion-poll data showing a
much heavier support for Reagan among men than women in the United
States presidential election of 1980. But there is no simple translation
of sexual politics into votes. One of the first governments to use the
New Right rhetoric, the Fraser government in Australia, was elected in
1975 with heavier support from women than men; and even in the 1983
election that ousted it, women stayed with the conservative parties more
than men did.

A third pattern of connection between institutions sets them in
parallel, so to speak, as the domain of a common strategy or movement.
For instance the Equal Employment Opportunity campaigns have moved from
one organization to another, attempting to bring them into line with the
policy, using experience gained in one to move things along in the next.
At another level, ‘coming out’ as gay has to be done in a whole series
of settings: workplace, family, friendship networks, etc. As Wendy Clark
observes, the emotional patterns to be dealt with vary: coming out to
your parents is different. But the logic of the process still links the
institutions.

What is common to the three patterns is the fact of politics, the social
struggle around the terms of relationship between institutions. The
state/family connection has been particularly inflamed. It has given
rise to political programs that range from Alexandra Kollontai’s desire
to use the revolutionary state in the Soviet Union to dismantle the
patriarchal family, to the Vatican strategy of using the Italian and
Irish states to prop it up. The more generalized programs we see here
are a sign of the formation of more generalized interests than the
analysis of any one institution could account for. Here we come to a
second major step in the constitution of the gender order.

The basic point is that the groupings which are the major actors in
sexual politics on the large scale are constructed historically. It may
still sound strange to say this of categories like ‘women’ and ‘men’.
But it makes sense when the ‘construction’ itself is more closely
defined. It means giving a particular content to a social category,
establishing particular contrasts with and distances from other social
categories, and constituting an interest around which identity and
action can be organized. To recall the argument of chapter 4, the
biological categories of female and male determine only a limited range
of practices (bearing, suckling, etc.) which define the participants as
occupants of a range of parallel situations – in Sartre’s technical
term, ‘a series’. Groups which are actors in sexual politics are
constituted by moves in which seriality is negated and a collective
practice undertaken. Such moves are necessarily social processes, action
in history.

That is very abstract, but cases in point have already been discussed.
The categories ‘male’ and ‘female’ are not categories of social life and
sexual politics; the categories ‘men’ and ‘women’ are. The two pairs
overlap but the second pair is far richer and more complexly determined
than the first. The category ‘men’ for instance has a specific cultural
content in a given time and place. Its meaning in social action is not
the same in Bali in the 1980s, London in the 1980s and London in the
1680s. One of the key differences between these two dates in London was
the expulsion of homosexual practice from the conventional definition of
masculinity. The creation of a social category of ‘homosexuals’ has been
mentioned several times; less noticed is the simultaneous creation of a
category of ‘heterosexuals’. Since heterosexuality only has meaning
through a gender opposition, this actually requires two categories,
heterosexual men and heterosexual women. Their newly purged polarity
became the major axis of gender relations in the twentieth century.

The construction of a social category is not quite the same thing as the
constitution of a social interest. ‘Twins’, for instance, is a
well-recognized category, but it is not easy to define any interest that
all or most twins share. An interest is defined by the possibility of
advantage or disadvantage in some collective practice. The groupings of
sexual politics are constituted as interests by the facts of inequality
and oppression. The interests are articulated by processes of
mobilization that define collective goals and strategies. Interests are
not necessarily articulated. For instance it is clear from David Lane
and Felicity O’Dell’s The Soviet Industrial Worker that it is
politically impossible for women workers in the Soviet Union to mobilize
as a distinct group outside the Party and the unions, both of which are
controlled by men. Yet their unequal social and economic situation
provides a good motive for collective action.

Interests can be constituted on very different bases, which may cut
across each other. Marriage and kinship involve collective practices in
which advantage may be gained for one family over another family, and
people may well see this as the primary definition of their interests.
On the other hand ‘men’ and ‘women’ are collectivities of a more
generalized kind which have conflicting interests defined by the
inequalities of income, power and so on already documented.

Both of these cross-cutting sets of interests are real, and both can
become the basis of a very active politics. Feminism is a mobilization
on the latter basis. Mobilization on the former is illustrated by Pierre
Bourdieu’s account of Kabyle society in Algeria, with lineages
manoeuvering for advantage through marriages as much as through land
deals. The tendency in social theory has been to pick one basis of
interest and regard the rest as secondary. Thus Bourdieu simply subsumes
the interests of Kabyle women in those of their menfolks’ lineages.
Conversely Christine Delphy ignores the material interest ruling-class
wives have in their husband’s careers by assimilating their situation to
that of peasant and working-class women. This is not a point to be
settled by postulation. The way of defining interest that is ascendant
at a given time and place is an empirical question. Indeed a great deal
of sexual politics is precisely about trying to make a latent interest
salient in practice.

Interests are immediately defined by existing inequalities, but they can
also be defined in a longer-term sense. Gender relations are historical,
they can be remade in new patterns, and the new patterns will advantage
and disadvantage particular groups. So there are interests in historical
transformations. Barbara Ehrenreich’s The Hearts of Men is a notable
attempt to define the interest heterosexual men had in the remaking of
sexuality and the family in postwar North American society. It is not
easy to do this, since the public articulation of sexual issues reflects
interests only in oblique and censored ways. But it is clear that a
pattern of interest can be found.

The conflict of interest on this society-wide scale, the formation and
dissolution of general categories and the ordering of relationships
between institutions, together amount to a macro-politics of gender.
This is analytically distinct from, though at all points linked to, the
face-to-face issues that are the usual sense of ‘sexual politics’. The
‘gender order’, defined abstractly at the end of chapter 5, can be
defined dynamically as the current state of play in this macro-politics.

Its processes include the creation and contestation of hegemony in
definitions of sexuality and sexual character (see chapter 8) and the
articulation of interests and organization of political forces around
them (see chapter 12). At stake are the institutional resources that
bear on gender relations, such as the state powers discussed earlier in
this chapter; cultural definitions of gender (see chapter 11); and
through both of them, the definition of historical possibilities in
gender relations. The historical dynamic in this macro-politics is the
crux of the social analysis of gender, and the most difficult of all
issues to grasp. It will be addressed, in a preliminary way, in the
following chapter.

A Note on the Definition and Institutionalization of Gender

In common-sense understanding gender is a property of individual people.
When biological determinism is abandoned, gender is still usually seen
in terms of socially produced individual character. It is a considerable
leap to think of gender as being also a property of collectivities,
institutions and historical processes. This view is nevertheless
required by evidence and experience of the kind just traversed. There
are gender phenomena of major importance which simply cannot be grasped
as properties of individuals, however much properties of individuals are
implicated in them. It may be useful to get clearer the exact sense in
which we can speak of gender as collective, and social practices as
gender-structured.

Chapter 4 argued that the social relations of gender are not determined
by biological difference but deal with it; there is a practical
engagement rather than a reduction. It is this engagement that defines
gender at the social level, demarcating gender-structured practice from
other practice. ‘Gender’ means practice organized in terms of, or in
relation to, the reproductive division of people into male and female.
It should immediately be clear that this does not demand an overriding
social dichotomy. Gender practice might be organized in terms of three,
or twenty, social categories. Indeed our society recognizes a fair
variety – girls, old men, lesbians, husbands and so on. It should also
be clear why a dichotomy of women and men is likely to be an important
part of any gender order.

Gender then, is a linking concept. It is about the linking of other
fields of social practice to the nodal practices of engendering,
childbirth and parenting. The definition just offered leaves wholly open
the question of how extensive and how tight those links are, and what
their social geometry is. There are times and places where the links are
more extensive and compelling, where (to change the metaphor) a greater
percentage of the social landscape is covered by gender relations; and
times and places where they are less. This is a basic reason why Gayle
Rubin’s concept of a ‘sex/gender system’ in all societies cannot be
sustained.

Gender in this conception is a process rather than a thing. Our
language, especially its general categories, invites us to reify. But it
should be clear that the ‘linking concept’ is about the making of the
links, the process of organizing social life in a particular way. If we
could use the word ‘gender’ as a verb (I gender, you gender, she genders
…) it would be better for our understanding. The Marxist-feminist
literature of the late 1970s that talked awkwardly about ‘gendered
subjectivity’ was groping in this direction, and discussions of
‘gendered language’ are already there.

The ‘process’ here is strictly social, and gender a phenomenon within
sociality. It has its own weight and solidity, on a quite different
basis from that of biological process, and it is that weight and
solidity that sociology attempts to capture in the concept of
‘institution’.

The notion of institution classically signifies custom, routine and
repetition. Anthony Giddens in The Constitution of Society follows this
by defining institutions as practices with ‘the greatest space-time
extension’ within societies, or ‘the more enduring features of social
life’. But practice does not have the long duration Giddens attributes
to institutions; practice is of the moment. What persists is the
organization or structure of practice, its effects on subsequent
practice. This can either depart from, or reproduce, the initial
situation; that is to say, practice can be divergent or cyclical. As
argued in chapter 3, it is not a logical requirement that social
reproduction occurs; that is simply a possible empirical outcome. But it
is an important one, and the cyclical practice that produces it is what
is meant by an ‘institution’. The process of ‘institutionalization’ then
is the creation of conditions that make cyclical practice probable.

Speaking of a ‘cycle’ is intended as an alternative to the notion of a
continuum of practice, the idea that structure is a matter of sameness
in practice. This is implicit in Giddens, explicit in Adrienne Rich’s
concept of the ‘lesbian continuum’ as a transhistorical reality.
Structure may involve a cycle of opposites. Anne Parsons’s
psychoanalytic study of the non-Oedipal ‘nuclear complex’ in Naples is a
particularly clear example, where a particular pattern of masculinity is
socially reproduced through the relation with the mother, and femininity
through the relation with the father. The opposites may also be at the
collective level. The discussion of power earlier in this chapter noted
situations where a local power pattern is out of kilter with the more
global one, for instance women having authority within a household. This
does not undermine the conception of a power structure, merely the idea
that a structure must be homogeneous.

Putting these bits together, gender is institutionalized to the extent
that the network of links to the reproduction system is formed by
cyclical practices. It is stabilized to the extent that the groups
constituted in the network have interests in the conditions for cyclical
rather than divergent practice.

NOTES

Institutions

(pp. 119–120). For good critiques of gender-blindness in mainstream
social science see Goot and Reid (1975); Wilson (1977) and West (1978).
The analysis of gender regimes in schools is based on Kessler et al.
(1985).

The Family

(pp. 121–5). Quotations on English families from Davies (1977) p. 62 and
Burnett (1982) p. 72, and on Florida eroticism from Morgan (1975) p. 94.

The State

(pp. 125–32). On feminism and the bureaucracy see Eisenstein (1985) and
Pringle (1979). Quotation from Touraine (1981), p. 108. The argument on
relationships between masculinities in armies is developed in Connell
(1985a). On Hitler’s social consciousness see Bullock (1962).

The Street

(pp. 132–4). This section is mainly based on observation and impressions
in Brixton during 1984.

The Gender Order

(pp. 134–9). Full text of ‘The Blood Vote’ is in Harris (1970), p. 239.
Poll figures from 1980 United States elections in Friedan (1982), p.
210; from 1975 and 1983 Australian federal elections from Morgan Gallup
Polls, 102 and 499A.

7

Historical Dynamic

Historicity and ‘Origins’

In 1984 the British government’s program of coal-pit closures provoked a
national strike by mine workers, one of the bitterest industrial
confrontations in recent times. As the struggle got under way with
miners’ leaders and National Coal Board shaping up in best macho style,
the media ran stories about how the miners’ wives were opposed to the
strike. Since industrial disputes in mining are very much a community
affair, these claims provoked a good deal of anger. Some miners’ wives
organized a demonstration to show their support for the strike, and to
the surprise of the mineworkers’ union as well as the government a
solidarity movement among women developed quite rapidly on a national
scale.

One of the initiating groups, from the town of Barnsley, brought out a
booklet about their experience called Women Against Pit Closures. Its
main theme is how the women of the district are part of the class
solidarity of the miners. But the booklet also criticizes the union for
excluding or ignoring women. It conveys a strong sense that now the
women have taken public action, gained a political voice and among other
things have been harassed by police and some arrested, things can never
be the same in the mining towns again: relations between the women and
the men have changed decisively.

This sense that things ‘can never be the same again’, that new
possibilities have opened and old patterns closed off, is exactly what
the historicity of gender relations is about. The concept of historicity
is stronger than the concept of ‘social change’, which may be mechanical
and external, something that happens to people, like a comet, a fire or
a plague. The idea of historicity is about change produced by human
practice, about people being inside the process.

The idea that gender relations have a history is more than a century
old. As noted in chapter 2 it was a basic element in the creation of a
social science of gender. Its early formulations, in best
nineteenth-century style, revolved around the problem of ‘origins’. This
is at best a half-way house to the concept of historicity. The concept
of ‘origins’ implies that something is already formed, though not fully
developed, in its earliest appearance, and that what follows is the
unfolding of a nature already settled.

Of the origin theories that dot the landscape, by far the most
influential has been Friedrich Engels’s Origin of the Family, Private
Property and the State, which appeared in 1884. Engels’s view of
primitive social structure was, in its day, a reasonable piece of
armchair research. It was based mainly on Greek and Roman literary
sources enlivened by a little early ethnography. But it was not
state-of-the-art prehistory even then. The Assyrian civilization had
been revealed a generation before; the Egyptian hieroglyphs had been
deciphered in the 1820s; and while Engels wrote, major excavations were
showing the outlines of a yet more ancient civilization in Sumer. In the
decades that followed, Engels’s limited sources were overwhelmed by an
explosion of archaeological information. In the Mediterranean region,
which his main sources dealt with, archaeology brought to light the
Minoan, Mycenaean, Hittite and Etruscan cultures, to mention only the
most spectacular. By the 1920s prehistory had become a sophisticated
science with well-developed field methods. Technically detailed regional
syntheses like Gordon Childe’s Dawn of European Civilization were
appearing; and speculative library essays like Engels’ Origin were
simply obsolete.

One reason it has remained the focus of argument is that the
prehistorians have not done their job. There is no literature that
debates and synthesizes the field evidence, now vast, that bears on the
early history of gender relations. The secondary literature on
prehistory, with very few exceptions, takes the sexual division of
labour and the subordination of women for granted.

Here, for instance, are two famous prehistorians discussing the early
family:

  Since hunting put a premium on masculine qualities, this activity
  became a special province of males, and a sexual division of labour
  was instituted under which women continued to gather plant, insect and
  comparable foods while men developed the skills required for tracking
  down and killing game. This heightened the need for a partnership of
  the sexes.

No evidence is offered for this; the sexual division of labour from
later societies is simply read back. It is difficult to think of any
other topic on which such a colossal anachronism would get past a
professional historian’s self-censorship. This example is from two
decades ago, but little has changed in the archaeological literature
since. With modern historiography sunk in patriarchal ideology, even an
obsolete essay that asks some of the right questions looks good.

Of course Engels is more than the author of an obsolete essay. With the
founding fathers’ texts canonical (or nearly so) for orthodox Marxists,
his Origin has inevitably become the focus of argument over Marxist
explanations of women’s oppression now. Opponents of Marxism have found
it easy to carry on the combat by inventing an alternative prehistory.
As Homeric warriors battled for possession of a hero’s corpse wherever
the hero fell, struggle has raged over the true origin of patriarchy
without much thought about the choice of battlefield. The most bizarre
results were a completely speculative debate about whether there was a
primitive matriarchy, a prehistoric world ruled by women, and if so how
it was overthrown by men; and a completely speculative theory of
evolution that found the origins of patriarchy in palaeolithic hunting,
the ‘master pattern’ of the human species according to Lionel Tiger.

Christine Delphy, whose splendid demolition of Origin myths deserves to
be better known, observes the drift of this debate away from the insight
that began it. ‘In fact, under cover of putting an historical question,
an ahistorical one has actually been posed: “What are the natural
reasons which caused male supremacy?”’ Since there are no natural
reasons for a social relationship, this debate cannot ever be resolved.
It is basically symbolic, a way of making declarations about the
present; one of those really satisfying arguments that exclude all
evidence that might tend to settle them.

The ultimate weakness of the Origin debate is that to have any force,
either strategically or symbolically, it must assume that nothing much
changes after the Origin. Like the Elephant’s Child in the Just So
Stories having its nose stretched, once you get it you are stuck with
it. In all essentials, the argument assumes, ‘male bonding’ is the same
now as it was among the mammoth-hunters, patriarchy as it was when Moses
came down from the mountain.

Alongside the mythography of the Origin there is a hybrid literature
that presents itself as a scientific search for origins; the
participants include Kathleen Gough, Rayna Reiter and Maurice Godelier.
Its basis is an attempt to synthesize data from archaeology with
contemporary studies of the behaviour of apes and monkeys and the
ethnography of small-scale societies, preferably hunter-gatherers. The
latter two are supposed to cast light by analogy on what things were
like in early human evolution. Clare Burton’s critique of this
literature is apt. The analogical evidence fails to establish anything
significant about the remote past, and the origins argument establishes
absolutely nothing about the present. Reiter’s paper ‘The Search for
Origins’, perhaps the most interesting in this literature, shows the
stress by falling apart into two quite incompatible arguments. One is a
sketch of major transitions in the world history of gender relations – a
novel and important exercise. But this is framed by the quite spurious
claim that knowing the origins of gender hierarchy gives the strategic
clue to how it may be abolished now.

The origin literature’s assumption of the homogeneity of history, to put
it formally, is important as a mechanism of ideology. As a basis of
theory it is less compelling. It either denies historical change, or
allows just one model of change, the natural unfolding of a fixed logic.
This is incompatible with the view that social structures are
constituted by practice. It is inconsistent with any conception of
internal contradictions in gender relations, since they must give rise
to historical discontinuities. It is also inconsistent with the
subdivision of structures proposed in chapter 5, since a consequence of
recognizing different logics of relationship is recognizing
contradictions that emerge between them. If the arguments and evidence
assembled in chapters 3, 5 and 6 have any weight, the notions of a
homogeneous history and a formative origin are ruled out absolutely.

We must also reject the conventional ‘history of sex’ and the more
recent history of ‘sex roles’, both of which are based on a similar
premiss of homogeneity. Such familiar texts as Rattray Taylor’s Sex in
History conceive their subject-matter as the varying expressions of an
underlying essence. The history is the story of how these expressions
modulate under different circumstances: changing religious ideas,
heavier or lighter censorship and so forth. But sexuality itself is not
understood as formed in history, indeed as changing at all. Vern
Bullough, a historian of homosexuality in this vein, puts it succinctly:
‘In sum, homosexuality has always been with us; it has been a constant
in history’. As R. A. Padgug argues in an essay on conceptualizing
sexuality in history, the idea of an unchanging essence misses the
connection of sexuality with practice, the historical formation of the
categories and relations that I have called the structure of cathexis.

The same is true of the history of ‘sex roles’ that emerged in the late
1970s. Patricia Branca’s Women in Europe Since 1750, Peter Stearns’s Be
a Man! and Elizabeth and Joseph Pleck’s The American Man may serve as
respectable examples. The ‘role’ framework declares a concern with
social definitions. Stearns’s book, for example, opens with an essay on
‘manhood as a social construct’. But as the analysis in chapter 3
showed, ‘sex role’ theory is only notionally social. It actually rests
on a pre-social sex dichotomy, which supplies the missing structure to
the analyses of attitudes and interactions. Exactly the same is true of
sex-role history. These texts rest on the fixed dichotomy of sex –
women’s history plus men’s history – and concern themselves mainly with
mapping changes in attitudes and expectations about the dichotomy.

A much more profound grasp of the historicity of gender is shown in the
new gay history that has superseded work like Bullough’s. Homosexuality
is a historically specific thing, and the fact that it is socially
organized becomes clear once we distinguish between homosexual behaviour
and a homosexual identity. While homosexual behaviour of some kind may
be universal, this does not automatically entail the existence of
self-identified or publicly labelled ‘homosexuals’. In fact, the latter
are unusual enough to require a historical explanation. Jeffrey Weeks
argues in Coming Out that in Western Europe, male homosexuality did not
gain its characteristically modern meaning and social organization until
the late nineteenth century. That period witnessed the advent of new
medical categorizations, homosexuality being defined as a pathology by
the German psychiatrist Westphal in 1870. There were also new legal
proscriptions. All male homosexual behaviour was subject to legal
sanctions in Britain by the end of the century.

Such medical and legal discourses underlined a new conception of the
homosexual as a specific type of person. Alan Bray in Homosexuality in
Renaissance England shows that while homosexual encounters certainly
occurred in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, the
participants did not have a clear social definition. They were therefore
not persecuted systematically, though treated with extreme brutality on
occasion. Homosexual behaviour was seen as a potential in the lustful
nature of all men, or indeed a potential for disorder in the cosmos.
When men with same-sex preferences began to be defined as a group, in
the milieu associated with the ‘Molly houses’ of London in the early
eighteenth century, they were characterized by a high degree of
effeminacy and what is now known as transvestism.

Thus the emergence of both the medical discourse on homosexuality, and
the corresponding self-conception of homosexuals, need to be related to
particular social conceptions of femininity and masculinity and to the
social reorganization of gender. Just as ‘the housewife’, ‘the
prostitute’ and ‘the child’ are historically specific social types that
must be understood in the context of gender relations of the time, so
‘the homosexual’ represents the modern definition of a new type of adult
male. It was a man who was classified as an invert, and who, frequently
at least, understood himself to possess a ‘woman’s soul in a man’s
body’.

These developments in gay history move decisively beyond the concept of
modulations to a radical view of sexuality and gender identity as
constructed within the history of a changing social structure, by
processes of social struggle.

There are some connections with the work of Jacques Donzelot and Michel
Foucault. Foucault’s History of Sexuality argues forcefully that an
emphasis on sexuality as a motivating force in life is not only
distinctively modern but is part of a process of social control. He is
very clear about the social construction of sexual ideology and gender
identities. As he observes in an essay on the transsexual Herculine
Barbin, the demand that everyone should have a clear-cut and fixed
identity as a member of one sex is historically recent.

But the focus of this work on the apparatuses of power – the professions
and the state – and the forms of knowledge they generate, gives no grip
on the grass-roots reality that was the object of the strategies of
control. This theoretical problem has become a strategic dilemma in gay
liberation. When identity as a homosexual is seen as an effect of
‘regulation’, of the discourses and strategies used by the powerful to
fix, study and label the dissident, the logical response is to
deregulate or deconstruct. But deconstructing homosexual identity means
dismantling the political power that has been gained by a mobilization
stressing that identity, proclaiming gay pride. So the theoretical
advances generated by gay liberation seem to require the end of gay
liberation.

The roots of this paradox are in a lopsided conception of social process
endemic in theories of discourse and regulation. The practical side of
the problem will be discussed in chapter 10 below. At the level of
theory it can be corrected from feminist history. The approach pioneered
by Sheila Rowbotham in Hidden from History and Women, Resistance and
Revolution holds the focus on social relations, especially structures of
power. But it gives a central place to the practice of the oppressed.
The uses of power meet strategies of resistance, with varying results.
Such an approach acknowledges the reality of power without presenting
woman as eternal victim; and insists on the agency of the oppressed
without denying the reality of oppression.

Thus the historicity of gender defined at the beginning of this section
is not a completely abstract concept. Change is produced by human
agency; conversely all practice occurs in specific settings and has a
particular place in the sequence of events. The idea of historicity
implies a concrete history, some of whose features are now clear. Its
subject matter is a structure of social relations and the form of life
constituted in them, including sexual and political life. This history
is not homogeneous. As Juliet Mitchell emphasized, the different
structures of relationship may develop in different rhythms and come
into contradiction. Real social struggles do not have predictable or
standard outcomes, and sometimes change the conditions that gave rise to
them. There is a long-term historical dynamic of practice and structural
transformation.

The study of the historical dynamic of gender relations is still in its
early days, but it is clear that its shape is nothing like the smooth
unfolding of a predetermined logic. Gender history is lumpy. There are
moments of transition, when the conditions of practice alter fast; there
are periods of more or less steady shift in a given direction; and there
are periods when a particular balance of forces is stabilized.

The concrete focus of this history (as distinct from the abstract
definition of its subject-matter and scope) is the composition of the
gender order of a given time and place, and the collective projects that
compose it. To make sense of these projects requires a history of the
formation of groups and categories, and of the types of personalities,
motives and capacities drawn upon in sexual politics.

In those terms, the following section is not even the sketch of a
history. But it is important at least to move the argument as far as
posing concrete historical problems. What follows is an attempt to state
some of the questions that need answering about the dynamics of gender
on the scale of world history.

The Course of History

The early development of gender relations is a matter of deep interest,
regardless of the origins debate. In fact it hardly matters whether we
can define an origin or not. The history begins when the archaeological
evidence becomes full enough to throw some real light on the structure
of gender relations.

There is no evidence of any weight before the upper palaeolithic, nor is
it likely to appear. The earliest stages of human tool-making and food
production have left material traces like tools, bone deposits and
hearths, but there is nothing in such objects to indicate the gender
relations in which they were produced. There is no basis of evidence for
the conventional assumption, made alike by archaeologists,
sociobiologists and many feminists, that there was a sharp sexual
division of labour with men making tools and going hunting while women
gathered or stayed at home. That is simply guesswork.

By the upper palaeolithic some evidence is accumulating in the form of
paintings, bone carvings and burials. While these are as uncertain a
representation of social reality as a single page of Playboy would be,
they are at least pointers. For instance a sexual division of labour is
suggested by rock paintings in eastern Spain, where genitals and breasts
are distinguishable and women and men are associated with different
forest scenes. A burial and other objects at a settlement of
mammoth-hunters at Dolní Věstonice in Czechoslovakia imply some
association of a woman with ritual power.

To assemble such fragments into a historical argument will require a lot
of work; isolated examples like these may be quite misleading. I mention
them simply to show that this is the stage in the story where a
reconstruction becomes just possible. The evidence becomes very much
richer with the development of the first agricultural societies in
south-western Asia – the lands around Mesopotamia – around 10,000 years
ago.

Some speculation about the history of gender identifies a matriarchal,
or at least egalitarian, stage in neolithic village society based on
domestication of plants and animals and the invention of cloth and
pottery. This is followed at a considerable interval by a patriarchal
stage associated with cities or nomadic herders, warfare and kingship.
Unfortunately for this scheme the results of post-war excavation have
broken down the once clear distinction between an ‘agricultural
revolution’ and an ‘urban revolution’. It now appears that towns like
Jericho in Palestine, Çatal Hüyük in Anatolia and Abu Hureyra on the
middle Euphrates developed long before the plains civilizations of
Mesopotamia and Egypt, close to the time when agriculture and animal
husbandry emerged. If city walls are an indication of warfare, then at
Jericho war came before pottery. There is no evidence whether it was a
male monopoly or not.

Two conclusions about this era seem clear, nevertheless. One is that the
cultural elaboration of gender had begun. At Çatal Hüyük for instance
women’s graves included jewellery more often than men’s, and there were
differences in the types of tools and features of clothing. In some
respects women and men were being treated differently in ritual and
religion. The second is the absence of a sharp sex difference in access
to social goods. Women’s graves and ritual objects are not reported as
poorer than men’s. Argument from a negative is notoriously weak, but so
far as this goes it suggests that the cultural marking of gender
differences in early settlements did not require an economic
subordination of women. The excavator of Çatal Hüyük, James Mellaart,
cautiously remarks that ‘the position of women was obviously an
important one’.

With the invention of writing in Sumer around 5,000 years ago the
history of gender relations takes on new detail and immediacy, and a
history of the structure of cathexis becomes possible. The surviving
records include myths that show patterns of emotion, commercial and
legal documents that evidence divisions of labour and household
arrangements, and state archives that cast light on the organization of
power. Some of this is stunningly familiar. Stories of jealousy,
disputes about paternity, idylls of love and loyalty, are found in the
earliest surviving literatures. Yet it is also very alien. Early epics
from the Gilgamesh tablets to the Iliad show structures of emotion very
different from ours. A good part of the dynastic history of Egypt
revolves around planned incest on a scale that should have turned
Freud’s beard prematurely white. There is no clearer case of the need to
treat gender history rigorously as history, not as a reading-back. The
reconstructed patterns are likely to be unfamiliar, perhaps shockingly
so.

Writing is not only a source of evidence, it was itself a major social
technique, closely bound up with the centralized states and commercial
networks that were knitting whole regions into the provinces of an urban
culture. By perhaps 5,000 years ago in south-west Asia and the eastern
Mediterranean, 3,000 years ago in India and China, 1,500 years ago in
Central America, a new social order was entrenched beyond the power of
wars or famines to destroy. It was characterized by state structures
that linked cities to agricultural hinterlands, with large populations
integrated by exchange of services and goods as well as religion and
power. Its history has been continuous from then until the advent of
industrial capitalism.

Historians’ accounts of this transition, in so far as they have
addressed social dynamics, have focused on the class issues by which
Gordon Childe originally characterized the ‘urban revolution’. We can
now pose the question of a gender dynamic at a more fundamental level
than the traditional question of the effects of this transition on the
status of women. If the argument of chapter 6 is broadly correct, the
creation of the state is itself a reorganization of gender relations,
particularly the structure of gender power. The sexual division of
labour is implicated in the production processes that generate the
surplus of goods and services which makes urban populations possible. It
is important to know to what extent the surplus is appropriated through
sexual politics and on gender lines, and to what extent the increased
specialization of workers is a gendered one. It seems likely that the
changed population densities, opportunities and demographic structure of
urban populations were accompanied by changes in the structure of
cathexis.

The construction of the state is a particularly interesting and
important aspect of these issues. One of its key features was the
invention of armies. As far as the written and visual record goes, the
armies of Sumer, Egypt and their successors were composed wholly (or
nearly so) of men. David Fernbach proposes that the ‘masculine
specialization in violence’ is a key both to the development of the
state as an instrument of class and patriarchal power, and to the
history of masculinity. The point is important, but this overstates it.
Ancient armies were small, so it is likely that organized violence could
determine the character only of a minority of men. Nor did the masculine
personnel of the machinery of violence immediately determine a
subordination of women in other spheres of life. Both in Sumer and in
Egypt there is a good deal of evidence of women’s prestige and
authority. In Sumer for instance women owned property, engaged in trade
and so on, while the myths have goddesses active and powerful, notably
the cycle of legends around the goddess Inanna (Ishtar). In Egypt much
the same is true, with women’s prestige perhaps rising in the period of
the Empire, when Egyptian military power was at its height.

Yet the control of the means of violence by some men rather than by any
women remains a central fact. So does the concentration of supreme
political authority in the hands of a man or group of men. The
implication is that early states were a vehicle of the differentiation
of masculinities and a site of contestation between them. The conflict
between the priests of Amon and the reforming Pharaoh Akh-en-Aton at the
height of the Egyptian Empire is a striking example. The stake of these
struggles was still limited because the exclusion of women from supreme
power did not mean their overall subordination in other spheres.

There seems to be some confirmation of this in the structure of emotion
in the world’s first (surviving) literary masterpiece, the
Sumero-Akkadian Epic of Gilgamesh. The story centres on the conflict and
passionate attachment of Gilgamesh, King of Uruk, and Enkidu, a hero
from the wild; the two men turn out to be mirror images of each other.
The sexuality in the epic seems to involve ritual more than emotional
relationships. The strongest feelings and personal attachments are
connected with war and rulership rather than sex.

These bits of evidence suggest societies that were controlled by men but
not ‘patriarchal’ in the sense usually understood today. That is to say,
the patterns of emotional relationship, production and consumption were
not closely integrated with the relations of gender subordination and
exclusion that had developed in the state. The culture was not
completely ‘gendered’. If that is true, the subsequent history of
agricultural/commercial civilization in western Asia and the
Mediterranean involves a deepening institutionalization of patriarchy to
the point we are familiar with in classical Greece (for example the
exclusion of women from the public sphere in Athens) and the Roman
Empire. There is a major transition in gender relations here which does
not obviously correspond to a major change in technology, demography or
class relations.

However it is important not to presume a single sequence of events, for
two strong reasons. One is the diversification of urban civilizations,
including their gender orders. The connection of hegemonic masculinity
with militarism and violence that developed in the Mediterranean world
and Europe seems not to have developed in China, at least to the same
degree. In Confucian culture soldiers had much less prestige, scholars
and administrators more. It seems likely that the social surplus
produced in agricultural/commercial society allowed new options, more
potential diversity of social structure. With no global dynamic to
constrain them, the result was likely to be divergent gender histories
in the major world provinces of urban culture.

The other reason is that in the five millennia of its ascendancy,
agricultural/commercial civilization never controlled, let alone
covered, the greater part of the inhabited world. Because of their
density urban cultures probably included the majority of the world’s
human population, but left vast tracts where settlement was organized on
different bases. Lower-density economies were pastoral (central Asia),
hunter-gatherer (northern North America, Amazonia, Australia),
agricultural but not urban (Mississippi–Great Lakes, western Africa) and
an infinite range of combinations. It is a gross historical error to
treat these societies as primitive survivals (much of the literature on
‘origins’ does), as static, or as just peripheral to the real human
story. Synthetic works like Basil Davidson’s Africa in History show
dramatically how active and intricate was the history of societies
beyond the pale of the major empires.

It is difficult to get bearings on the gender orders of such a range of
situations, and I will make only a few suggestions. The most promising
sources are written decriptions of these societies by travellers from
literate cultures. Roman and Chinese descriptions of the barbarians
across the frontier have an understandable emphasis on what was
perceived as the main threat, the hypermasculinity of undisciplined
warriors. The account of gender relations from such sources, then, is
likely to be systematically biased; the reality may be very different.
The mutual dependence of women and men in subsistence agriculture is
likely to give considerable power resources to women. High rates of
fertility plus high rates of infant mortality mean that close
mother-child relations are unlikely, as Philippe Ariès has argued for
mediaeval Europe, and femininity cannot be constructed around dependence
and nurturance. It is a cliche that peasant women are ‘hard’ in terms of
urban sensibilities; there are hard reasons for it. Finally it is
notable that the heroic literatures of societies on the fringes of urban
culture, while stressing masculine violence, do not picture women as
simply subordinate. In the pre-Christian mythology of the Anglo-Saxons,
for instance, when Beowulf had triumphed over the monster Grendel he
faced an even fiercer struggle with Grendel’s Mum. Meanwhile the Vikings
imagined the Valkyries, war goddesses more bloody and terrifying in the
original than in the sanitized modern versions.

Over the last 500 years the world order just sketched has been replaced
by something very different. This era sees the first global empires,
controlled from western Europe; the first global economy, centered on
the North Atlantic; a new system of production and exchange, with
rationalized agriculture, industrial manufacturing and capitalist
control; a revolutionary development of transport, medical technique and
nutrition resulting in a spectacular increase of world population;
bureaucratized and powerful state structures, which have developed not
only an unprecedented capacity to educate and control, but also an
unprecedented capacity for mass killing. As with the ‘urban revolution’,
the node of this transition has long been taken to be the class dynamic.
As in that case, we can now pose questions not only about the effects on
gender relations but about the gender dynamic of the transition itself.
Three issues emerge most clearly, centering on the three main
structures.

The first has to do with the reconstruction of the state and of
masculinity. On the argument of chapter 6, the bureaucratized state is
in fundamental respects a pattern of gender relations. The previous
exclusion of women from the state apparatus cannot be sustained. More
and more women are now drawn into employment in the state; exclusion is
replaced by various forms of segregation and direct subordination. The
rationalization of administration is incompatible with forms of
masculinity that were hegemonic in the aristocratic ruling classes of
the old regime. Even in the military branch of the state, heroic
personal leadership is steadily displaced by the calculating masculinity
of General Staffs and logistics experts. Napoleon appealed to ‘la
gloire’; Admiral Nimitz, the architect of the American defeat of Japan
in World War II, hung a sign in his office that read: ‘IS IT IN THE
REALM OF PRACTICABILITY OF MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES?’ Commercial
capitalism calls on a calculative masculinity and the class struggles of
industrialization call on a combative one. Their combination,
competitiveness, is institutionalized in ‘business’ and becomes a
central theme in the new form of hegemonic masculinity.

The second issue has to do with the wedge that is driven between money
economy and domestic economy, between wage work and house work. As
Elizabeth Janeway remarks, the notion of ‘the home’ as a distinct sphere
of life, the stronghold of family and leisure, did not exist before the
eighteenth century in Europe. The notion that women were or ought to be
dependent on men would have seemed absurd in the context of the
reciprocities of village agriculture and commercial towns. In fact
women’s extensive involvement in production, and in earning cash,
continued through the period of industrialization. As Joan Scott and
Louise Tilly have shown, the percentage of European women in paid jobs
remained impressively stable in the nineteenth century. It was the
location and social meaning of the work that changed. A combination of
technology and industrial politics gradually levered women out of the
core industries of the Industrial Revolution, creating the segregated
occupations and low wage structures now familiar. The ‘family wage’
model of male breadwinner and dependent wife, never a reality for much
of the working class, nevertheless became a criterion both of union
activity and state policy. The construction of the gender division
between ‘breadwinner’ and ‘housewife’ was formative not only for modern
definitions of masculinity and femininity but also for the character and
direction of working-class politics.

The third issue has to do with a new structure of cathexis centering on
what might be called hegemonic heterosexuality. The shift here is
complex and subtle. Heterosexual relationships had been predominant in
the previous European agricultural/commercial civilization, but were not
exactly hegemonic, given the importance of asceticism in the Christian
tradition before Protestantism. The married heterosexual couple now came
to be defined as a cultural ideal, and this involved a splitting-off of
kinds of sexuality that came to be seen as deviant. More, they come to
be identified with types of people: the homosexual, the pederast, the
whore-master, the Don Juan, appear as social types. It seems that this
typification is reflected in the internal organization of emotions.
There is a marked growth in the tendency to form fixations, both on
people and objects, a tendency essential to the construction of the
family as a tightly knit emotional unit but which ultimately breaks its
bounds. One result is the cult of sexual fetishes – high heels, corsets
and so on – which is in full swing by Krafft-Ebing’s day. The partial
reification of emotional relationships here is surpassed by the
development of a completely externalized sexuality in twentieth-century
mass media, starting with the cult of movie sex goddesses and moving on
to the pinup and the eroticization of advertising. The reorganization of
emotions that allows this externalization of cathexis is perhaps the
truth behind Foucault’s claim of an increasing incitement rather than
repression of sexuality.

These are issues about the nature of the transformation in the core
countries of the new world order. Another set of issues arises about the
global spread of these relations. There is now considerable research on
the effects of imperialism on the position of women in the colonized
world. The impact is plainly uneven. We can nevertheless say that for
the first time in history since early urbanization there is a strong
dynamic tending to standardize gender relations in different parts of
the world. The spread of wage relationships is one part of this; the
labour market segmentation strategies of international businesses
another; the cultural prestige of the ‘Western’ family, especially among
urban people, a third.

At the same time the creation of the imperialist world order involves a
global differentiation of gender patterns, or inserts a global dimension
into their definition. The frontier of trade, conquest or settlement
exalted forms of masculinity different from those becoming dominant in
the core countries. The formula of the Davy Crockett story – the
frontiersman elected to Congress at odds with the urban elite – is
classic. So is the formula of normalization: the white women arrive to
raise families. An Australian history of women’s work in the colonies is
called Gentle Invaders, and the point is well made. The expansion of
white settlement involves a dialectic of masculinities and femininities
as well as race and class; the women were invading white men’s realms as
well as the lands of the blacks.

More broadly than the process of settlement, imperialism involves
reconstruction of the sexual division of labour on a global scale.
Agricultural communities are systematically disrupted. New industries
commonly involve a stark sexual division of labour: men in mines and
copra plantations, women picking cotton, etc. More recently a strong
sexual division of labour has been created in Third World manufacturing,
in industries such as garment-making and microprocessor assembly. Yet
women have also gained access to education on an unprecedented scale,
and with it entry to expanding occupations like clerical work and some
semi-professions such as teaching.

Though the evidence is much more difficult to come by, it seems that
there might also be differentiation in the structure of cathexis. The
psychoanalytic arguments of Octave Mannoni in Prospero and Caliban and
Frantz Fanon in The Wretched of the Earth and Black Skin, White Masks,
suggest that colonialism disrupts existing forms of masculinity and
femininity and produces on both sides a distinctive organization of the
unconscious. Episodes like the Port Moresby (Papua) race/rape panic of
1925, documented by Amirah Inglis in Not a White Woman Safe, suggest
that this dynamic can have drastic effects in colonial politics.

Crisis Tendencies

The ‘crisis of the family’ has not ushered in Armageddon, despite the
confident predictions made a decade ago. Indeed with the current
conservative ascendancy in Western politics it is easy to feel that the
cultural and sexual radicalism of the 1960s and 1970s has gone for
nothing. Yet rhetoric about threats to the family and the decline of
family values is not to be dismissed as a tactical ploy. It is a pointer
to real changes, real tensions and fears. Nor have the sexual liberation
movements been dispersed, however far short their accomplishments have
fallen of the hopes of 1968–75. A political force was created then which
is still active and in some situations effective. If the idea of a
full-blown crisis of the gender order is exaggerated, it is undeniable
that we are in the presence of powerful tendencies towards crisis. The
political conflict over issues of gender and sexuality is structured
around those tendencies and the historical possibilities they open up.

In Legitimation Crisis Jürgen Habermas analyses the concept of ‘crisis
tendencies’ in relation to the class dynamics of late capitalist
societies. The details of his analysis assume a generative nucleus (or
‘principle of organization’), which I have argued in chapter 3 and 5 is
not applicable to gender relations, and may be misleading for class
relations too. Yet the concept of crisis need not depend on a postulate
of systematicity. It can be applied to a historically composed gender
order, or to the gender regime of a particular institution, provided it
is possible to distinguish historical developments that call into
question the properties of the gender order as a whole from those that
can be contained locally. For instance the political processes that
allow an Indira Gandhi or a Margaret Thatcher entry to power are not
crisis tendencies in terms of the overall structure of men’s dominance.
They do not imply an improvement in the conditions of practice for women
generally; in fact with Thatcher it has been the reverse.

The following discussion explores possible crisis tendencies in the
gender order of the rich capitalist countries. I take the major
structural features of this gender order, produced by the history
sketched in the last section, to be (a) the gendered separation of
domestic life from the money economy and the political world; (b)
heavily masculinized core institutions and a more open-textured
periphery; (c) institutionalized heterosexuality and the invalidation or
repression of homosexuality. These patterns sustain (d) the major
pattern of sexual politics, the overall subordination of women by men.
If this is broadly correct, the analysis of crisis tendencies is a
question of identifying dynamics which have the potential to transform
these four features, and thus change in fundamental ways the conditions
of future social practice.

The debate on the ‘crisis of the family’ provides a useful
starting-point on the assumption that it provides evidence of real
crisis tendencies, though misunderstood because conservative sexual
ideology reifies the family as the basis of society. The discussion in
chapter 6 of the dynamics constructing the family raised two points
highly relevant here: the dependence of the family form on other
institutional structures, notably the state; and the weakening of
legitimate patriarchy as the form of authority within the family. There
is an obvious parallel between the latter and developments within the
state connected with women’s gaining citizenship rights.

On these bases we may define a tendency towards a crisis of
institutionalization, a weakening in the ability of the institutional
order of family-plus-state to sustain the legitimacy of men’s power. The
long-term political source is the importance of generalizable claims to
equality as the basis of legitimacy of the state. This claim has
operated in class relations (as argued by T. H. Marshall), race
relations (the civil rights campaign for American blacks being an
immediate source of the New Left and the new feminism) and global
politics (decolonization). Nothing has prevented it having an impact on
gender relations. Responding to challenges to the legitimacy of the
political order, or even to the government of the day, involves the
state in strategies that inevitably disrupt the legitimacy of domestic
patriarchy.

Some are quite direct: funding women’s education on a scale comparable
with men’s, providing machinery for no-fault divorce, funding women’s
refuges and training police for intervention in domestic violence, and
so on. Others are more indirect, such as the changing provisions about
property, taxation and pensions that treat a married woman as a person
in her own right. There need be no intention to undermine domestic
patriarchy. The machinery of these policies – divorce courts, the
police, etc. – become the sites of a political struggle in which
masculine prerogatives are defended, often successfully. An example is
divorce proceedings involving lesbian mothers, in some of which attacks
on lesbianism are made and influence decisions on the custody of the
children. Nevertheless the whole process destroys the
taken-for-grantedness of patriarchal authority on which the simple
reproduction of power inequalities rests.

The result is not an automatic disruption of the institutional order of
power, but must be an increasing vulnerability to challenge. Whether and
how challenges develop is a further question. Conditions for the
challenge that did develop in rich capitalist countries in the 1960s and
1970s include, at a minimum, the fact that women had easier and more
reliable contraception (the Pill, intra-uterine devices, etc.); the
growth of women’s higher education to a mass scale; and the sharpening
contradiction, for groups of younger women radicalized in the anti-war,
civil rights and campus struggles of the 1960s, between the rhetoric of
equality and the practice of sexual oppression in the radical movement
itself.

The advent of the Pill in the late 1950s was denounced as a giant step
towards a general breakdown of morality, a theme still pursued by the
Pope. Once again the rhetoric of the Right is a useful guide to
underlying tensions. We may define a complex but powerful tendency
towards a crisis of sexuality, in which hegemonic heterosexuality comes
unstuck as a stable resolution of the issues of cathexis and motivation.

In the previous section and in chapter 6 I argued that heterosexual
masculinity was historically constructed by the exclusion of particular
forms of desire and relationship, which were split off into marginalized
masculinities, most significantly homosexual. It can be argued that a
comparable process has operated in the construction of modern
femininity, though the resulting patterns are not symmetrical because of
the structure of power (see chapter 8).

In the ideal couple relationship defined by hegemonic heterosexuality,
and theorized as ‘the family’ by Talcott Parsons, a stable reciprocity
of cathexis is achieved. But it is achieved only by a process of
repression, both internal and external, which creates resistances and
oppositions. Externally these include the ‘wild’ masculinities discussed
above, and the bonds among women theorized by Adrienne Rich as the
‘lesbian continuum’. Internally the opposition includes a range of
forbidden impulses and attachments, evidence on which has emerged mainly
in psychoanalytic research (see chapter 9 on the ‘layering’ of gender in
personality).

Hegemonic heterosexuality, then, is not a natural fact but a state of
play in a field of power and cathexis; at best an ongoing
accomplishment. The accomplishment may cease, the state of play alter.
The resistances and oppositions amount to a crisis tendency if the
social supports of the process of repression prove inadequate, are
weakened or altered in ways that allow the emergence of alternative
patterns of sexuality on a significant scale.

Several arguments point to this possibility being realized. As suggested
in the previous section, the logic of fixation involved in the creation
of hegemonic heterosexuality is not obliged to stop within the
relationships making up the family. It can and does go on to create an
increasingly externalized and alienated sexuality which, while admirably
suited to commercial exploitation, corrodes reciprocity at a personal
level. Barbara Ehrenreich picks up an important dimension of this in her
argument about the ‘flight from commitment’ among heterosexual men in
the United States.

There are also arguments that suggest a dismantling of heterosexuality
itself. Herbert Marcuse’s well-known thesis that genital primacy in
sexuality was a product of a level of repression now superseded in
advanced capitalism suggests the emergence of a polymorphous sexuality.
Theorists such as Mario Mieli have argued that gay relationships are the
key to emergent forms of liberated sexuality. One current of feminist
theory from Jill Johnston on has seen the centre of feminism as
coinciding with the development of lesbian sexuality.

The economic trend most often seen as evidence of a crisis of the family
is the rising proportion of married women who are in ‘the workforce’: 42
per cent at the beginning of the 1980s in Australia. This need not
represent a breakdown at all. Much of it is produced by the need for a
second income to sustain conventional family patterns. The very high
proportion of employed women who are part-time workers underlines the
point.

Yet the effects of large-scale and long-term employment of married women
are more subversive than the statistic itself. On the one hand a wife’s
wage – even if firmly defined as a ‘second income’ – is a power resource
in domestic politics and feeds into the crisis of domestic patriarchy
noted above. On the other hand the fact that large numbers of women are
now employed for long periods of their lives in the largely segregated
labour market documented in chapter 5, creates a new political situation
in the workplace.

It is often remarked that domestic labour in suburban houses separates
women from each other physically. It is also remarked that
heterosexuality separates women from each other emotionally. The
concentration of large numbers of women at the point of production in
industry is one of the strongest tendencies working in the opposite
direction. A parallel development in relation to consumption has been
important in gay men’s politics, with the growth of commercial venues.
The gay liberation movement in New York sprang directly from a
mobilization in defence of such venues against the police, the
‘Stonewall riots’.

What these points imply is a tendency towards a crisis of interest
formation, the emergence of bases for the social constitution of
interests that cut across patterns of interests compatible with the
existing gender order. The definition of a married woman’s interests as
being essentially those of her husband and children is the hegemonic
pattern; the definition of her interests as those of a group of
exploited women in a factory is subversive. As with
institutionalization, it is a further question whether these
possibilities are realized, whether new interest groupings are formed.
Ruth Cavendish’s Women on the Line provides a fascinating case where
this did happen. The general issue of working-class feminism will be
taken up in chapter 12.

The three tendencies defined here are certainly not a complete map of
the structural tensions of the current gender order. A fuller account
would address the interactions of structures, such as the contradictions
surrounding childcare, women’s employment and fathering; and the
problems of the hegemonic definition of sexual character, femininity and
masculinity. This may, however, be enough to establish how an account of
crisis tendencies can provide the rational link between structural
analysis and liberation politics that is missing from sex-role theory
and categoricalism. The emergence of women’s liberation and gay
liberation movements did reflect crisis tendencies of a general kind,
though not a general crisis. Crisis tendencies are uneven in their
impact; while acting generally, they are likely to come to a head in
quite specific milieux. In this case the milieu most affected was the
younger intelligentsia of large Western cities. Some of the reasons and
consequences will be discussed in Part IV after the constitution of
sexual character has been considered.

NOTES

Historicity and ‘Origins’

(pp. 141–50). Discussions of Engels almost always ignore the historical
context of his own research. For Mesopotamian archaeology in the
nineteenth century see Lloyd (1955). Quotation on prehistoric hunting
from Clark and Piggott (1965), p. 40; criticism of origin-hunting from
Delphy (1977) pp. 53–60, at p. 59. Homosexuality always with us,
Bullough (1979), p. 62. My argument on homosexual history is taken from
Carrigan et al. (1985). For the transformation of homosexuality in
England see, besides work noted in the text, the pioneering work of
Mcintosh (1968). For the paradox of gay liberation theory see Johnston
(1982) and Sargent (1983).

        My argument on historicity has some parallels with Touraine
(1981). His understanding of structural change however is basically
confined to class dynamics and it is difficult to extend his rather
specific definition of historicity to gender relations. My approach is
derived from Collingwood (1946) and Carr (1961). I depart sharply from
Collingwood’s argument that feelings and emotions are incapable of
rational reconstruction from evidence, which draws a thick line between
history and psychology. I would argue that both the practice of
psychotherapy and modern social history refute Collingwood, and that
psychology is a branch of history. The historicity of the structure of
cathexis depends on this.

        The treatment of patriarchy as a transhistorical fact or
‘cultural universal’ in much feminist writing is incompatible with the
historicity of gender relations as formulated here. This is not to say
that a historical approach portrays gender as always in flux. Rather,
what does not change is as much in need of historical evidence, analysis
and explanation as what does.

The Course of History

(pp. 150–8). On gender in palaeolithic art see Pericot (1962) and
Cucchiari (1981); on the Dolní Věstonice burial see Klíma (1962). My
sketch of prehistoric western Asia draws on Burney (1977). For Jericho
see Kenyon (1960–83); for Çatal Hüyük see Mellaart (1967), quotation at
p. 225. On the position of women in Sumer and Egypt see Kramer (1963),
pp. 153–63; Wilson (1951), pp. 202–3; 206–35 on Akh-en-Aton; and Trigger
et al. (1983), pp. 79, 312. The Gilgamesh epic is translated in
Pritchard (1950), pp. 72–99 with other relevant myths. Admiral Nimitz’s
wall quoted from Costello (1985), pp. 366. Gentle Invaders is by Ryan
and Conlon (1978).

Crisis Tendencies

(pp. 158–63). For social meanings of New Right sexual ideology see Poole
(1982). The varying significance of antihomosexual prejudice in divorce
proceedings is carefully analysed by the Anti-Discrimination Board of
NSW (1982), pp. 252–87. Statistics on married women in the work-force
from Edgar and Ochiltree (1982).

Part III

Femininity and Masculinity

8

Sexual Character

Unitary Models and Sex Difference Research

The most common conception of the psychology of gender is that women and
men as groups have different traits: different temperaments, characters,
outlooks and opinions, abilities, even whole structures of personality.
There is no accepted term for this concept; I will call it ‘sexual
character’. The analogy is with David Riesman’s term ‘social character’;
‘sexual’ is more apt than ‘gender’ since in most usages the idea is
specifically linked with sex.

Often it is assumed that there is just one set of traits that
characterizes men in general and thus defines masculinity. Likewise
there is one set of traits for women, which defines femininity. This
unitary model of sexual character is a familiar part of sexual ideology.
It can be quite explicit: ‘just like a woman’, ‘just like a man’. More
often it is implicit. Jokes against ‘women drivers’, or the ‘Mere Male’
column in the women’s magazine New Idea, work by calling into play
shared assumptions of this kind: that women are hopeless with cars, that
men are hopeless around the house.

More sophisticated, but logically similar, ideas appear in academic
writing. In Talcott Parson’s classic work ‘instrumental’ versus
‘expressive’ traits are supposed to mark the two sexual characters that
correspond to the male and female roles. A unitary model of sexual
character underlies Nancy Chodorow’s feminist reworking of the same
themes. Here the focus is on how women’s sexual character prepares them
for mothering and men’s does not. Notions of unitary sexual character
have also emerged in cultural feminism in the last ten years. The
antipornography campaigns, for instance, have often presented a lust for
domination as the core of male sexuality, and as being more or less
undifferentiated among men.

Freud’s writings implied rather different conceptions of femininity and
masculinity, but most of Freud’s followers returned to convention.
Prominent in the psychoanalytic shift towards conservatism was the
Austrian/American Theodor Reik. His long essay ‘The Emotional
Differences of the Sexes’ is a classic statement of the unitary model.
It takes for granted that women and men have sharply different emotional
characteristics, and postulates that these are based on their different
functions in biological reproduction. Reik draws from this, mainly by
speculation, complacent explanations of an extraordinary range of
matters, from the double standard to cooking, cattiness, premenstrual
tension, and why women are concerned about furniture.

In more recent psychoanalytic literature such conceptions of gender
remain active. The American Robert May, for instance, makes the
difference between ‘the male and the female fantasy patterns’ the
central theme of his book Sex and Fantasy. He pursues a general
distinction between ‘pride’ and ‘caring’ – compare Parson’s
‘instrumental’ and ‘expressive’ – through ancient myths and modern
personality tests and clinical case histories.

It is clear that unitary conceptions of sexual character have a wide
appeal and can give comfort to people of very different political
persuasions. This is partly because having a unitary conception of
feminine or masculine character does not in itself settle what the
content of the two opposed characters might be. Speculation, assertion
and inference from biology are the order of the day.

Yet there is a large research literature closely related to this
problem: the psychological ‘sex difference’ research mentioned in
chapter 2, which as Viola Klein and Rosalind Rosenberg show has been
flowing since the turn of the century.

The facts at issue in this research are what might be called the block
differences between women and men – for instance, differences between
the average reaction times or tactile sensitivity of women and men; or
between average scores on tests of verbal ability, anxiety, or
extraversion. There are well-established conventions of method.
Comparable samples of women and men are needed, together with a reliable
measure of some sort. A test is always made for the statistical
significance of whatever difference turns up between average scores, or
between the proportions of women and men who meet a given criterion.

‘Significance testing’ itself presses the research towards a focus on
block differences, since what is tested is not its size or psychological
importance, but simply the probability that there exists some difference
which is not the result of chance. The kind of conclusion that passes
from the journal articles into the textbooks and popular-psychology best
sellers is that ‘women have higher verbal ability’ or ‘men are more
aggressive’. If a statistically significant block difference does not
emerge, the researcher is likely to be disappointed and the research may
not get published, since it seems to have nothing to say. I have written
this kind of data-dredging paper, about adolescents in Sydney, and, as
usual in this genre, paid a lot of attention to items where sex
differences did appear and much less attention to the larger number of
items where they did not.

When block differences do appear they are conventionally explained by
appeal to some underlying traits which distinguish women from men – in
other words by a unitary conception of sexual character. Often sex role
notions are brought in to provide a common-sense explanation of how
sexual character is formed. Thus women are said to be less
achievement-oriented than men because they have been socialized to
dependency, and so on. Often sex differences are hardly distinguished
from sex roles at all; the two blur together in a single concept.

A vast compendium of this kind of research was made in the mid-1970s by
Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin. The Psychology of Sex Differences
reported that block differences between women and men (generally white,
affluent, North American college students) did appear fairly
consistently in studies of some traits: verbal ability, visual/spatial
ability, mathematical ability, aggressiveness. A finding of no block
difference fairly consistently appeared in studies of rather more
traits: sociability, suggestibility, self-esteem, types of learning,
cognitive styles, achievement motivation, sensory modality. The authors
entered an ‘open finding’ – i.e., no consistent pattern – on another
range of traits: tactile sensitivity, timidity, activity level,
competitiveness, dominance, compliance, nurturance. The research has
flowed on since Maccoby and Jacklin wrote. Its results have been mixed,
but if it has had any trend it has been to close some of the gaps
between women and men that they left open. Robert Plomin and Terry Foch,
for instance, find sex differences accounting for only 1 per cent of the
variance in a study of children’s verbal and quantitative abilities.
Olive Johnson and Carolyn Harley report that being right- or left-handed
is a better predictor of cognitive abilities than is sex. Of course
these are only two examples from a mass of studies, and there are others
which suggest stronger sex differences. Nevertheless one can be very
confident of a negative point. Recent research has not shown that
Maccoby and Jacklin systematically underestimated sex differences.

A striking conclusion emerges. The logic of the genre focuses on
‘difference’ and its explanation. In fact the main finding, from about
eighty years of research, is a massive psychological similarity between
women and men in the populations studied by psychologists. Clear-cut
block differences are few, and confined to restricted topics. Small
differences-on-average, in the context of a very large overlapping of
the distributions of men and women, are usual even with traits where
differences appear fairly consistently. If it were not for the cultural
bias of both writers and readers, we might long ago have been talking
about this as ‘sex similarity’ research.

In so far as these scales and measures can be trusted, the notion of
distinct unitary sexual characters for women and men has been decisively
refuted. With it, much of the common-sense understanding of sex and
gender, together with most functionalist sex role theorizing, should
collapse.

This has not happened. There is too much invested in the notion of
sexual character for a simple factual refutation to destroy it. Yet
there has been serious pressure to modify it. The simplest modification
is to abandon the idea of categorical differences and interpret the
results of data-dredging sex difference research through the formula of
variation about a norm.

Overlapping distributions now matter less. Differences between means
suffice to establish difference between a male and a female norm. Role
theory provides a gloss. Variation about each norm reflects role
distance, vagueness or conflict in the expectations, or even deviance.
Those studies which fail to find mean differences are interpreted as
evidence of overlapping expectations or the convergence of traditional
sex roles.

As argued in chapter 3, role theory is infinitely plastic. There is no
great interest in its exercises in retrieval. But there is something of
more note here: the shift to a focus on variation. Concern with
variation in the traits for which feminine and masculine sexual
character are explanations is only a step from concern with variation in
femininity or masculinity themselves. This path leads to non-unitary
conceptions of sexual character.

The need to take this path is now clear in the research literature; all
interesting conceptions of sexual character from here on are
non-unitary. Both femininity and masculinity vary, and understanding
their variety is central to the psychology of gender. How is that
variety to be understood? There are several possible approaches.

Masculinity/Femininity Scales

The most popular way of grasping diversity in sexual character is to
think of people as being arrayed along a dimension that represents
differences in some gender-related trait. This is the basis of most
paper-and-pencil tests of masculinity/femininity (hereafter M/F). The
problem is how to specify where, on the imaginary line representing the
dimension, any given person’s shadow falls. This is called ‘measuring’
the trait, and M/F scales differ in the solutions they offer.

Some tests have used projective methods, such as the TT’ scale which
shows children a sexually ambiguous figure and invites them to make up a
story about it. But since the 1940s, when the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory (MMPI) came into use, a different form has been
usual. This most famous of all psychiatric screening tests contained a
masculinity-femininity subscale, and set the pattern of a self-report
inventory with many short items. The respondents describe themselves on
each item separately, and a count is made of how often a certain kind of
response is made. This count, sometimes transformed statistically,
becomes the respondent’s femininity or masculinity score.

The form of the self-description varies a little. Janet Spence and
Robert Helmreich in Masculinity and Femininity use a questionnaire which
invites people to rate themselves on where they fall between two
specified extremes, for example:

very rough …… very gentle
goes to pieces under pressure … stands up well under pressure

Sandra Bern, author of the famous ‘androgyny’ scale, dispenses with the
polar opposites. Each item simply names a trait and asks respondents to
rate how often it is true of them:

  ambitious …

  forceful …

  affectionate …

  child-like …

How is it known that these scales measure femininity and masculinity?
The usual test has been that each item discriminates statistically
between women and men. As Anne Constantinople points out in her
excellent review of M/F scales, this results in a systematic confusion
between ‘sex difference’ and ‘masculinity/femininity’. In principle any
item that shows a sex difference can figure in M/F scales. In practice
almost anything does. Items range from generalized self-descriptions
like those quoted above, to job preferences, word associations, neurotic
symptoms, information and aesthetic interests. Constantinople remarks
that while some items reflect an intuitive notion of what ‘masculinity’
and ‘femininity’ mean, in many cases the content seems ‘irrelevant to
any identifiable definition of the concept’.

Once a point of departure has been established another psychometric
criterion takes over, the scale’s internal consistency. Candidate items
are kept in the scale, or dropped, according to their correlation with
other items. Spence and Helmreich’s scales illustrate this. The
correlation of each item with the total (i.e., the sum of scores on all
items) is presented as justification of the coherence of each trait and
scale; and those items which have high item-total correlations are
chosen for the ‘short form’ of the scale.

This criterion is likely to whittle down the heterogeneity of content,
as it is familiar in questionnaire research that the highest
correlations are between items which ask the same kind of question in
slightly different language. More important, it eliminates any
possibility of recognizing tension or incoherence within the trait being
measured.

The reason for using a scale score is that individual items are not very
reliable, and can only be presumed to carry a small drop of the trait
being measured, mixed up with various impurities. By combining the
answers to a number of questions, the impurities tend to cancel each
other out. The way this combining is done is the key to the kind of
psychology that quantitative personality research produces. In adding
together the item scores, the specific meaning of each question is
ignored. In old-fashioned hand-scoring of questionnaires it was usual to
lay a cardboard sheet which masked the questions over the page, with the
ticks or crosses of answers appearing through small windows cut in the
cardboard. In modern machine-scoring only the number of the question is
needed – its wording does not enter the machine or the processing at
all. Semantics, in short, is abandoned.

Gutting answers of their particular meaning in order to treat them as
partial measures of a dimensional whole is taken for granted in the
psychometric literature. What a person thinks she is saying to the
researcher is set aside. The tick or cross is treated not as an answer
to a question but as a ‘response’ providing a clue to an underlying
entity. The researcher knows about this entity but the ‘subject’ does
not.

Nearly thirty years ago, in The Person in Psychology, Paul Lafitte
mounted a sustained critique of what he called ‘substantive abstraction’
in psychological measurement. Other criticisms of the dubious
assumptions and attenuation of reality in paper-and-pencil surveys have
come from quarters as diverse as psychoanalysis, anthropology and
ethnomethodology. The problem is not that the technique was rough in its
early days. Recent research commonly takes less account of such problems
than the pioneering studies did. The problem is about the bases of the
method. Gender scaling, like other forms of personality and attitude
scaling, involves a radical desemanticization of human practice. It is a
case of what R. D. Laing in another context called ‘transpersonal
invalidation’. The chances of a sound understanding of human beings
coming out of such research are infinitesimal.

But the approach does have important ideological effects.
Desemanticization allows research to recognize variation without having
to deal with contradiction. If a person’s answers to related items
conflict, this does not register as a problem, for instance a question
of ambivalence. It simply lowers the total score. If some items do not
fit with the others, there is no requirement to investigate why. They
are simply dropped from the item pool as a normal step in producing the
final instrument.

Femininity and masculinity are thus implicitly theorized as homogeneous
dimensions of temperament, which can be measured in all people. In a
roundabout way this allows scalar research to recognize a point that
unitary conceptions of sexual character could not, the coexistence of
masculinity and femininity in the same person. Not in the way Freud saw
them, as desires and identifications in conflict with each other, but
through the notion of multiple dimensions of variation. Femininity and
masculinity need not be treated as polar opposites, i.e., as ends of the
same dimension. Each might be treated as a separate scale, and the same
person might get high scores on both. This idea occurred to a number of
American psychologists in the early 1970s, with Bern’s version,
‘androgyny’, gaining most attention. Spence and Helmreich performed a
kind of reductio ad absurdum by constructing a femininity scale, a
masculinity scale and a M/F scale and showing they were all
statistically unconnected when administered to the same people.

The muddle in interpretation that follows from the desemanticization of
human communications is obvious enough. Constantinople’s summing-up on
masculinity and femininity scales a decade ago is still sound: ‘both
theoretically and empirically they seem to be among the muddiest
concepts in the psychologist’s vocabulary.’ The scalar approach has
produced very little new understanding of the psychosocial processes
involved.

The reasons for its popularity perhaps have more to do with the politics
of academic psychology. Scalar M/F research offers a way of treating an
important social question in terms acceptable to a psychological
establishment very much concerned with scientificity, formal measurement
and statistical proof. It is quick and straightforward, since the
conventions of scaling are well established; the professional journals
like it, and no one is threatened by it. At this level scalar research
is part of the domestication of sexual politics in the name of science.
It is an important political fact that a great deal of it has been done
by women.

At a deeper level this kind of psychology participates in the process of
reification. Turning a process, an action, or a relationship into an
object, or treating it as if it were an object, is one of the
fundamental dynamics of modern culture. Gender scaling involves a
drastic reification of the process of self-expression or accounting for
oneself. Even the stylized self-description called for by the scale
items is converted, by the operations that produce ‘scores’ and then
statistically manipulate them, into location in the abstract space of a
personality dimension.

If this research has been popular, and people feel they recognize
themselves in dimensional accounts (or in the unitary accounts of sexual
character discussed previously), it is not because people are dots on a
computer-generated graph in, N dimensions. It is, perhaps, because the
process of reification is so far advanced as to make recognition of
qualitative diversity threatening. Fear, not of ‘otherness’ so much as
of the riotous exuberance of motive and imagination that is a
possibility in sexual life, can be a powerful motive in a world partly
reified already.

Multiple Models: From Typology to Relationship

Scalar models of personality have often stemmed from theories of
personality ‘types’. Extraversion-introversion scales and the famous ‘F
scale’ of authoritarianism both derive from such typologies, devised by
Jung and the Frankfurt school respectively. M/F scales similarly derive
from unitary models of sexual character, in effect ‘dimensionalizing’
them by adding a range of possibilities in between. But this is not the
only way diversity can be recognized in a theory of types. One may hold
to the conception of a whole personality rather than a dimension, and
subdivide or multiply the types.

In the case of sexual character the classic of this approach is Simone
de Beauvoir’s account of femininity in Book Two of The Second Sex.
Starting with a general difference in the social situation and
ontological status of women and men, she goes on to develop a subtle
account of half-a-dozen types of femininity in literature and French
social life: the lesbian, the married woman, the prostitute, the
independent woman, etc. Her types are partly based on social
circumstances, partly on the patterns of inner dynamics that will be
discussed in the following chapter.

In principle the same kind of thing can be done for types of
masculinity, though no Simon de Beauvoir has appeared to do it. Andrew
Tolson’s The Limits of Masculinity makes a beginning. Going through the
(mostly British) research in community studies and industrial sociology,
Tolson draws out connections between economic circumstance, life cycle
and sexual identity in a broad distinction between a working-class type
and a middle-class type of masculinity.

Both de Beauvoir and Tolson assume a one-to-one correspondence between
character type and milieu. This is a step forward from unitary models of
sexual character, but not a long one. Character is still treated as
unitary within a given setting. The logic is the same as in ‘national
character’ or culture-and-personality research that described the ‘modal
personalities’ supposed to characterize Germany, Japan, Samoa. The same
treatment of sexual character is found in the cross-cultural contrasts
made by Margaret Mead in Male and Female.

The next step is to recognize that qualitatively different types are
produced within the same social setting. Evidence for this is not
difficult to find. Here is an example taken from the collection of
working-class autobiographies already quoted. The author, Bim Andrews,
is talking about growing up and going to work at Cambridge in the 1920s:

  In the mid-twenties, I learned how to become a clerk at the Coop, and
  after evening classes in shorthand and typing, a higher grade office
  worker. A dutiful, heads-down-all-day, worker, with no ideas at all
  about my rights. Not even my basic rights as a human being, never mind
  my rights as part of a deal involving my work and their money. True,
  there was some talk of a Trades Union, but no girl or woman ever
  thought it applied to her. Some of my work kept me standing up all
  day, and when I had bad menstrual cramps, as I often did, I would
  slink off to the lavatory to sit down for as long as I dared. No rest
  room, not even a chair in our crowded cloakroom.

  Some new ideas did take root – the Co-op was quite an evangelical
  movement then, and it was their evening classes which I joined. But my
  emotions and understanding were still at sixes and sevens. Which was
  the right way to live? Like Nellie, with her placid face and her
  engagement ring, and her pieces of linen and underclothes in tissue
  paper, brought for display to the girls before settling in her bottom
  drawer? Or like Jessie, coy and nudging – what we would now call sexy
  – surrounded by men, single and married? Or like Miss Marshall, the
  General Manager’s secretary and our immediate boss. Composed, and
  sharp with us, the owner of a little car, involved in a sly
  relationship with the Manager of the Grocery Dept?

Nellie, Jessie, Miss Marshall and indeed the earnest Bim herself, are
present in her mind as types – real types, not ideal or abstracted types
– standing for different ‘ways to live’. Yet they do not float free from
each other. Bim experiences a relationship between them. It is a kind of
rivalry between alternatives, confronting her with an existential and to
some extent moral choice. She can become a certain kind of woman, enter
a certain kind of femininity, by throwing herself forward along one path
in life.

I will return to the idea of a life path in chapters 9 and 10; here the
important point is that the types exist in a relationship with each
other. In the research which first raised this question for me, in an
Australian ruling-class boys’ school, the connections take the definite
form of a hierarchy. A teacher whom we call Angus Barr described to us
an episode, some details of which we could confirm from other sources,
of what he thought of as ‘bullying’ between two groups of boys:

  There are a group [‘the Bloods’] which I suppose you can say is a
  traditional one, the sporting group, they are more active physically …
  And sometimes they ride a bit rough over another group who have been
  called, and now call themselves, ‘the Cyrils’, the conshies. [From
  ‘conscientious’.] Who are the ones who don’t play any games. Who have
  this year [had] a particularly bad time from the Blood group … And
  about the middle of the year I had to – it hasn’t arisen in past
  years, I’ve taken the form for a number of years so I think I know –
  had to intervene. And say, Well now, what is being done by some of you
  to some others has reached limits where it has got to stop, it is
  going too far … [The Cyrils] were these quite clever little boys who
  are socially totally inadequate, and yet who have got very good
  brains. They’ve all got glasses, short, very fat and that sort of
  thing … I think I was reasonably successful in stopping it. I tried to
  ask discreetly some of the Cyrils how things had been getting on, and
  they said, Well it had been better. And I spoke to one or two of the
  Bloods, said that it’s got to stop.

In contrast to Bim Andrews’s perceptions, the difference between these
masculinities is not a matter of free choice by the boys: an unathletic
way of life may for instance be imposed by a boy’s understanding of his
physique. Larger cultural dynamics can be detected here. But the crucial
point is that entering one group does not make the other irrelevant. Far
from it: an active relationship is constructed. The Bloods persecute the
Cyrils, because being a Blood involves an active rejection of what they
see as effeminacy.

This particular pattern of conflict does not arise by chance. The school
in question is noted for its attachment to a fiercely competitive
body-contact sport, football. Both official school policy, and the ethos
among staff, parents and Old Boys, encourage activities in which the
kind of aggressive, physically dominant masculinity represented by the
Bloods is at a premium. The boys are obliged to define their attitude to
this demand, either for or against. Hence they polarize along the axis
described by Mr Barr. Yet those boys who react against the model
embraced by the Bloods are not simply pushed into limbo. For the school
not only wants football glory, it also must have academic success. A
high rate of performance in matriculation examinations is necessary if
the school is to hold its position in the now strongly competitive
secondary-education market. In short, the school needs the Cyrils too.
Within their own sphere it gives them honour: acknowledging examination
success by means of prizes, giving awards to the chess club as well as
the football team. And it protects their interests, as Mr Barr’s
intervention to stop the ‘bullying’ neatly shows.

The production of multiple masculinities and femininities can be seen in
studies of other schools. In one of the earlier school ethnographies,
Social Relations in a Secondary School, David Hargreaves portrayed the
production of a semi-delinquent ‘subculture’ in the lower streams of a
British secondary modern school. One of its components was a rough,
aggressive masculinity, strongly and no doubt deliberately contrasted
with the more compliant behaviour of boys in the upper streams. A
similar pattern in a similar school a decade later is traced by Paul
Willis in Learning to Labour, a contrast between ‘the lads’ and ‘the
ear’oles’. Willis is more explicit about the construction of masculinity
and its connection with class fate, as the two groups of boys head for
factory jobs on the one hand and white-collar jobs on the other.

In the Australian girls’ private school we call Auburn College, there is
not only a differentiation between several kinds of femininity, but also
a recent change in the pattern of hegemony among them. An academic
renovation of the school, undertaken by a new headmistress and new
staff, has altered the context of the girls’ peer-group life. The
prestige formerly enjoyed by a ‘social’ set of girls has been broken and
their place in the sun taken by academically successful girls headed for
university and professional careers.

The pattern of differentiation and relation appears in other
institutions besides schools. The fashion industry is an important case,
given the significance of clothes and cosmetics as markers of gender.
Here there is a constant interplay between the economic need for a
turnover of styles – the basis of ‘fashion’ itself – and the need to
sustain the structures of motive that constitute their markets.

In the aftermath of the new feminism, the promotion of a ‘liberated’
femininity became the basis of many marketing strategies. ‘Charlie’
perfumes and cosmetics (introduced by Revlon in 1973) and ‘Virginia
Slims’ cigarettes were among the most heavily promoted examples. Yet a
femininity that gets ‘liberated’ too completely loses the need to
present itself through cosmetics and fashionable clothes. Thus an
oscillation: on one poster ‘Charlie’ strides out boldly in trousers; on
another, ‘Pretty Polly’ advertises its fragile pantihose with the
caption ‘For girls who don’t want to wear the trousers’. Some marketers
take the contradiction inside the one promotion: thus ‘natural look’
cosmetics; or a magazine that uses a feminist name, Ms London, as a
vehicle for wholly stereotyped advertising.

The fashion industry works through competition of images, but also on
the assumption that the competition is always being resolved. A leading
designer emerges; a ‘look’ is settled on; a particular presentation of
femininity made normative. In cases such as Dior and the ‘New Look’ of
1947, a trend lasting over a number of seasons may be set. Moreover, the
brilliantly lit centre stage of high fashion is only a small part of the
clothing industry’s sales. The bulk of the business concerns cheap,
drab, and poorly made clothing for the mass market in styles that change
slowly. Two centuries ago this was called bluntly ‘slop cloathing’; it
is now called in the rag trade ‘dumb fashion’. So the currently exalted
style does not eliminate all other styles. Rather it subordinates them.

There need not be any psychological traits which all femininities have
in common and which distinguish them from all masculinities, or vice
versa. The character structure of the academic high-flyers at Auburn
College is probably closer to that of Milton’s ‘Cyrils’ than to
socialite femininities. What unites the femininities of a given social
milieu is the double context in which they are formed: on the one hand
in relation to the image and experience of a female body, on the other
to the social definitions of a woman’s place and the cultural
oppositions of masculinity and femininity. Femininity and masculinity
are not essences: they are ways of living certain relationships. It
follows that static typologies of sexual character have to be replaced
by histories, analyses of the joint production of sets of psychological
forms.

The Effect of Structures

To this point I have discussed the production of sexual character as if
each milieu were independent of all others. It is time to bring into the
analysis the structures that interrelate milieux (chapter 6) and their
historical composition into a gender order for the society as a whole
(chapter 7).

To start with the structure of power, workplace studies like those
discussed in chapter 5 show that face-to-face relations are strongly
conditioned by the general power situation between employers and
employees and its materialization in particular labour processes. A
notable case is the job of personal ‘secretary’ in business. An
apparently very individualized relationship of mutual dependence and
trust between the executive (generally a man) and the personal secretary
(almost always a woman) in fact rests on sharp differences of income,
the industrial vulnerability of the employee, and the overall social
power and authority of men. A specific version of femininity is called
for, in which technical competence and the social presentation of
attractiveness, social skill and interpersonal compliance are fused.
This kind of femininity has to be produced, and is by the informal
training documented in Chris Griffin’s study of British girls moving
from school into office work.

The power hierarchy among men in the industrial enterprise is clear
enough, from managers and professionals at the top to unqualified manual
workers at the bottom. In sharp contrast to the situation of personal
secretaries, the men in manual industrial work are often in situations
that allow a countervailing solidarity (one of the bases of unionism)
and with it a rejection of the masculinity of the dominant group. John
Lippert provides a striking description of the aggressive, sometimes
violent, heterosexual masculinity produced among motor manufacturing
workers in Detroit. The description can be matched in other countries:
Meredith Burgmann’s account of ‘machismo’ among radical builders’
labourers in Sydney and Paul Willis’s account of masculine ‘shop-floor
culture’ among metal workers in Birmingham. The common elements are a
cult of masculinity centring on physical prowess, and sexual contempt
directed at managers, and men in office work generally, as being effete.

These examples also point to the gender structuring of production.
Elements of sexual character are embedded in the distinctive sets of
practices sometimes called ‘occupational cultures’. Professionalism is a
case in point. The combination of theoretical knowledge with technical
expertise is central to a profession’s claim to competence and to a
monopoly of practice. This has been constructed historically as a form
of masculinity: emotionally flat, centred on a specialized skill,
insistent on professional esteem and technically based dominance over
other workers, and requiring for its highest (specialist) development
the complete freedom from childcare and domestic work provided by having
wives and maids to do it. The masculine character of professionalism has
been supported by the simplest possible mechanism, the exclusion of
women. Women have had a long struggle even to get the basic training,
and are still effectively excluded from professions like accountancy and
engineering.

In manual trades, and manual work more broadly, the claim to competence
is rather different. Here the most competent are not the most
specialized but the most versatile – those with a range of skills, able
to tackle any job that offers. This too is often constructed as a form
of masculinity dependent on a domestic division of labour. Tradesmen
have often been prepared to move around from place to place, even from
country to country, to increase their range of experience, the wife’s
willingness to stay or go being assumed. Fathers have taken care to
provide their sons with a range of skills as insurance against economic
fluctuations. To quote another British working-class autobiography, from
a miner’s son called Fred Broughton who grew up in the years before
World War I, ‘Father used to say, “I shall not leave you much money, but
I will teach you every job, then you can always get work”. He showed us
every job in the garden and on the farm, including how to get stone in
the quarry and trim it and build stone walls.’

The construction of nursing as an element of the sexual division of
labour, an occupation blending a particular version of femininity with
the technical requirements of the job, has already been discussed.

Finally the structure of cathexis is involved. This is the most obvious
of structural determinations of sexual character because of the
prominence of heterosexual couple relationships in everyday life. It is
folklore that ‘opposites attract’. One of the most familiar features of
sexual display is behaviour and clothing that emphasizes stereotyped sex
differences. Studs display their biceps and pectorals, suave charmers
grow their pencil moustaches; ‘girls’ emphasize their vulnerability in
tight skirts and high-heeled shoes, sheer stockings and make-up that is
constantly in need of repair. So much emotion is adrift around these
marks of difference that they can get cathected in their own right, as
argued in chapter 5. These stereotypes are so familiar that it is
necessary to stress that they are not the whole story. Alongside the
Errol Flynns and John Waynes are figures like Cary Grant, whose appeal
is specially as a model of sympathetic (though not effeminate)
masculinity. In a study of images of masculinity in Australian
television, Glen Lewis has pointed to the prominence of ‘soft’ men as
presenters, especially in daytime programs directed at women.

Desire may be organized around identification and similarity rather than
around difference. Homosexual love is the obvious case. The attempt to
reduce this to attraction-of-opposites by assuming it is based on a
butch/femme pattern is now generally discredited. Gay liberation theory
lays emphasis instead on the solidarity created by love between women or
between men. The point is that there are many more possibilities than
the standard dichotomy or complete structurelessness. Works like Pat
Califia’s Sapphistry explore a variety of erotic constructions of
femininity (homosexuality still presupposes gender division) based on
identification and shared experience; the same can be done for
masculinity.

There is a related possibility among heterosexual people, for powerful
desire can exist between those whose character structure is similar. An
interplay between identification and reciprocity, and a literal playing
with similarity and difference, becomes possible as a basis of
eroticism. On such a basis heterosexual masculinity and femininity might
be recomposed as various kinds of psychological hermaphroditism, a
possibility I will return to in chapter 13.

To sum up: it is possible to see how each of the major structures
impinges on the way femininity and masculinity are formed in particular
milieux. Conversely, these structures must be seen as the vehicles for
the constitution of femininity and masculinity as collective patterns on
a scale far beyond that of an individual setting. In the terms proposed
in Part II, we have moved from particular gender regimes to the
society-wide gender order. The question now to be faced is how, at the
level of a whole society, the elements are composed, interrelated and
ordered.

Hegemonic Masculinity and Emphasized Femininity

The central argument can be put in a few paragraphs. There is an
ordering of versions of femininity and masculinity at the level of the
whole society, in some ways analogous to the patterns of face-to-face
relationship within institutions. The possibilities of variation, of
course, are vastly greater. The sheer complexity of relationships
involving millions of people guarantees that ethnic differences and
generational differences as well as class patterns come into play. But
in key respects the organization of gender on the very large scale must
be more skeletal and simplified than the human relationships in
face-to-face milieux. The forms of femininity and masculinity
constituted at this level are stylized and impoverished. Their
interrelation is centred on a single structural fact, the global
dominance of men over women.

This structural fact provides the main basis for relationships among men
that define a hegemonic form of masculinity in the society as a whole.
‘Hegemonic masculinity’ is always constructed in relation to various
subordinated masculinities as well as in relation to women. The
interplay between different forms of masculinity is an important part of
how a patriarchal social order works.

There is no femininity that is hegemonic in the sense that the dominant
form of masculinity is hegemonic among men. This is not a new
observation. Viola Klein’s historical study of conceptions of ‘the
feminine character’ noted wryly how little the leading theorists could
agree on what it was: ‘we find not only contradiction on particular
points but a bewildering variety of traits considered characteristic of
women by the various authorities’. More recently the French analyst Luce
Irigaray, in a celebrated essay ‘This Sex Which Is Not One’, has
emphasized the absence of any clear-cut definition for women’s eroticism
and imagination in a patriarchal society.

At the level of mass social relations, however, forms of femininity are
defined clearly enough. It is the global subordination of women to men
that provides an essential basis for differentiation. One form is
defined around compliance with this subordination and is oriented to
accommodating the interests and desires of men. I will call this
‘emphasized femininity’. Others are defined centrally by strategies of
resistance or forms of non-compliance. Others again are defined by
complex strategic combinations of compliance, resistance and
co-operation. The interplay among them is a major part of the dynamics
of change in the gender order as a whole.

The rest of this section will examine more closely the cases of
hegemonic masculinity and emphasized femininity, making brief comments
on subordinated and marginalized forms. The latter will come back into
focus in chapters 10 and 12.

In the concept of hegemonic masculinity, ‘hegemony’ means (as in
Gramsci’s analyses of class relations in Italy from which the term is
borrowed) a social ascendancy achieved in a play of social forces that
extends beyond contests of brute power into the organization of private
life and cultural processes. Ascendancy of one group of men over another
achieved at the point of a gun, or by the threat of unemployment, is not
hegemony. Ascendancy which is embedded in religious doctrine and
practice, mass media content, wage structures, the design of housing,
welfare/taxation policies and so forth, is.

Two common misunderstandings of the concept should be cleared up
immediately. First, though ‘hegemony’ does not refer to ascendancy based
on force, it is not incompatible with ascendancy based on force. Indeed
it is common for the two to go together. Physical or economic violence
backs up a dominant cultural pattern (for example beating up
‘perverts’), or ideologies justify the holders of physical power (‘law
and order’). The connection between hegemonic masculinity and
patriarchal violence is close, though not simple.

Second, ‘hegemony’ does not mean total cultural dominance, the
obliteration of alternatives. It means ascendancy achieved within a
balance of forces, that is, a state of play. Other patterns and groups
are subordinated rather than eliminated. If we do not recognize this it
would be impossible to account for the everyday contestation that
actually occurs in social life, let alone for historical changes in
definitions of gender patterns on the grand scale.

Hegemonic masculinity, then, is very different from the notion of a
general ‘male sex role’, though the concept allows us to formulate more
precisely some of the sound points made in the sex-role literature.
First, the cultural ideal (or ideals) of masculinity need not correspond
at all closely to the actual personalities of the majority of men.
Indeed the winning of hegemony often involves the creation of models of
masculinity which are quite specifically fantasy figures, such as the
film characters played by Humphrey Bogart, John Wayne and Sylvester
Stallone. Or real models may be publicized who are so remote from
everyday achievement that they have the effect of an unattainable ideal,
like the Australian Rules footballer Ron Barassi or the boxer Muhammed
Ali.

As we move from face-to-face settings to structures involving millions
of people, the easily symbolized aspects of interaction become more
prominent. Hegemonic masculinity is very public. In a society of mass
communications it is tempting to think that it exists only as publicity.
Hence the focus on media images and media discussions of masculinity in
the ‘Books About Men’ of the 1970s and 1980s, from Warren Farrell’s The
Liberated Man to Barbara Ehrenreich’s The Hearts of Men.

To focus on the media images alone would be a mistake. They need not
correspond to the actual characters of the men who hold most social
power – in contemporary societies the corporate and state elites. Indeed
a ruling class may allow a good deal of sexual dissent. A minor but
dramatic instance is the tolerance for homosexuality that the British
diplomat Guy Burgess could assume from other men of his class during his
career as a Soviet spy. The public face of hegemonic masculinity is not
necessarily what powerful men are, but what sustains their power and
what large numbers of men are motivated to support. The notion of
‘hegemony’ generally implies a large measure of consent. Few men are
Bogarts or Stallones, many collaborate in sustaining those images.

There are various reasons for complicity, and a thorough study of them
would go far to illuminate the whole system of sexual politics. Fantasy
gratification is one – nicely satirized in Woody Allen’s Bogart
take-off, Play it Again, Sam. Displaced aggression might be another –
and the popularity of very violent movies from Dirty Harry to Rambo
suggest that a great deal of this is floating around. But it seems
likely that the major reason is that most men benefit from the
subordination of women, and hegemonic masculinity is the cultural
expression of this ascendancy.

This needs careful formulation. It does not imply that hegemonic
masculinity means being particularly nasty to women. Women may feel as
oppressed by non-hegemonic masculinities, may even find the hegemonic
pattern more familiar and manageable. There is likely to be a kind of
‘fit’ between hegemonic masculinity and emphasized femininity. What it
does imply is the maintenance of practices that institutionalize men’s
dominance over women. In this sense hegemonic masculinity must embody a
successful collective strategy in relation to women. Given the
complexity of gender relations no simple or uniform strategy is
possible: a ‘mix’ is necessary. So hegemonic masculinity can contain at
the same time, quite consistently, openings towards domesticity and
openings towards violence, towards misogyny and towards heterosexual
attraction.

Hegemonic masculinity is constructed in relation to women and to
subordinated masculinities. These other masculinities need not be as
clearly defined – indeed, achieving hegemony may consist precisely in
preventing alternatives gaining cultural definition and recognition as
alternatives, confining them to ghettos, to privacy, to unconsciousness.

The most important feature of contemporary hegemonic masculinity is that
it is heterosexual, being closely connected to the institution of
marriage; and a key form of subordinated masculinity is homosexual. This
subordination involves both direct interactions and a kind of
ideological warfare. Some of the interactions were described in chapter
1: police and legal harassment, street violence, economic
discrimination. These transactions are tied together by the contempt for
homosexuality and homosexual men that is part of the ideological package
of hegemonic masculinity. The AIDS scare has been marked less by
sympathy for gays as its main victims than by hostility to them as the
bearers of a new threat. The key point of media concern is whether the
‘gay plague’ will spread to ‘innocent’, i.e., straight, victims.

In other cases of subordinated masculinity the condition is temporary.
Cynthia Cockburn’s splendid study of printing workers in London portrays
a version of hegemonic masculinity that involved ascendancy over young
men as well as over women. The workers recalled their apprenticeships in
terms of drudgery and humiliation, a ritual of induction into trade and
masculinity at the same time. But once they were in, they were
‘brothers’.

Several general points about masculinity also apply to the analysis of
femininity at the mass level. These patterns too are historical:
relationships change, new forms of femininity emerge and others
disappear. The ideological representations of femininity draw on, but do
not necessarily correspond to, actual femininities as they are lived.
What most women support is not necessarily what they are.

There is however a fundamental difference. All forms of femininity in
this society are constructed in the context of the overall subordination
of women to men. For this reason there is no femininity that holds among
women the position held by hegemonic masculinity among men.

This fundamental asymmetry has two main aspects. First, the
concentration of social power in the hands of men leaves limited scope
for women to construct institutionalized power relationships over other
women. It does happen on a face-to-face basis, notably in
mother–daughter relationships. Institutionalized power hierarchies have
also existed in contexts like the girls’ schools pictured in Mädchen in
Uniform and Frost in May. But the note of domination that is so
important in relations between kinds of masculinity is muted. The much
lower level of violence between women than violence between men is a
fair indication of this. Second, the organization of a hegemonic form
around dominance over the other sex is absent from the social
construction of femininity. Power, authority, aggression, technology are
not thematized in femininity at large as they are in masculinity.
Equally important, no pressure is set up to negate or subordinate other
forms of femininity in the way hegemonic masculinity must negate other
masculinities. It is likely therefore that actual femininities in our
society are more diverse than actual masculinities.

The dominance structure which the construction of femininity cannot
avoid is the global dominance of heterosexual men. The process is likely
to polarize around compliance or resistance to this dominance.

The option of compliance is central to the pattern of femininity which
is given most cultural and ideological support at present, called here
‘emphasized femininity’. This is the translation to the large scale of
patterns already discussed in particular institutions and milieux, such
as the display of sociability rather than technical competence,
fragility in mating scenes, compliance with men’s desire for titillation
and ego-stroking in office relationships, acceptance of marriage and
childcare as a response to labour-market discrimination against women.
At the mass level these are organized around themes of sexual
receptivity in relation to younger women and motherhood in relation to
older women.

Like hegemonic masculinity, emphasized femininity as a cultural
construction is very public, though its content is specifically linked
with the private realm of the home and the bedroom. Indeed it is
promoted in mass media and marketing with an insistence and on a scale
far beyond that found for any form of masculinity. The articles and
advertisements in mass-circulation women’s magazines, the ‘women’s
pages’ of mass-circulation newspapers and the soap operas and ‘games’ of
daytime television, are familiar cases. Most of this promotion, it might
be noted, is organized, financed and supervised by men.

To call this pattern ‘emphasized femininity’ is also to make a point
about how the cultural package is used in interpersonal relationships.
This kind of femininity is performed, and performed especially to men.
There is a great deal of folklore about how to sustain the performance.
It is a major concern of women’s magazines from Women’s Weekly to Vogue.
It is even taken up and turned into highly ambivalent comedy by
Hollywood (How to Marry a Millionaire; Tootsie). Marilyn Monroe was both
archetype and satirist of emphasized femininity. Marabel Morgan’s ‘total
woman’, an image that somehow mixes sexpot and Jesus Christ, uses the
same tactics and has the same ambivalences.

Femininity organized as an adaptation to men’s power, and emphasizing
compliance, nurturance and empathy as womanly virtues, is not in much of
a state to establish hegemony over other kinds of femininity. There is a
familiar paradox about antifeminist women’s groups like ‘Women Who Want
to be Women’ who exalt the Kinder, Kirche und Küche version of
femininity: they can only become politically active by subverting their
own prescriptions. They must rely heavily on religious ideology and on
political backing from conservative men. The relations they establish
with other kinds of femininity are not so much domination as attempted
marginalization.

Central to the maintenance of emphasized femininity is practice that
prevents other models of femininity gaining cultural articulation. When
feminist historiography describes women’s experience as ‘hidden from
history’, in Sheila Rowbotham’s phrase, it is responding partly to this
fact. Conventional historiography recognizes, indeed presupposes,
conventional femininity. What is hidden from it is the experience of
spinsters, lesbians, unionists, prostitutes, madwomen, rebels and maiden
aunts, manual workers, midwives and witches. And what is involved in
radical sexual politics, in one of its dimensions, is precisely a
reassertion and recovery of marginalized forms of femininity in the
experience of groups like these.

NOTES

Unitary Models and Sex-difference Research

(pp. 167–71). Research since Maccoby and Jacklin is large and life is
short; one example must do. The text cited two studies of cognition, an
area where Maccoby and Jacklin thought sex differences were well
established. Fairweather (1976) argued that these differences were
trivial. Hyde (1981) concluded they were consistent but small. Rosenthal
and Rubin (1982) concluded they were not so small, but probably
declining. Lest this seem like a trend, Fendrich-Salowey et al. (1982)
and Denno (1982) agree with Fairweather. An outside observer may
reasonably suspend judgement between these views, but all must agree
that if there are systematic sex differences here, they are not very
large in terms of overall variance on the measures.

Masculinity/Femininity Scales

(pp. 171–5). For classic critiques of reified measurement in attitude
and personality research see Goldhamer (1949), Williams (1959) and
Cicourel (1964). Lafitte’s critique (1957) remains the most penetrating
on technical grounds.

Multiple Models

(pp. 175–9). Bim Andrews’ quotation from Burnett (1982), pp. 130–1.
Angus Barr quoted from original interview transcript. For the story of
‘Auburn College’ see Connell et al. (1981). The argument at the end of
this section leaves open the sense in which we can speak of ‘femininity’
in a man and ‘masculinity’ in a woman. The psychoanalytic evidence to
come in chapter 9 implies that these are meaningful expressions, but
since they involve a psychological structure that works against bodily
experience it can hardly be the same kind of structure as women’s
femininity or men’s masculinity. The pressures set up can be ferocious
enough to change the body-image itself, as with those transsexuals who
experience their penises or their breasts as not being part of their
bodies.

The Effect of Structures

(pp. 180–2). Fred Broughton quotation from Burnett (1982), p. 299.

Hegemonic Masculinity and Emphasized Femininity

(p. 183–8). Quotation from Klein (1946) p. 164. On Burgess’s remarkable
immunity see Seale and McConville (1978). The concepts discussed in this
section are both important and underdeveloped; my argument is more
tentative than usual here. The mother–daughter relationship might modify
the argument about femininity significantly.

9

The Mystery in Broad Daylight
Gender Formation and Psychoanalysis

How are the structures of personal life discussed in the last chapter
formed? There are two main approaches to this question that are
compatible with a social analysis of gender. Socialization theory treats
gender formation as the acquisition and internalization of social norms.
It stresses continuity between social context and personality, and the
homogeneity of personality itself. Psychoanalysis treats gender
formation as the effect of an encounter with power and necessity rather
than normative prescriptions. It emphasizes discontinuity between social
context and personality, and points to radical division within
personality. I will make only a brief examination of socialization
theory as it quickly appears inadequate to the problem; then turn to the
two main branches of psychoanalysis that offer some grip on the
question.

Socialization

In both academic social science and the popular literature on gender in
the last two decades the commonest approach has been through concepts of
social moulding or ‘socialization’.

Schematically, the main argument runs like this. The new-born child has
a biological sex but no social gender. As it grows older society
provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviour
appropriate to the one sex or the other. Certain agencies of
socialization – notably the family, the media, the peer group and the
school – make these expectations and models concrete and provide the
settings in which they are appropriated by the child. The sequence of
agencies may be important and distinctions between primary and secondary
socialization are often made. Various mechanisms of learning come into
play: conditioning, instruction, modelling, identification, rule
learning. There is much debate in the gender-socialization literature
about the relative importance of these mechanisms. Whatever the details,
the social models or prescriptions are internalized to a greater or
lesser degree. The result is a gender identity that in the usual case
corresponds to the social expectations for that sex. Some cases will
‘deviate’ because of the abnormal functioning of an agency of
socialization (for example, a father-absent family), or because of
exceptional biology. The products of these deviations are homosexuals,
transsexuals, intersexes and others whose gender identity fails to
correspond in the usual way to their sex.

A close affinity between socialization concepts and sex role theory is
obvious. The social prescriptions are often called ‘norms’ and the
process of social learning is often called ‘role learning’, ‘role
acquisition’, or ‘sex role socialization’. To this extent the critique
of role theory stated in chapter 3 applies in full force. Role-learning
theory is internally incoherent, and incapable of providing a genuinely
social analysis of social process. But though they are commonly phrased
in sex role terms, strictly speaking the main elements of socialization
analyses can be separated from the role framework and need to be
considered in their own right.

The notion of a school, family, peer group or television network as an
‘agency of socialization’ implies a definite script, a charter under
which the agency acts on behalf of the society, and a degree of
consensus about what it is to do and how to do it. Such smooth pictures
of socializing agencies are given by most of the literature on sex-role
socialization, including the writings of liberal feminism.

Both historical evidence about the institutions involved, and close-up
studies of their contemporary working, oblige us to reject this picture
of consensual agencies acting on behalf of the social order as a whole.
Social history shows schools and families often in conflict with each
other and with larger social structures. Examples are Richard Sennett’s
Chicago study Families Against the City, and Pavla Miller’s Long
Division which shows how the mass school system in South Australia was
imposed as an intervention into working-class families and in the teeth
of considerable resistance from them.

Nor are these institutions internally homogeneous, consensual, or even
roughly consistent in their dealings with the people being ‘socialized’.
Psychoanalytic studies of families such as Laing and Esterson’s Sanity,
Madness and the Family and Françoise Dolto’s Dominique show intolerable
contradictions in the pressures and demands placed on children. These
cases are, by definition, exceptional in the intensity of the pressures
they generate. But other evidence goes far to show that internal
conflict and cross-pressure is quite normal. Examples are American
research on families like Mirra Komarovsky’s Blue-Collar Marriage and
Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain, and the British research on
working-class schools cited earlier. The classic of liberal feminism,
Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique, was precisely an exploration of
contradiction within the American bourgeois family. When institutions
appear consensual and consistent, closer examination is likely to show
this is because a great deal of energy has been put into overriding
conflicts of interest to create a front of harmony and good order. This
is shown for ruling-class schools in Teachers’ Work, and is evident in
case studies of families like the Princes in chapter 1.

These data have considerable implications for our understanding of the
way institutions shape people. The notion of ‘socialization’ rests on
the idea of internalization through one or other of the mechanisms
described by the psychology of learning. What is produced inside the
person is a psychological structure that reproduces or reflects the
characteristics of the socializing agency. The notion of ‘modelling’,
taking on the attributes of the socializer, encapsulates this feature of
socialization theory.

This becomes untenable as a general conception of gender formation once
we recognize the fact of contradiction within the process. This
eliminates the possibility of mechanical causation: the only mechanical
outcome of contradiction would be randomness, and the evidence will not
support that. Instead it introduces two possibilities, both of which
lead away from ‘socialization’ notions to something radically different.
One is the production within the person of psychological structures
qualitatively different from the properties of the institution or
milieu. This is the basis of classical psychoanalysis. The other is the
possibility of constitutive choice in a field opened up by
contradiction. This is the basis of existential psychoanalysis.

The popularity of socialization notions in academic research has been
supported by two occupational blindnesses, the inability of sociologists
to recognize the complexities of the person, and the unwillingness of
psychologists to recognize the dimension of social power. Both groups
have been willing to settle for a consensual model of intergenerational
transfer – playing down conflict and ignoring violence – and for a
consensual model of the psychological structure produced.

The notion of a ‘gender identity’ at the core of femininity and
masculinity is the psychological counterpart of the notion of a ‘sex
role’ into which one is socialized. Indeed its basis seems to be the act
of recognizing oneself as the kind of person that conventional images of
femininity and masculinity define. Accordingly investigators like Robert
Stoller trace the foundations of gender identity back to the first years
of life, when the child is introduced to definitions of femaleness and
maleness. Likewise the origins of aberrant gender identity, in Stoller’s
case studies of transsexuals, are traced to aberrant family
constellations at that stage of life.

The notion of identity as a coherent core to personality or sexual
character was popularized in the 1940s and 1950s by Erik Erikson in
Childhood and Society and by the culture-and-personality school of
anthropology. It is not accidental that this happened at the same time
as the rise of role theory in sociology. Identity theory traded on the
psychoanalytic idea of different levels in personality, but gutted it by
removing the idea of fundamental conflict between the levels. Surface
levels of personality became the more or less straightforward expression
of the core.

A full critique of such models of personality would involve a long
detour. I will state the main points briefly. A homogeneous or
consensual model of gender identity loses the ability to account for
creativity and resistance. It recognizes the production of different
gender practices only as deviance resulting from inadequate or aberrant
socialization. Its homogeneous picture of the core misses or
marginalizes that mixing of elements of gender which classical
psychoanalysis referred to as normal bisexuality and which even scalar
conceptions of personality have now acknowledged as important (androgyny
etc.). And it makes a cognitive act – recognizing oneself as male or
female – central to the structuring of emotion without acknowledging
either the social structuring of such cognition (gender involves social
categories presented to the child in the practices of adults) or its
dependence on emotional processes that are not cognitively organized
(what the Freudians call ‘primary process’).

Socialization theory, supposing a mechanism of transmission and a
consensual model of what is produced, has been credible only to the
extent that social scientists have been willing to ignore both choice
and force in social life. I would argue, with Sartre and Laing, for
seeing them as constitutive. ‘Agencies of socialization’ cannot produce
mechanical effects in a growing person. What they do is invite the child
to participate in social practice on given terms. The invitation may be,
and often is, coercive – accompanied by heavy pressure to accept and no
mention of an alternative. The emotional pressure involved has been well
brought out in autobiographical writings from the American antisexist
men’s movement, such as those by Seymour M. Miller and Michael
Silverstein. Yet children do decline, or more exactly start making their
own moves on the terrain of gender. They may refuse heterosexuality,
though gay autobiographies show it often takes a long time to construct
a positive alternative as homosexual. They may set about blending
masculine and feminine elements, for example girls insisting on
competitive sport at school. They may start a split in their own lives,
for example boys dressing in drag when by themselves. They may construct
a fantasy life at odds with their actual practice, which is perhaps the
commonest move of all.

If socialization were as smooth and successful as socialization theory
presupposes, it would be difficult to account for the degree of violence
that has existed historically in relations between adults and children.
It seems that its level has declined a great deal in capitalist core
countries over the last hundred years – one of the few senses in which
this really has turned out to be, as Ellen Key predicted, ‘the century
of the child’. Yet even here the decline has been very selective. In a
Sydney survey of 1969, over 70 per cent of adolescent boys aged eleven
to fourteen reported being caned or strapped at school in the current
year. Observation in any supermarket will indicate that hitting young
children is still a commonplace of daily life.

The imbalance of power makes it possible for adults to put very heavy
pressure on children if they set out to. Adults too respond to
contradiction in the ‘socialization’ process, and their response may
take the form of attempting to impose order and direction on it,
creating vehement regimes of character formation and indoctrination. A
classic description of such a regime in an Irish Jesuit school was
provided by James Joyce in Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. In
many cases vehement regimes do work as intended: the novitiate produces
the nun, the school produces scholars, the boy grows up to be the image
of his father. Suddenly the socialization paradigm seems apt. Yet
notions of ‘role learning’ are all too mild for the fierce pressures
generated in such settings. And even here the response may be rather
different from what was intended; then we get not a good Catholic Civil
Servant but a James Joyce.

An adequate account of gender formation must be able to understand such
events as something more than random exceptions or social deviance. That
is only possible if the analysis of the successful case of
‘socialization’ is in terms that also allow us to understand the
unsuccessful.

Several criteria for a theory of gender formation are implicit in what
has just been said. It must be able to reckon with social contradiction
and contradiction within personality. It must be able to reckon with
power and its effects without turning people into automata (for instance
recognizing motives for compliance like the child’s need for love). It
must be able to recognize different levels in personality without
depending on the notion that one level simply expresses the
characteristics of another. Most important – and in a sense subsuming
the others – it must be historical, both in the sense of seeing the
person in terms of a trajectory through time and situations, and in
recognizing the constant historical reconfiguration of the social forces
impinging on personal growth.

Those are reasonably strong criteria. There are, I think, only two
approaches that come close to meeting them, classical psychoanalysis and
existential psychoanalysis. Their accounts of gender formation are the
subject of the rest of this chapter. For different reasons, neither
fully meets the criteria just outlined. Considering these reasons points
towards a reformation of personality concepts, which is attempted in the
following chapter.

Classical Psychoanalysis: The Dynamic Unconscious

Freud wrote voluminously on sexuality and gender. My purpose here is not
to give a summary or a history of his ideas and those of his followers,
but to explore the contribution they make to a social theory of gender.
Accordingly I will start not with the Oedipus complex and Freud’s
discussions of femininity and masculinity but with his general
theorizing about the relationship between the psychic and the social.

On this theme Freud developed two main lines of thought. One made
sweeping and mostly fanciful analogies between the psychic life of
children and neurotics on the one hand, and ‘savages’, crowds and groups
on the other. The other, much more profound, was concerned with the
social repression of sexuality in European culture. This led him in 1908
to a remarkable psychological critique of marriage and the double
standard as institutions that hinge on the suppression of women’s
sexuality. The social pressure that denied women sexual happiness was
the major force behind the growth of neurosis. In later writing,
culminating in Civilization and its Discontents (1930), Freud
generalized this argument about repression and laid more stress on its
historical dynamic.

A conflict between civilization and nature is of course a traditional
theme of Western thought. But Freud is not merely doing the rounds of
antique philosophy. The clinical tools of psychoanalysis, especially the
concept of repression, enable him to formulate the issue in a much more
precise and complex way and move it in a new direction. In ‘Civilization
and its Discontents’ he argues a similarity ‘between the process of
civilization and the libidinal development of the individual’, which is
not just an analogy but a relation: ‘civilization is built upon a
renunciation of instinct’. The ‘renunciation’ is not projected into a
mythical past or a philosophical heaven, as in Rousseau’s Social
Contract (and indeed Freud’s Totem and Taboo). It is something that
operates in every person’s life in the process of psychosexual
development, and takes effect at the level of the individual unconscious
through the mechanism of repression. Neurosis is a material, not a
metaphorical, consequence of the social pressures on the person required
by the advance of civilization. The structure of the adult personality
is formed by this pressure, principally by the way it is experienced by
the young child in the family. The formation of the super-ego as part of
the person’s psychic equipment is itself a social mechanism. In Freud’s
striking simile: ‘Civilization, therefore, obtains mastery over the
individual’s dangerous desire for aggression by weakening and disarming
it and by setting up an agency within him to watch over it, like a
garrison in a conquered city.’

But if ‘nature’ is thereby rendered partly social, so, conversely, the
social is brought within the sphere of nature. Civilization is not seen
as something external to the events and processes of psychic life: it is
seen as a product and extension of them. Its achievements represent a
sublimation of the impulses that would, but for repression, find
expression in a more raw and bloody fashion. In these later and more
complex formulations Freud has shifted from a position that makes
civilization the cause of neurosis, to one – admittedly not clearly
stated but certainly implied – that sees civilization as continuous with
neurosis, as part of the same structure. At this point he expounds the
important concept of a historical dynamic in repression:

  This conflict [of Eros and Thanatos] is set going as soon as men are
  faced with the task of living together. So long as the community
  assumes no other form than that of the family, the conflict is bound
  to express itself in the Oedipus complex, to establish the conscience
  and to create the first sense of guilt. When an attempt is made to
  widen the community, the same conflict is continued in forms which are
  dependent on the past; and it is strengthened and results in a further
  intensification of the sense of guilt … If civilization is a necessary
  course of development from the family to humanity as a whole, then …
  there is inextricably bound up with it an increase of the sense of
  guilt, which will perhaps reach heights that the individual finds hard
  to tolerate.

Which brings back the problem of unhappiness and closes the circle, for
him – but is precisely the point of departure for others.

With the technical concepts of psychoanalysis Freud thus dismantled the
traditional antinomy of nature and culture. He replaced it, most
unexpectedly – it is certain that he did not himself see the theoretical
significance of this – by the concept of a historical process. This
process operates simultaneously at the macro-social and the individual
levels. In it both human personalities and their troubles, and
collective social achievements, are integrally produced.

As Marcuse saw, this conception makes it possible to sociologize
psychoanalytic concepts. The Oedipus complex can be seen as a product of
a definite historical type of the family. Repression itself is no
abstract consequence of human relation in general, but takes definite
form and intensity in specifiable historical contexts. This does not
reduce psychoanalysis to sociology, any more than it can be reduced to
biology. But the concept of a historical process allows a much more
powerful connection between the social and the unconscious and those
theories which, for instance, have simply tacked psychodynamic notions
such as ‘identification’ onto a sociology of social control. It makes
possible a socially critical use of psychoanalysis, which is no longer
the theory of an eternal contest between instinct and reality.

In the early years of Freudian theory its potential for social criticism
was developed mainly by Alfred Adler, a socialist whose original and
fertile psychoanalytic writings on power, masculinity, war and
motivation are now mostly forgotten. (Adler later became the
father-figure of a small cult based on a bland ‘individual psychology’
which had no use for his early radicalism. The parallel with the fate of
Wilhelm Reich’s socialist writings is close.) Adler emphasized the
social shaping of motives and criticized Freud’s persistent attempts to
derive them from biology. He had a clear view of the importance of power
relations in social structure, and attempted to develop a ‘psychology of
power’, a psychoanalytic account of responses to powerlessness in
childhood and social insecurity in adulthood. Most notably he focused
part of this argument on the power relations of gender.

Perhaps influenced by the socialist feminism of the day, Adler noted
that femininity was devalued in European culture, and argued that this
devaluation shaped the psychological patterns of childhood. Children’s
weakness vis-à-vis adults was interpreted by them as femininity,
‘childish value-judgements’ crystallizing around the cultural polarity
of masculine and feminine. Submission and striving for independence
coexisted in the child’s life, setting up a contradiction between
masculine and feminine tendencies. Usually this led to some kind of
compromise, the tendencies balancing, if under tension, in the adult
personality. But the compromise was not always reached. Anxiety about
weakness could lead to overcompensation in the direction of aggression
and compulsiveness, which Adler dubbed, in a famous phrase, ‘the
masculine protest’ (applicable to both sexes). He saw this as the key
structure in neurosis, but also generalized it as a forcible critique of
hegemonic masculinity: ‘To this [children’s uncertainties about
sexuality] is added the arch evil of our culture, the excessive
preeminence of manliness. All children who have been in doubt about
their sexual role exaggerate the traits which they consider masculine,
above all defiance.’

Adler’s sketch of a critical psychology of gender, unfortunately, bore
little fruit. After the break between Adler and Freud in 1911, and
another radical wave in the 1920s which included a debate on Freud’s
theories of femininity, psychoanalysis evolved in much more conservative
directions. A continuing interest in the psychology of women by a few
analysts such as Karen Horney moved away from the social grounds on
which Adler had attempted to locate gender issues. By the 1940s and
1950s, in the writings of John Bowlby, Theodor Reik, Erik Erikson and
their contemporaries, mainstream psychoanalysis had become a powerful
ideological support of the patriarchal family and conventional
definitions of gender. The subsequent feminist criticisms of
psychoanalysis were thus well warranted, though much of the fire was
misdirected at Freud rather than his interpreters. A striking indication
of the political shift is the attitude to homosexuality. Freud had
scrupulously refused to define this as an illness, and had cautioned
against attempts to ‘cure’ a homosexual orientation. By the 1950s
psychoanalysts freely defined homosexuality as pathological in itself,
and proposed and undertook psychoanalytic treatment. They had a singular
lack of success.

It was theoreticians outside the clinical world of official
psychoanalysis who pushed on with the social dimension of Freud’s
thought. For various reasons, including the fact that most were men and
few had practised analysis, the question of gender dropped gradually out
of focus. The interest rather was in the psychological underpinnings of
capitalism.

In the 1930s and 1940s the focus was on the emergence of fascism out of
liberal capitalism. Karl Mannheim, trying to understand the popular
success of fascist movements, brought psychoanalytic arguments into
sociology in his Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction. Wilhelm
Reich did something similar from further left in The Mass Psychology of
Fascism. A whole programme of research attempting to weld psychoanalysis
to a reconstructed Marxism came from the Frankfurt school: the
Horkheimer collection Studien über Autorität und Familie, Erich Fromm’s
Fear of Freedom, and most famous of all, Adorno et al.’s The
Authoritarian Personality. This work moved in the direction of
characterology, and inadvertently began producing a typology of
masculinity. ‘Mack’ and ‘Larry’, the celebrated case studies of high and
low authoritarianism, can equally well be read as studies in the
formation of contrasting masculinities.

In another line of development Herbert Marcuse took up Freud’s argument
about the rising level of repression with the advance of civilization.
Eros and Civilization argued that some of this was the ‘surplus
repression’ required to sustain an exploitative class society, and that
this bore down mainly on non-genital sexuality, narrowing spontaneous
eroticism. In One Dimensional Man Marcuse turned back on his own tracks
and argued that advanced capitalism now allowed a controlled release of
repressions. This was, however, in forms that stabilized the social
order rather than disrupted it. The result was a socially repressive
‘desublimation’ of instinctual urges.

Both these lines of argument have the same goal, which I will call a
theory of embedding. Their purpose is to explain how a social movement
like fascism or a social system like advanced capitalism can establish
links with unconscious mental processes and thus gain mass support
regardless of its irrationality and destructiveness.

The two psychoanalytic concepts central to theories of embedding were
the displacement of cathexis and the constitutive role of repression.
Most social applications of psychoanalysis postulate a displacement of
emotions originally formed in childhood and attached to family members,
onto objects or relations in the larger social world in adulthood. The
energy of the displaced emotions is largely due to the blocking of
original impulses in the process of repression, the pattern of which is
decisive in the formation of adult character. The same formative
encounters thus shape personality and generate macro-social effects, by
dividing conscious from unconscious and determining a particular content
for each level.

When in the 1970s a new generation of feminist theorists roped in
psychoanalysis to supply part of a critical theory of gender, it was
largely as a theory of embedding. The social structure whose stability
was at issue here was patriarchy, especially the sexual division of
labour. What was felt surprising or in need of explanation was women’s
acceptance, even active endorsement, of social arrangements that oppress
them. The search for explanation was partly a matter of finding the
psychic gain in the social loss, and partly a matter of tracing out
through psychoanalysis the forms of adaptation to necessity in the shape
of men’s social power.

Nancy Chodorow’s argument in The Reproduction of Mothering, though its
details derive from the object-relations school of psychoanalysis,
follows the basic logic of Fromm and Adorno. What comes out of the
analysis is a character typology, in this case a fundamental distinction
between femininity and masculinity. The typology is used to provide a
psychodynamic explanation of the acceptance of a social structure, in
this case the sexual division of labour in childcare. Because of the
different patterns of attachment to the mother, girls grow up with less
sharply defined boundaries of the self and a greater need for emotional
completion in relationships, boys with more clear-cut ego boundaries and
a greater need for separateness. Women both want to mother, and are
psychologically adapted for mothering, more than men.

Juliet Mitchell’s Psychoanalysis and Feminism is also concerned with
character structure, though in her case the focus is a reconstruction
and correction of Freud’s account of femininity. The scope of Mitchell’s
social theory is considerably wider than Chodorow’s, as she construes
Lacanian psychoanalysis in terms of an Althusserian theory of ideology,
and patriarchy in terms of Lévi-Strauss’s theory of kinship and culture.
It is, however, less dynamic.

Like most of the structuralist theorists on whom she draws, the tendency
of Mitchell’s argument is ahistorical. Embedding is construed as the
insertion of people into places already laid out for them in a structure
whose characteristics are predetermined. This is a common feature of
feminist arguments based on Lacan’s reworking of psychoanalysis, for
instance by Luce Irigaray. In Irigaray’s work, for all its psychological
subtlety, there is a thoroughly categorical social analysis of gender.
This is partly because of the structuralist style, partly because the
focus is not on the division of labour but on the symbolic aspect of
social process. ‘Patriarchy’, or the ‘law of the father’, in these
writings is less the structure of social relations than the structure of
how the world is imagined.

History is more fundamental in the most complex and original work of
feminist psychoanalysis, Dorothy Dinnerstein’s The Mermaid and the
Minotaur. This is to an extent in spite of her own theory, as she takes
the sexual division of labour to be an evolutionary constant in human
society before the present. Dinnerstein focuses on women’s work as
mothers – ‘the female monopoly of early childcare’ – as the main
determinant of the adult emotional patterns that sustain patriarchy. In
explaining this she depends much of the time on a normative standard
case.

She departs from the formula, however, in a series of brilliant sketches
of emotional interactions. Here she catches, as no other social analysts
and only a few novelists (Nadine Gordimer, Patrick White) have done, the
ambivalences of women and men towards each other, and the ways childhood
resonances in their interactions lock the participants into patterns
they would not rationally choose. Dinnerstein teases out the tendrils of
the pre-Oedipal emotional relationship to the mother in explanations of
adult women’s sexuality, men’s hatred for women, women’s acceptance of
exclusion from ‘world-making’ in the public sphere, and, ultimately, the
ecological crisis of contemporary civilization. Unlike structuralist
appropriations of psychoanalysis, Dinnerstein’s does lead to a
conception of a historical dynamic and a historical appreciation of the
present moment. The book ends, in fact, with a remarkable psychodynamic
account of the emergence of the New Left and the new feminism in the
United States.

The crucial difference from structuralism is Dinnerstein’s focus on
routine practice: the practice of childrearing on the one hand, the
practices of interaction among adults on the other. This allows her to
see the emotional patterns as structurally based but not structurally
fixed, and to give a central place to emotional contradiction (in the
Freudian tradition called ‘ambivalence’). The approach allows a
recognition of the development of practice, of its historical
cumulativeness. Habermas, in a moment of optimism, spoke of this
capacity to form new structures as the ‘evolutionary learning process’
of societies. In Dinnerstein’s view the cumulation is rather in the
direction of global disaster: ‘the prevailing symbiosis between women
and men has something deadly wrong with it … It supports a growingly
perilous societal posture; it helps lock us, as a species, into a
suicidal stance toward the realities on which our collective survival
hinges.’

Here we reach the limits of ‘embedding’ arguments, where the
consequences of embedding bid fair to destroy the social order being
embedded. We are also left with two theoretical difficulties. First,
Dinnerstein’s argument is built around a normative standard case, though
it carries conviction mainly when it complicates or departs from it. Can
those complications and departures be made more systematic? Second,
Dinnerstein’s argument, like Chodorow’s and Mitchell’s, assumes a fairly
straightforward displacement of affect from individual family figures in
childhood to whole categories of people in adulthood, most notably by
undifferentiated use of ‘woman’ for both. But this displacement is not
straightforward, as psychoanalytic studies abundantly show. A classic
example is the enormous difficulty and complexity of a young boy’s
attempts to construct a stable pattern of attachment documented in
Freud’s ‘Wolf Man’ case history. As in Freud’s theoretical writings
about femininity and masculinity, Dinnerstein leaves us unclear why the
displacement must happen, and what agency or choice the growing
child/adult has in the matter.

Theories of embedding state the effects of gender formation;
psychoanalysis also offers maps of the route towards those effects. They
centre on the Oedipus complex, ‘the fateful combination of love for one
parent and simultaneous hatred for the other as a rival’ as Freud
summarized it, that emerges with the maturing of the child’s erotic life
around four to six years old. This appeared in Freud’s psychiatric
casework as the nucleus of the neuroses, and mainly on this evidence
became the key moment in psychoanalytic theories of human development.
It was, Freud assumed, structured differently for girls and boys. The
basis of this assumption was the different places of the mother and the
father in family dynamics. Some feminist reworkings of the Oedipal
theory have stressed the power dimension of this relation (Firestone),
others the division of labour (Chodorow, Dinnerstein); they are not
clearly distinguished in Freud.

The outcomes of the differently structured Oedipal crises are the bases
of Freudian accounts of femininity and masculinity. With girls the
process involved a messy and incomplete abandonment of the desire for a
penis, eventually transformed into desire for a baby and the man who
could give one. With boys the mother was retained as erotic object, a
cathexis eventually displaced onto other women; but this desire was
repressed by fear of the castrating father, itself provoking
identification with him, the internalization of prohibitions, and
formation of a strong super-ego. No such process stimulated super-ego
formation in women. These were, so to speak, standard resolutions. They
could and often did go wrong. Further, closer analysis would show
underneath these patterns traces of contradictory ones. The ‘complete’
Oedipus complex, Freud insisted, involved ambivalent feelings of desire
and hatred towards both parents.

The main modification of this argument within the psychoanalytic
tradition has been a greater attention to the pre-Oedipal period. Freud
himself began it. In the ‘Wolf Man’ case history, his most extensive
study of the problem of masculinity, Freud noted that in the crisis of
the boy’s relation to his father, the feminine aim in relation to the
father was repressed because of the fear of castration: ‘In short, a
clear protest on the part of his masculinity!’ This argument clearly
presumes a pre-Oedipal masculinity, which was important enough to the
little boy to force the repression of the strongest attachment in his
sexual life. Freud never spelt out the nature of this early
‘narcissistic masculinity’, but it is clear that it cannot be identified
with the ‘activity’ end of the activity/passivity polarity that plagues
psychoanalytic discussion of gender, including Freud’s earlier writings.
It probably does not have much to do with sex of object-choice either;
‘narcissistic’ is an apt adjective. It is difficult to escape the
conclusion that it is the cultural value placed on maleness in a
patriarchal society that is at issue here, and is a decisive
presupposition of the classic Oedipus complex. In this context the
emphasis in the French analytic tradition on the symbolic valorization
of the phallus seems justified.

The pre-Oedipal years also emerge as crucial in Chodorow’s and
Dinnerstein’s arguments. What Chodorow calls mothers’ ‘Oedipally toned’
responses to little boys push them along the path to the Oedipus
complex, while the closer identification of mothers with their young
girls leads to more permeable boundaries of the self. Chodorow and
Dinnerstein both emphasize the sexual division of labour as the crucial
condition of these pre-Oedipal effects. This suggests that the
psychoanalytic sequence might be interpreted in terms of the structures
defined in chapter 5. The structures interact in different ways as the
child grows older. The dominant interaction affecting the emotional life
of the child changes.

  ------------- -------------------------------
  Period        Major structural interaction
  Pre-Oedipal   Cathexis x division of labour
  Oedipal       Cathexis x power
  ------------- -------------------------------

If this is correct, we may conclude that the emotional dilemmas of the
encounter with power in the Oedipal stage depend on the outcome of the
earlier interaction of cathexis and the division of labour.

The psychoanalytic theory of the normative standard case can be revised
sociologically along these lines. But this still leaves unclear what
Freud left unclear, just how ‘standard’ this case is supposed to be. The
long controversy about the supposed ‘universality of the Oedipus
complex’ across cultures has not been particularly helpful. Those
combatants who were sympathetic to Freud usually took for granted that
Oedipus was standard equipment in European families and debated whether
he could be found in ‘primitive’ cultures. Nor are we helped by
Dinnerstein’s honest confession that none of the five people to whom she
is closest matches at all well ‘the composite portraits of “normal”
masculinity and femininity’ presented in her book.

The roots of this difficulty are connected to the unitary conceptions of
gender discussed at the start of chapter 8. It is assumed that the
systematic character of gender and sexual relations requires one central
pattern of personality, plus deviations. The argument of the later part
of chapter 8 may help sort out the place of the Oedipus complex as well.
More than one major pattern of childhood emotional development is
produced; and they are produced in relation to each other.

Freud succeeded in isolating and analysing one important pattern of
psychosexual development in European families. For masculinity this was
quite probably, in the social context of upper-middle-class Vienna, the
hegemonic pattern. Some of his descriptions of femininity imply the
‘emphasized’ pattern sketched in chapter 8, though his confusions and
hesitations about femininity show he found this harder to pin down. That
too is consistent with the argument about the absence of a ‘hegemonic’
femininity in patriarchal society.

The crucial point is that no one pattern of development can be taken as
universal even within the specifical social context Freud studied.
Researches like Anne Parsons’s work on southern Italy have documented
alternative ‘nuclear complexes’, and this point has to be applied within
cultures as well as between them. The Oedipal drama is constructed in
quite specific situations. Not only are there multiple pathways through
childhood, the routes can and do change as gender relations change in
history. Erikson’s suggestion that the focus of neurotic conflict has
changed during the twentieth century – formerly about sexuality, now
about identity – is a useful warning, though greatly overgeneralized.
The now familiar research by Philippe Ariès and others on the history of
the family implies longer-term changes in the psychodynamics of child
development.

In this light, the formulations of femininity and masculinity by
dissident psychoanalysts like Adler and Jung acquire a new interest.
Instead of seeing them as displacing Freud’s theory of the Oedipus
complex (which Adler and Jung certainly intended), we can see them as
accounts of other paths of psychosexual development that were available
to be discovered through the research method that all schools of
psychoanalysis share, the reconstructed clinical case history. The
alternatives include Adler’s notion of the compulsive ‘masculine
protest’, already described; Jung’s somewhat similar notion of a strong,
authoritative masculine ‘persona’ based on the repression of weakness
and dependency which then coexists as the unconscious ‘anima’; the
Frankfurt school’s models of ‘authoritarian character’. These can be
brought together as elements of the psychoanalysis of a historically
constructed range of masculinities. The Authoritarian Personality,
sketching the ‘democratic personality’ and the social and political
conditions for resistance to fascism, even made a beginning on the
immensely difficult problem of the relations between these different
dynamics.

This is as far as I can take this problem at the moment. The next step,
clearly enough, is the empirical investigation of the range of
developmental paths and psychodynamic patterns in a given milieu, and
their interconnections. The methods of such a study cannot be formulated
without a closer examination of the idea of life histories, which I will
attempt later in this chapter and in the next. Before doing so it is
necessary to take a closer look at the concepts shared by all schools of
classical psychoanalysis, repression and the unconscious.

In Freud’s original and most influential version, repression is applied
to libido, to erotic impulses, and the whole theory of the formation of
personality thus rests on an account of libidinal development. As
Mitchell points out this is what revisers of Freud have found hardest to
handle, and have most commonly dropped, in particular the theory of
children’s sexuality. With a few exceptions, the libido theory was
preserved only by the most orthodox school of psychoanalysts, whose
increasing social and political conservatism blanked out its
subversiveness.

The attempt to recover the erotic dimension, and to bring out the social
criticism implicit in the theory of repression, has been central to
radical reworkings of psychoanalysis which have seen Freud as a theorist
of liberation more than a theorist of embedding. Norman Brown in Life
Against Death, Marcuse in Eros and Civilization and An Essay on
Liberation, and Reimut Reiche in Sexuality and Class Struggle present
versions that largely ignore gender. But the same themes have been
applied to women’s liberation by Dorothy Dinnerstein, and to gay
liberation by Dennis Altman in Homosexual: Oppression and Liberation and
Mario Mieli in Homosexuality and Liberation.

The concept of repression, then, points to an erotic dimension of
liberation, though it does not fully specify it. All the works just
cited are forced to go outside the psychoanalytic framework to formulate
the process of liberation. A purely psychic liberation is rather hard to
sustain. Freud’s own therapeutic purposes were deliberately limited,
given his acceptance of the established social order and family
structure.

If patterns of femininity and masculinity are composed as patterns of
repression, the reconstruction of gender does involve a reworking of
erotic attachment and expression. Mieli sees this optimistically and
expansively, as early gay liberation generally did. Dinnerstein is
rather more sombre about the ‘project of sexual liberty’, though she
sees it as central to whatever chance humans have of surviving. An
important tendency in feminism sees the path forward as a withdrawal of
women’s emotional attachments and energies from men to focus them on
other women. Though there is a long way to go with any of these
strategies, the political experience of the last twenty years is already
consistent with psychoanalytic theory in at least two respects. Patterns
of erotic attachment have proved deep-seated and difficult to change.
The attempt to change them provokes strong and complex resistances at
the personal level as much as the political.

The concept of repression is central to the main complication that
psychoanalysis introduces to the concept of sexual character, since
repression constitutes the unconscious. The conceptions of sexual
character discussed in chapter 8, for all their differences, mostly
share the assumption that personality is homogeneous – expressed in
gender scaling by the requirement of statistical consistency, in
humanistic psychology by the notion of a core ‘gender identity’, and so
on.

Classical psychoanalysis violates this assumption comprehensively, and
this is one of its most important contributions to the analysis of
gender. The notion of ‘primary process’ thinking in the id and
‘secondary process’ in the ego; the idea of unconscious impulses which
cannot be directly expressed in consciousness; the notion of the dream
or symptom as a ‘condensation’; and the structural model of personality
(id, ego, super-ego) – all were ways in which Freud tried to formulate
the idea that repression marks out qualitatively different parts of the
human psyche. They not only can contradict each other, they normally are
in contradiction. Repression itself is a mechanism of contradiction.

We do not need to accept Freud’s particular formulations to appreciate
the importance of the idea. It implies that femininity and masculinity
are normally internally fissured and in tension. To use a rather static
model, they are normally layered. (To correct the image one must bear in
mind that the relationships between the layers are as important as their
content, and the layers themselves writhe around, so to speak, as the
person moves on a life trajectory.)

This can be accepted without the libido theory on which Freud based it.
Indeed its most clear-cut application to gender is not by Freud but by
Jung in his essay ‘Anima and Animus’. Here Jung suggests that sexual
character is systematically layered in the sense that the public face of
femininity and masculinity, compatible with the conventional social
role, is always constructed by a repression of their opposites. A kind
of unconscious personality (the ‘anima’ for men, ‘animus’ for women)
develops as a negative of the socially acceptable one, and their
incompatible demands underlie many of the tortured emotional dynamics of
marriages.

Freud’s case histories present more complex layerings again. The ‘Wolf
Man’ is the classic example, Freud peeling off in turn an inhibited
adult heterosexuality, a promiscuous but emotionally shallow adolescent
heterosexuality, a passive and highly ambivalent homosexual attachment
to the father, arriving at last at the pre-Oedipal narcissistic
masculinity that has already been mentioned. Dinnerstein’s argument
likewise revolves around the idea of layering, with the pre-Oedipal
attachments as hidden determinants in the most complex adult emotional
relationships.

Jung’s argument dramatizes the most problematic aspect of this: that
femininity and masculinity can coexist in the same personality. Freud
wrestled with this idea endlessly, talking variously of bisexuality, of
activity/passivity, and so on; he was never very satisfied with his
answers and we need not be either. Jung’s analysis is better since not
reductionist – the starting-point is social role rather than biology –
but is too schematic to carry us far.

The evidence for layering is convincing, and requires us to see the
tension between different layers or tendencies in personality as a
constitutive force in gender relations. Yet its theorizing seems
fragile, vulnerable to any criticism of the concepts of repression and
the unconscious.

Two critiques are of particular importance. The one formulated by Sartre
depends on an account of consciousness and motivation which will be
discussed in the next section. The other mounts an essentially political
critique of the concept of the unconscious. Its clearest statement is in
The Politics of Sexuality in Capitalism by a London radical group of the
early 1970s. The ‘Red Collective’ argue that what Freud took to be
effects of the unconscious are in fact effects of power, both class
power and patriarchal power, their causes being invisible only so long
as these structures are not brought into question by political practice.
Psychoanalysis is an emanation of the establishment, and the concept of
the unconscious is a mystification justifying dominance of the
therapeutic situation by the therapist.

The Red Collective is right to point to the social practices in which
psychological concepts are formulated. The book is theoretically
interesting, as well as moving, in reporting the group’s own attempts to
work through the personal politics of sexual relationships. Its
criticism of the notion of the unconscious is apt as far as the
unconscious is thought of as a place where certain mysterious things
happen, comprehensible only to the expert. Freud has to bear some
responsibility for this, as much of the time he used spatial metaphors
in talking of the unconscious.

But fundamentally Freud’s concept was processual, based on the dialectic
of impulse, repression and symbolization. Even more, it was strategic, a
concept arising in connection with practices of transformation. As Freud
insisted at boring length, he did not discover the unconscious mind;
that had been known to poets and philosophers for centuries. He was
simply one of the first to try to do something about it, in the sense of
working out therapies for people who had got it badly snarled. All
Freudian theory developed in relation to a practice of attempting to
transform lives. The concepts of repression and the unconscious mark
both obstacles and potentials encountered in this practice. And that is,
I think, the fundamental sense in which they are important to other
practices of sexual politics.

Structuralist and poststructuralist ‘readings’ of Freud have been
misreadings exactly so far as they separate the concepts from their
context in practice. That separation is central to the pessimism these
readings have led to. To bear a different fruit, analytic concepts have
to be reconnected to practice. The Red Collective rightly argues that
this will have to be based on different social foundations from the
doctor/patient format. The medical model of psychoanalysis proved easy
to absorb into conventional medicine, and to turn into a politics of
‘adjustment’ and non-violent social control.

Existential Psychoanalysis: The Project

It has long been objected that Freud’s theory results in too mechanical
a view of personality and too limited a view of human possibility. Adler
was one of the first to raise these points, though he did not take them
far. Much more radical was the critique developed by Jean-Paul Sartre in
Being and Nothingness and applied to the theory of gender by Simone de
Beauvoir in The Second Sex. The argument started with the theory of
libido and moved on to the concept of the unconscious.

The problem with ‘empirical psychoanalysis’, as Sartre called Freudian
thought, is that it takes as a necessary structure of the person what
should be regarded as the product of choice. For one’s psychic life to
be determined by libido is certainly a possible form of human existence,
but it is not the only one. It is a way of being that a person may take
up, may choose. What is human is precisely the process of constructing
oneself by choices that transcend given circumstances. This is far from
the easy-going voluntarism of 1970s ‘growth movement’ psychology. To
Sartre, being in a position to choose also means having to take
responsibility – in a famous phrase, ‘we are condemned to be free’. The
act of choice also means the fact of commitment. We are stuck with what
we do; what’s done cannot be undone. To make a choice is to walk into a
future defined by the consequences of that choice.

Humans project themselves into their future by their choices, by the way
they negate and transcend the circumstances that are given to them to
start with. The person is constructed as a ‘project’ of realizing
oneself in a particular way. This is certainly intentional, but it
involves more than the concept of purposive behaviour. The project is,
to use a term coined later by the Czech philosopher Karel Kosík,
‘onto-formative’, constitutive of social reality. The process itself
appears as a complex unification, a constant bringing-into-relation, of
actions that are uncaused (because always choices) but intelligible in
relation to each other. Looking back, the process can be decoded by a
reconstruction of the life history that relates later parts of the
trajectory to the original, constitutive choices. This decoding is
‘existential psychoanalysis’. Sartre himself did this job only in the
form of literary biographies, notably of Genet and Flaubert. There is
now also a body of case histories by two British psychiatrists
influenced by Sartre, R. D. Laing and Aaron Esterson, which show what
the approach looks like in a clinical setting.

One of the most impressive parts of Sartre’s argument, given his lack of
clinical experience, was his intuitive acceptance of Freud’s insistence
on the difficulty of self-knowledge. The concept of the unconscious was
built around the practical difficulty that some important facts about
the person were not accessible to conscious inspection. Sartre
vehemently rejects the metaphor of regions in the mind, and the concept
of a system of mental processes that we do not know about. To him the
process of choice and transcendence, i.e., what is specifically human in
human life, is necessarily conscious. But this does not imply that
everything about a person is immediately accessible. There is mystery: a
‘mystery in broad daylight’. Human self-consciousness can have different
structures. The unreflective structure of being-for-itself is very
different from self-knowledge with the structure of being-for-others.
The latter can be very difficult to produce, as the practice of
psychoanalysis shows. But its production is, in a sense, the
psychoanalytic cure itself, the famous ‘talking cure’. Psychoanalysis is
not a process of ‘bringing to consciousness’ material that always was an
aspect of consciousness. Rather it is a question of attaining knowledge
of what one is, instead of just being what one is.

This argument yields a rather different image of cathexis. Freud’s
hydraulic model of the libido suggests a stream of affect flowing here,
being blocked up there, bursting through somewhere else. Sartre’s
treatment suggests cathexis is a kind of commitment, a
throwing-oneself-into a particular emotional involvement. The
intractability of attachment, the stickiness of cathexes dramatized by
hopeless love, is a fact of our emotional lives not because we cannot
choose other attachments but because we cannot walk away from the
consequences of past ones. An emotional commitment of any force comes to
structure not only our social interactions but also our fantasy life,
our self-concepts, our hopes and aspirations. One can only switch them
off at a cost that for many people is intolerable, the cost of making a
great void in every aspect of our life. We know what this feels like for
people who have suffered it involuntarily – the abandoned lover, the
bereaved. Few people would choose to be in that position.

There are various ways of denying freedom and refusing responsibility,
which give existential psychoanalysis an armoury of concepts for
analysing the rigidities of social interaction. De Beauvoir, for
instance, connects the valorization of the penis in masculinity with the
near-universal tendency towards alienation:

  The anxiety that his liberty induces in the subject leads him to
  search for himself in things, which is a kind of flight from himself …
  Here is to be found the primary temptation to inauthenticity, to fail
  to be genuinely oneself. The penis is singularly adapted for playing
  this role of ‘double’ for the little boy.

From the ‘incarnation of transcendence in the phallus’ flows, naturally
enough, the fear of castration in the Oedipus complex. Here the
psychoanalytic theory of gender appears as a special case. It
presupposes, as de Beauvoir forcibly argues, a specific set of social
and historical circumstances which it cannot itself explain.

Sartre’s treatment of ‘bad faith’, situations where people refuse
responsibility for what they do and claim that their decisions are made
for them by external forces, suggests a different kind of connection
with Freudian theory. The concepts of libidinal determination and the
unconscious offer psychoanalytic patients a tremendous temptation to
assign their actions to uncontrollable mental forces. From another
starting-point Thomas Szasz in The Myth of Mental Illness convincingly
argues that the concept of ‘mental illness’ invites collusion among
patient, family and doctor. The hysterical ‘symptom’ is a claim for the
sympathy and care due to the sick, made by someone who will not speak
out about what is intolerable in their lives or personal relations. The
‘layering’ of sexual character appears as a form of bad faith, of
refusal of responsibility for one’s own conduct in sexual politics.

The existentialist argument does not imply that the world described by
classical psychoanalysis is non-existent. It is real, but real as a
world of alienation. Its obscurity is the darkness of escape and
refusal. It is always capable of being transcended; as de Beauvoir
argues:

  The psychoanalyst describes the female child, the young girl, as
  incited to identification with the mother and the father, torn between
  ‘viriloid’ and ‘feminine’ tendencies; whereas I conceive her as
  hesitating between the role of object, Other which is offered her, and
  the assertion of her liberty.

The concept of sexual liberation, if it can be formulated at all, is not
a matter of unshackling native eroticism but of dismantling alienations
(including erotic ones) and realizing native freedom.

Sartre presents existential psychoanalysis as the decoding of a way of
being in search of original, constitutive choices. In his study of
Genet, for instance, he traces a great deal back to Genet’s childhood
choice to be what his foster parents regarded him as, a thief. This
procedure runs a considerable risk of homogenizing the person, as do de
Beauvoir’s pictures of ‘the avenues of inauthentic flight open to
women’, the basis of her character typology discussed in chapter 8. The
risk is that the intelligibility of a life will be found only in its
consistency, in the bits that hang together. The Freudian idea that the
intelligibility of a life might lie in its contradictions is too
valuable to lose.

The problem can, however, be corrected. There is nothing in Being and
Nothingness, nor in Sartre’s later reworking of existential
psychoanalysis as ‘the progressive-regressive method’ in The Question of
Method, that requires constitutive choices to be always singular, or
always consistent with each other. The practical applications by Laing
and Esterson have not found this assumption necessary. For instance
Laing’s case study of the flamboyant student ‘David’ in The Divided Self
shows contradiction developing between the boy’s choice to be his dead
mother and his choice to be a man.

‘David’ was driven towards psychosis by the fact that these two choices
or commitments had incompatible consequences. The choice to be a man
involved fear and hatred of femininity, and thus of ‘the woman who was
inside him, and always seemed to be coming out of him’ – that is, the
consequences of his choice to be the mother. It might have been possible
not to fear that femininity, had the masculinity in question been
differently organized. Laing’s case history gives a few hints of a
father whose masculinity was highly conventional, at least in relation
to issues like the household division of labour, but does not give
enough detail to be sure.

This case study suggests a distinction between hegemonic masculinity and
forms of masculinity that are heterosexual without being directly
organized around domination – conventional masculinities, loosely. Both
are founded on a claim to power, which the one carries through in all
its consequences and the other does not. Conventional masculinity is, to
an extent, hegemonic masculinity in bad faith. Men can enjoy patriarchal
power, but accept it as if it were given to them by an external force,
by nature or convention or even by women themselves, rather than by an
active social subordination of women going on here and now. They do not
care to take responsibility for the actions that given them their power.
Hence their often slightly shamefaced admiration for the heroes of
hegemonic masculinity, the footballers, jet pilots, wife-beaters and
poofter-bashers, who do.

The claim to masculinity here embeds social structure in sexual
character in a sense almost exactly the reverse of ‘embedding’ in
psychoanalytic sociology. The power relations of the society become a
constitutive principle of personality dynamics through being adopted as
personal project, whether acknowledged or not. At the social level, what
this produces is not the stabilization of a social order, but what could
be called a collective project of oppression. The subordination of women
and the marginalization of homosexual and effeminate men are sustained
neither by chance nor by the mechanical reproduction of a social system,
but by the commitments implicit in conventional and hegemonic
masculinity and the strategies pursued in the attempt to realize them.

The notion of a collective project is not easy to get clear, except in
the all-too-easy form of a conspiracy. There certainly are conspiracies
among men, for instance to exclude women from most positions of power in
business and the state. There are conscious individual actions to
protect men’s privileges, such as a senior bureaucrat blocking the
appointment of a feminist to a particular government job. Such things
not only do occur, they occur quite commonly, and are well known to
insiders. But as the argument of Part II has shown, this cannot be taken
as the fundamental structure of patriarchal power, for this also rests
on institutionalization. The collective project of oppression is
materialized not only in individual actions but in the building up,
sustaining and defence of an institutional order that generates
inequalities impersonally.

Sartre’s own attempt to do this analysis for the case of class dynamics
shows the enormous complexity of the problem and I don’t propose to
match his effort here. I do want to register, first, the conceptual
importance of the question and second, the fact that practical
beginnings have been made with it. Aaron Esterson’s case study and
theoretical formulations in The Leaves of Spring illustrate the
dialectical intelligibility of collective practice in the family.
Cynthia Cockburn’s Brothers, though not conceived on a psychoanalytic
paradigm, still documents very clearly some of the structures of a
collective project of sexual politics in the workplace.

The notion of a collective project, like that of an individual project,
implies both freedom and responsibility. At the minimum it implies
freedom to participate or not, and responsibility for the choice made.
This has proved difficult for men influenced by feminism to get
straight. Accepting the feminist critique of patriarchy has often led to
overwhelming guilt and desire for redemption. Hence the ‘effeminist’
tendency that repeatedly emerges in counter-sexist politics among men.
In its own appealing way, this is just as inauthentic as any
‘masculinist’ denial of the facts of inequality. It makes no sense for
me to take responsibility for what other grown-up people do, or have
done in the past. I take responsibility for what I do and for its
consequences. A clear view of what I do – as the whole argument of this
book goes to show – includes the way my actions interact with those of
other people and either sustain or subvert the collective project of
oppression. But to take responsibility for, and hence feel guilt about,
that collective project as a whole is at one level paranoid, at another
paralyzing. It has certainly not led to any practically effective form
of politics over the last dozen years.

More hopefully, relations between men and women also include the project
of love. This is a project in the strict sense, a commitment of selves,
a relation around which practice becomes organized. It is a formative
commitment, whose consequences ramify and develop through a life
history, often changing the complexion of the original relationship very
deeply.

It is commonly assumed that love is incompatible with hatred or
oppression. This is one reason why women may reject feminism, because
they have experienced love from men (and towards them) and take feminism
to be a doctrine that denies or rejects that fact – despite the
passionate writings of heterosexual feminists like Sheila Rowbotham,
Dorothy Dinnerstein and Barbara Sichtermann. In reality love is a
project that can be interwoven with the project of oppression.
Psychoanalysis has shown the importance of ambivalence, the coexistence
of strong but opposed feelings towards the same object. Shulamith
Firestone analysed ‘romantic love’ as the corrupted version of love that
develops when the parties are unequal. This is debatable, but there are
other ways heterosexual attachment and subordination can be connected.
De Beauvoir and Dinnerstein both analyse in some detail the
incorporation of a loving woman into the loved man’s projects as an
important mechanism sustaining the exclusion of women from
‘world-making’ in public life.

Yet love is also, notoriously, a destroyer of conventions, a force
difficult to channel and control. Héloïse and Abélard, Guinevere and
Lancelot, Paolo and Francesca, Romeo and Juliet, Tristan and Isolde, are
not exactly marginal figures in the European imagination. The myths
generally kill them off before they get to old age, but the images live
on with compelling emotional force. The contradiction between the
project of erotic love and the requirements of patriarchal institutions
– marriage, property and kinship relations – also has to be recognized
as a permanent tension in patriarchal society.

To transform tension into structural change, actually to start
dismantling structures of domination, is the collective project of
liberation. It has proved no easier to get its personal and structural
dimensions together in practice than it is in theory. The New Left of
the 1960s criticized mainstream Stalinists and labourites for trying to
change society without changing themselves. The New Left was criticized
by feminists and gay liberationists for macho public politics and
domestic sexism. The growing visibility of ‘communities’ of gay men has
sparked criticism from feminists, especially since the reassertion of
masculine styles in the late 1970s. Feminism in turn has been criticized
for dogmatism, power plays, elitism and jobs-for-the-girls since it won
a thin slice of power in education, welfare and the bureaucracy.

There is some truth in each of these criticisms. We are living in the
real world and not on a drawing-board. But none of them invalidates the
premiss of the project, that social and personal change are essentially
connected. The next task is to take a closer look at the object of the
politics of everyday life, and consider how personality can be
understood in terms consistent both with the psychodynamic arguments
just traversed and the structural analysis of Part II.

NOTES

Socialization

(pp. 191–6). Debate in the ‘sex role socialization’ literature has
mainly concerned the different mechanisms or paradigms of acquisition:
useful reviews are by Constantinople (1979) and Cahill (1983). Though
Cahill’s ‘social interactionist’ paradigm is helpful in stressing the
child’s agency more than usual, this whole literature is contained
within the framework criticized in the text. For Ellen Key’s phrase and
its context see W. F. Connell (1980), pp. 92 ff., and for the corporal
punishment figures quoted, W. F. Connell et al. (1975).

Classical Psychoanalysis

(pp. 196–211). Quotations from Freud (1930), pp. 123–4, 132–3; Adler
(1956), p. 55; Dinnerstein (1976), pp. 230–1; Freud (1918), p. 47. For
the debate on the universality of the Oedipus complex see Parsons
(1964), whose solution is incomplete but certainly along the right
lines, and unfortunately neglected in the feminist psychoanalytic
literature. The problem of the politics of psychoanalytic treatment
raised by the Red Collective has recently been explored in great detail
by Kovel (1981) who is more committed to therapy but also rather
insensitive to gender.

Existential Psychoanalysis

(pp. 211–17). For the ‘mystery in broad daylight’ see Sartre (1958), p.
571. Other quotations: de Beauvoir (1972), pp. 79, 83. The notion of a
‘collective project’ is all too simple for the intricate analyses in
Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason but is perhaps an allowable
condensation for present purposes. Its full development would embrace
the subject-matter of Part II of this book.

10

Personality as Practice

Personality, Society and Life History

Chapters 8 and 9 have described how structures of gender relations enter
into personal life and shape personalities. The fact is clear, but how
to understand it is more difficult. ‘Enter into’ is a metaphor, and we
might ask just what is being ‘entered’. Has personality some distinctive
substance, as implied by the other familiar metaphor for these
relationships, that personality is ‘moulded’ or ‘shaped’ by social
pressure, like clay under a potter’s hands?

The critique of socialization theory and the discussion of the ‘project’
in chapter 9 both imply that the answer is no. The components of
personality traditionally discussed in psychology – attitudes,
abilities, drives, repressions, fantasies and so on – are not separate
from social interactions. On the one hand practices have a ‘personality’
dimension. It makes good sense, for instance, to talk of the
characteristic emotional problems of particular social practices, such
as teaching. (Indeed this is a theme in recent research on teachers.) On
the other hand personality needs a social field for its realization.
People can, of course, hide some aspect of themselves. (Teenage girls
have often been advised to make sure they do not seem more clever than
the boys they want to date.) But personality in general is not hidden;
nor is deliberate hiding usually very successful. As Freud remarked
about sexual motives in ‘symptomatic acts’, ‘He that has eyes to see and
ears to hear may convince himself that no mortal can keep a secret. If
his lips are silent, he chatters with his finger-tips; betrayal oozes
out of him at every pore.’

Here the argument on gender converges with the current rethinking of
social psychology in texts like Rom Harré’s Social Being and Personal
Being, Paul Secord and co-workers’ Explaining Human Behavior, Edmund
Sullivan’s A Critical Psychology and the joint work by Julian Henriques
and others, Changing the Subject. These theorists have tried to move
beyond the approach that founds psychology on the category of the
‘individual’, beyond the belief that laboratory experiment is the
paragon of methods, and beyond the conceptualization of social context
as a Variable’ to be correlated with ‘behaviour’. Instead this work
implies a historical conception of the person. As Harré observes, the
very idea of individual character and the self is the product of
collectives, of particular societies. The approach emphasizes the
situational meanings of action and explores how personal life is
constructed through the play of social relations. In Sullivan’s phrase,
‘the person is person only as I-and-you’; the personal world is
relational.

In the terms used in this book, personality has to be seen as social
practice and not as an entity distinct from ‘society’ Personality is
what people do, just as social relations are what people do, and the
doings are the same. Yet there is a difference which makes personality a
coherent object of study. Personality is practice seen from a particular
angle, which I will call the perspective of the life history.
Psychologies of personality that have stressed the case study as the
basic form of understanding are thus an important resource for social
analysis. John Dollard’s nearly forgotten Criteria for the Life History
is a brilliant summary of early versions that demonstrates this point.

There is a strain of individualism in much case-history research, where
dynamics are treated as wholly internal to the case. This amounts to
seeing the life history as the only form in which practice can be
understood. The structural and institutional analyses in Part II above
show this is untenable for the analysis of gender The most penetrating
case-study research, including Dollard’s own Caste and Class in a
Southern Town, combines the logic of the life history with the logic of
institutional analysis.

At least in our society, people experience themselves and their practice
most readily in terms of a life trajectory, a personal past and a
personal future. Personal time can also be conceived in terms of a ‘life
cycle’, and a good deal of academic research on the family, growth and
ageing is done in that framework. But history is not cyclical, and a
personal history is not an unfolding. It is a construction, something
made.

What is ‘made’, specifically, is the coherence, intelligibility, and
liveability of one’s social relationships through time. Sartre’s notion
of personal life as a ‘unification’, a making-into-a-unity, is important
here. Without it, social analysis reduces a life to a collection of
roles learnt, expectations enacted or structural locations occupied:
Ralf Dahrendorf’s Homo Sociologicus, the man-who-is-his-roles. Some of
the recent work on the construction of subjects by discourses,
influenced by Althusser and Foucault, comes very close to this
conception.

In Being and Nothingness Sartre treated the life history as a
unification with a single principle, the ramifying consequences of some
initial, constitutive choice. I argued in chapter 9 that such a view
over-simplifies the person and misses the importance of contradiction.
Even on Sartre’s model, initial choices may be multiple. More
importantly, complexities of personal life arise from structural
contradictions that go far beyond the particular person.

However much detail is known about a given life, personal life becomes
unintelligible if the structural bases of practice are not kept in view.
A striking demonstration is the attempt to document ‘total personality’
in a study already referred to, Robert White’s Lives in Progress. In a
monumental exercise in longitudinal method White followed three ‘normal’
upper-class Americans from their student days well into adulthood,
applying a battery of psychological tests and collecting data from
interviews and essays. The detail is remarkable; the insight resulting
is remarkably small. Lacking organizing questions about structure, the
study runs out into the sands of eclecticism and blandness, flavoured
with a faint life-cycle ideology of ‘natural growth’.

The contrast with Freud’s study of an upper-class Russian, the ‘Wolf
Man’, is notable. Not that Freud had a theory of social structure worth
twopence, but as a therapist he was highly sensitive to structural
effects in the dynamics of personal life. The ‘Wolf Man’ is a howling
mass of contradictions, and his personality is contradictory because the
elements of an emotional life offered him were impossible to work into a
smooth and consistent whole. Obviously enough the class relations
between peasants and landowners in pre-revolutionary Russia were in
tension. The case history shows how these relations intersected with
gender dynamics – ambivalences between husband and wife, divisions of
labour among servants in childcare and housework, rivalries between
girls and boys – to construct a household that was an emotional
minefield for the small boy.

My experience of life-history interviews suggests that the conclusion
about the contradictory bases of personal life might hold very
generally. The materials offered a growing person are lumpy and
indigestible; ‘unification’ is often hard and may be impossible. The
evolving pattern of a person’s life often involves disjunction,
incoherence or schism. Sartre does not consider that the practice of
unification, like all other practices, may fail. Some theorists even
suggest that participation in contemporary society requires schism in
the person. Laing in The Politics of Experience argues this way about
‘normality’ in a mad society, as do some feminist critiques of the front
that has to be put up by conventional femininity.

Lives are not monads closed off from others. People experience
themselves as having shared pasts and sharing the present; ‘for we are
members one of another’, as the Apostle Paul wrote. (The metaphor is
stronger in seventeenth-century English: the phrase means roughly ‘we
are each others’ limbs’.) This sharing may be as intimate as the story
of a marriage or a love affair never spoken of beyond the two concerned,
or as public as the proceedings of parliament.

Collective practice is not reducible to a sum of individual practices.
In a strict sense there is no such thing as ‘individual practice’ at
all; the phrase is an abstraction from a tissue of relational conduct.
Even masturbation involves socially constructed fantasies, techniques of
arousal and a kind of minimal society in which you are the object of
your own cathexis.

So a personal life is a path through a field of practices which are
following a range of collective logics, and are responding to a range of
structural conditions which routinely intersect and often contradict
each other. It is no wonder that theories of personal life which reify
‘the individual’ and his or her features – such as trait theories of
personality and the scalar conceptions of gender discussed in chapter 8
– give very little grip on reality. The structure of personality is not
the structure of an object. It is a particular unification of diverse
and often contradictory practices.

Thus the concept of personality is logically co-ordinate with the
concept of an ‘institution’, being another empirical unification of
practices. The gender analysis of personality will explore the same menu
of structures as the gender analysis of institutions in chapter 6. To
some extent it already does. Analyses in relation to the structure of
cathexis are very familiar in classical psychoanalysis. An analysis in
relation to the structure of power has been sketched by Shulamith
Firestone, and in another context by the psychoanalysts of colonialism,
Octave Mannoni and Frantz Fanon. Personality analysis in terms of the
structure of labour is the least common, though it exists in embryo in
the work of the German psychologist Frigga Haug and the theoretical work
of Edmund Sullivan in Canada.

A pattern of practice is likely to appear frail when formulated in terms
of its constitutive contradictions and dialectics, tensions and
layerings and historical transformations. If it keeps one shape over a
long period that is because a lot of energy has been invested in keeping
it that way. The Prince family in chapter 1 shows one version of this.
Another is shown by the business and professional families found in our
study, and by J. M. and R. E. Pahl in Managers and their Wives. These
are families whose personal lives are kept in order by the immense
labours of a wife, who appears to have no career but whose work is the
absolute condition of her husband’s apparently ‘individual’ success.

But it is also important to register the potential resilience of a given
organization of practice. Where it constitutes dominant social
interests, it constructs motives to expend a great deal of energy in
defence of the status quo. The depth of anti-feminism among men,
discussed by William J. Goode, is a case in point. Personality does not
constitute social interests, but it embodies personal relations to
social interests which may act powerfully as motives: defences,
identifications, commitments and fears. Where these interlock in related
lives, a pattern may result that is proof against severe stresses.
Stable marriages are perhaps the most familiar example.

Personality dynamics are not the secret key to society, as the first
generation of Freudians like Ernest Jones supposed. Nor are they
irrelevant, as sociological structuralism supposes. In the context of a
theory of practice, personality appears as one of the major sites of
history and politics. It is connected with other sites like
institutions, but has its own configurations. The rest of this chapter
will explore some of these configurations and try to map the sexual
politics that happen on this site.

The Historical Dynamic in Personality

The historicity of personality has been recognized in social theory
mainly by constructing historical typologies of character. A particular
character type is supposed to be dominant at one period of history and
then is swept aside in favour of a new type in a new epoch. The classic
sequence is David Riesman’s ‘tradition-directed’, ‘inner-directed’ and
‘other-directed’ character types in The Lonely Crowd. Other typologies
are Charles Reich’s ‘Consciousness I, II and III’; John Carroll’s
‘puritan’, ‘paranoid’ and ‘remissive’; and countless renditions of the
‘traditional’ versus ‘modern’ theme. Paul Hoch’s typology of masculinity
in White Hero, Black Beast has an alternation instead of a sequence. His
masculine character-types, ‘puritan’ and ‘playboy’, chase each other
through some 3,000 years of history.

A subtler approach can be found in the work of the Frankfurt school on
the psychological bases of fascism. Erich Fromm in Fear of Freedom
argued that the authoritarian character structure was a psychological
solution to problems of alienation created by the economic and cultural
development of capitalism – but not the only one. In The Authoritarian
Personality, as already noticed, the rigid and prejudiced character is
contrasted with others produced in the same historical setting. The
general argument in chapter 9 for the existence of multiple paths of
gender formation suggests a multiple pattern of personality at the end.

The historicity of personality can be understood as the reconfiguring,
by the dynamic of social relations, of the points of tension in
personality development and the politics of personal life. It is not
necessary to suppose a succession of dominant character types to analyze
changes in motivation and personality organization. This can be done by
recognizing emergent sets of pressures and possibilities within which
the actual diversity of personality is composed.

The application of this approach to the analysis of sexual character is
clear in principle, complicated in practice. I would like to illustrate
both the complexities and possibilities with a line of thought about the
recent history of femininity.

Bim Andrews, whose autobiography was quoted in chapter 8, posed the
question ‘which was the right way to live?’. Though the alternative
femininities she perceived are interesting in themselves, the most
notable fact of all was that she saw them as a choice. Bim’s world did
not present her with one pattern as her natural character or inevitable
fate. As the daughter of a domestic servant and coming to adulthood in
Cambridge in the 1920s, she did not grow up in a hotbed of feminism.
Nevertheless the taken-for-grantedness of gender relations and
femininity had been disrupted in southern Britain during the previous
generation. Agitation by the women’s suffrage movement was only its most
visible expression. Others were the literary debates over the ‘new
woman’, the reemployment of working-class women in heavy industry during
World War I and the mobilization of some groups of women workers in
unions and in the co-operative movement. Perhaps most important, there
was now a mass education system which working-class girls had to attend
at the elementary levels, and through which a few had access to
secondary schooling. One was Bim Andrews, who ‘endured the acute
embarrassment of always being top of the class’ and who stayed at school
till she was fourteen and a half. This experience seems to have combined
with her mother’s ‘firm intention to keep me out of domestic service’ to
distance Bim from the conventions of the ‘embryo wives and mothers’ who
were her schoolmates.

Her experience was exceptional but it was not isolated. It was part of a
historic shift in the construction of femininity in the richer parts of
the capitalist world. The same shift can be traced in some detail in
Australia as a result of recent work by sociologists and social
historians including Kerreen Reiger, Jill Matthews, Michael Gilding, Ann
Game and Rosemary Pringle. This research documents a complex of
institutional changes over the first half of the twentieth century
affecting gender relations in the family, state, labour market and
professions. Among them are exactly the changes that affected Bim
Andrews: the expansion of girls’ education and the redefinition of its
content; changes in the composition of households and the domestic
division of labour which soon obliterated ‘service’ as a mass
occupation; and the increasing availability of office work for women.

In combination, these institutional changes redefined the issues in
young women’s lives that needed to be resolved in the construction of
femininity in adolescence and early adulthood. Two issues appear
particularly important. The first was the choice of vocation, which now
replaced the issue of resignation to women’s lot versus protest against
it. ‘The new woman’ was essentially a woman with a vocation outside the
home. But the main issue was not a choice between jobs, rather about
them. The key development was the construction in the early decades of
the twentieth century of the ‘housewife’ as a vocation. Among other
things this involved the growth of ‘domestic science’ as a segregated
curriculum for girls in schools. Whether married women worked for wages
or not had previously been an issue of respectability (to the nineteenth
century labour aristocracy and small-business owners, withdrawing a wife
from earning was a mark of the husband’s success), or of simple need. It
now became a question of rejecting the vocation of housewife.

The second issue was one of competition with men. In a sense this had
been around much longer, as shown by the expulsion of women workers from
mining and heavy manufacturing during the nineteenth century.
Nevertheless the doctrine of ‘separate spheres’, which as Susan Magarey
suggests had gone some way to rationalizing such moves, was under
pressure at the turn of the century. Girls, for instance, were
conspicuously successful in schooling. In Australia their participation
rates in secondary schooling were higher than boys’ at all ages from
fourteen to seventeen, in the first decade of the twentieth century.

These developments did not automatically construct a new femininity. But
they certainly redefined the field within which sexual character was
constructed and relations between different kinds of femininity worked
out. The extraordinary celebration of the normative nuclear family in
mid-century, the apotheosis of the housewife described by Game and
Pringle in their essay ‘The Making of the Australian Family’, was an
attempt to resolve these issues in a new model of emphasized femininity.
The issue of vocation would be resolved by conscious choice of
home-making as a path in life, even as a ‘career’, a concept stressed by
magazines like Readers Digest targeted on the more affluent housewives.
The issue of competition could be resolved by women withdrawing from
men’s sphere, compensated by capital investment and cultural boosting in
their own, especially in the form of new technology like electric
refrigerators. Hence the media emphasized the modern housewife as
something new. At the same time a new sphere of life was defined that
was very deliberately shared, from which competition was consciously
drained. The 1950s popular literature on marriage laid heavy emphasis on
‘companionate’ marriage, ‘togetherness’ and doing things ‘as a family’.

At one level this was a model pushed on women by social interests which
stood to gain from such a resolution, not least the domestic appliance
industry, using new techniques of mass communication and persuasion. At
another level it was a genuine resolution of the issues of vocation and
competition which many women made their own in good faith.

It was a resolution that proved historically unstable. By the 1970s
women who had grown up in the 1950s were the main force in the new
feminism. In The Mermaid and the Minotaur Dorothy Dinnerstein offers a
wonderful account of the psychodynamics of this development in the
United States. She stresses the ambivalences of liberal parenting that
produced the men of the 1960s New Left, able to break with the state and
establishment but not with their masculine prerogatives; and the women
who, once radicalized in the campus and anti-war movements, would carry
the challenge through to their own exclusion from political power.

A somewhat more jaundiced view of the dialectic producing feminism is
offered by Faye Taylor, an Australian teacher interviewed during our
research in schools. At one point she cast her mind back over her own
family history:

  My grandmother was the controlling factor in her household. She
  decided everything that would be done, and I think this was because
  she was the more intelligent of the two. Her husband worked very hard
  but she directed him. Which meant that she was in control. My mother
  from the time she married was, I suppose, controlled in that her
  finances were limited by what her husband gave her. But she had
  complete independence in what she wanted to do, how she wanted to use
  her time, what she could do within that. So that she always did what
  she wanted to, remembering that her responsibilities came first. So I
  wouldn’t say that she was ever a second-class citizen. But from my own
  generation, we could do whatever we wanted to do, remembering that
  when we left school and got a job, there were certain jobs that were
  not open to girls. The ones which were open to girls were very limited
  in pay and promotion, simply because it was expected that when girls
  married they would stop work. That has opened up. But with opening it
  up, there’s been more of a definition of roles. Instead of being
  individual in your own right, you are now pushed into a stereotype
  inferior model, instead of being a different model. And in fighting
  for equality, some of the so-called double standards have been
  accepted where they never really existed before.

This very suggestive passage implies that feminism (liberal feminism
strictly, the only kind most teachers are familiar with) is a kind of
‘regulation’ of femininity in the Donzelot–Foucault sense. Breaking down
separate spheres has meant a bringing-under-control, as women are
subjected to direct comparison with men, while being disadvantaged in
the comparison from the start.

Whether Faye is correct or not on this point, her family history does
illustrate the emergence of competition with men as an issue in the
formation of femininity. Though there is no ‘feminist personality’, it
seems likely that the femininities formed in the historical dynamic that
created contemporary feminism share a position on this issue, rejecting
‘withdrawal from competition’ as a formative personal strategy. It is
also clear that other femininities which do accept this strategy are
still produced. Gabrielle Carey and Kathy Lette’s autobiographical novel
Puberty Blues nicely captures this polarity. The book ends with the two
heroines, who like other girls have spent their time on the beach
looking decorative and waiting for the board-riding boyfriends to come
back out of the surf, buying a cheap surfboard and heading into the
waves themselves. The other girls stay on the beach.

Politics of Personality

To speak of personality as an object of politics is to tread on
dangerous ground; the issue of totalitarianism is very close.
Authoritarian regimes of all persuasions in the twentieth century have
made sustained attempts to mould the upbringing and outlooks of their
citizens. Liberal critics of ‘totalitarianism’ such as Hannah Arendt
have their most effective moments when documenting and rejecting the
invasion of personal life by the party-state.

Yet liberal regimes have done the same kind of job. In One Dimensional
Man Marcuse described the general process of cultural and psychological
manipulation in the United States. The argument can be pinned down to
particular institutions, such as schools. Mass schooling in the United
States, from the late twentieth century to the present, has been
characterized by relentless propaganda in favour of the regime and
against its opponents. As a small example I cite some chapter headings
from a history textbook used in my (relatively liberal) high-school
class in New York in 1959:

  UNIT NINE (1920–1945): AMERICANS DEFEND DEMOCRACY IN A TROUBLED WORLD

  28 The nation faces the threat of world depression

  29 The United States becomes a friendly neighbor

  30 Americans fight round the globe in World War II

  UNIT TEN (1945-now): AMERICAN DEMOCRACY MEETS THE COMMUNIST THREAT

  31 Modern Russia arises to threaten the free world

  32 The United States leads the free world in the West

  33 The United States leads the free world in Asia

  34 Americans practise and protect democracy at home YOU ARE AMERICA

It doesn’t leave much to the imagination – nor much room for
unauthorized attitudes. Beyond the obvious propaganda content, mass
schooling in the United States over a long period has attempted to shape
attitudes and work habits, and to sort, classify and specialize its
pupils, in response to the policies of the central state and business
leadership.

So a politics of personality exists in the Tree world’ as well. On the
argument of this chapter, it must. Personality being a field of the
dynamics of social relations, its construction must be affected by the
formation of social interests, the functioning of institutions and the
mobilization of power. The early women’s liberation slogan ‘the personal
is political’, intended mainly to validate political discussion of
sexuality and domestic work, expressed a general truth.

To make this connection is not to welcome state intervention. There are
good reasons for resisting the state as we now find it, and many of its
policies and mechanisms for influencing people. Along with several
millions of other children I was taught a pack of lies about American
history. Such a practice should be rejected as noxious to growing minds
and dangerous for the future – as it has proved to be, with the
terrifying growth of American chauvinism in the 1980s. The point is that
criticisms of such practices have to be conducted on the merits of the
case. The idea that we should, or can, draw a general line between
politics and personal life is logically misconceived.

The New Right doctrine of ‘small government’ and ‘rolling back the
state’ does not end or seriously reduce state influence on personal
life. It simply changes its direction. As Elizabeth Wilson, Lois Bryson
and Martin Mowbray argue, cutting back on welfare and ‘returning’ care
of the sick, elderly or troubled to the ‘community’ or ‘the family’, in
reality means loading extra unpaid work onto women. The sexual division
of labour and inequalities of gender are intensified. Cutting the
‘burden’ of taxation does not increase freedom for citizens in general.
It increases the advantages of groups who benefit from income being
distributed through the market (capitalists as against workers, employed
as against unemployed, men as against women) at the expense of those
whose welfare depends on distribution of income through the state.

The real question is not whether politics can be removed from personal
life, but what kind of politics invests personal life and how far it can
be democratic or egalitarian. Most important is the political question
as to whether personality can be formed and reconstructed ‘from below’.

Radical movements have, by and large, been much less interested in these
questions than authoritarian movements, the state and business. But in
the last twenty years the problem has come into focus in radical
politics, especially in sexual politics. The methods available for
working on them are complex and not well defined. They have mostly been
evolved by trial and error. Still, a good deal of experience has now
accumulated, which needs examination if we are to judge the prospects of
a radical sexual politics.

The most widespread has been the ‘consciousness-raising group’ (CR
group) developed in the early years of women’s liberation. It was not a
completely new invention; aspects can be found in the ‘affinity groups’
of anarchism, in sewing-circles and other traditions of women’s informal
organization and in American group-therapy techniques. But the
combination was new, the needs it met were general and the technique
spread rapidly. In the early 1970s the women’s liberation movement in
countries like the United States, Canada, Britain and Australia could
well be regarded as a network of CR groups which coalesced in partial
and often fleeting ways for public politics.

The CR group aimed at the reconstruction of femininity in two main ways.
First was discussion and re-evaluation of the past and present
experiences of the women in them. Doing this in a group meant that
everyday relationships, with men, children and other women had to be
thought through as ‘being-for-others’, their everyday logic no longer
presupposed. It also meant that there was support for ‘speaking
bitterness’ (to use the Chinese phrase) about men, saying and thinking
hostile things that were censored or suppressed in everyday life. A CR
group might set an agenda of working systematically through oppressions
in different areas of life. This would call attention to the political
dimension of practices and symbols that normally go without comment,
such as housework, dress and habits of speech. The overall result was to
disrupt the taken-for-grantedness of many of the practices that
constitute conventional femininities.

The second step was to support new practices that might displace the
ones thus disrupted. The CR group became a forum for talking about what
to do in households, in sexual relationships, in bringing up children
and in public politics. In many cases the group itself became a new
friendship network, with the members going to entertainments,
travelling, sometimes working together. In this way the CR group merged
into the construction of feminist communities as the 1970s wore on.

As a technique for the reconstruction of femininity this had several
important strengths. It was flexible, easy to start, inexpensive and
easy to manage in an egalitarian way. It contrasted sharply with both
traditional party politics and traditional psychotherapy. It could deal
with work as well as domestic life and sexual relations. It was easy to
disband if things went wrong.

It also had some significant drawbacks, which were slower to emerge. It
was good at dealing with what was common in women’s experiences, less
good with what divided them. If serious conflicts arose there was little
to prevent the CR group simply splitting up. Like the ‘talking cure’ of
psychoanalysis, it suited the highly educated and affluent and never
spread far among working-class women. The exclusion of men, which was a
condition of much that the CR groups did, meant that heterosexual
relationships were likely to be worked at from only one end. CR
technique had little power to reach unconscious processes or
constitutive commitments, and might therefore work on emotional issues
only at a surface level or within narrow limits. One such limit, pointed
out by lesbian feminists, was a widespread failure in CR groups to
question heterosexuality.

The process of ‘coming out’ as gay is a form of reconstruction that
contrasts sharply with CR work. In the collective coming-out at the end
of the 1960s, the low-key, even covert, strategy of seeking tolerance
and law reform that had characterized earlier homosexual politics was
replaced by a highly visible celebration of gayness. The public
demonstration of ‘gay pride’ went along with a playfulness about gender,
a subversion and recombination of elements – radical drag, gay weddings,
pink boiler suits and so on – which gave an air of carnival to many gay
liberation activities. Public celebration, for instance in the Mardi
Gras in Sydney, has remained an essential part of homosexual politics.

Coming out individually is less spectacular but still involves a visible
break. It means repudiation of a whole history of interactions – in
families, workplaces, the street – that were predicated on an assumption
of heterosexuality. Nothing as drastic is implied in CR work. Two things
moderate the drama of the act. First, ‘coming out’ is not done once and
for all, like a wedding; there is no Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Comings-Out. As autobiographies make clear, coming out to friends is
different from coming out to workmates, and both are different from
coming out to one’s parents and other relations. They may be done at
different times and with very different results. Second, declaring
oneself gay, in whatever setting, can be only one moment in a process.
It may result in major shifts in relationships, but even so has to be
followed by making the new situation work. Friendship networks,
political practices and sexual relationships have to be constructed on
new foundations.

In this sense ‘coming out’ inverts the order of things in CR groups; a
personal reconstruction has to occur, or at least be well advanced,
before social support can be generated. The social support is variable
in the extreme. Coming out in a supportive workplace may be easy and
enriching. In a hostile one it probably means losing the job. In some
families the result is easy acceptance, in others appalling emotional
trauma, depending on the interaction with parents’ masculinity and
femininity.

In another respect the process is closer to CR: the extension of
reconstructed personal networks into a gay ‘community’. There were of
course networks of homosexual people before gay liberation, whose
stories are gradually being retrieved by gay historians. The 1970s saw a
qualitative change in their conditions of existence and those of the
discreet businesses based on them. Gay communities developed on a
considerable scale in cities like San Francisco and Sydney, with a rapid
growth in the number, size and visibility of the businesses servicing
them. ‘Gay capitalism’ emerged and gay businessmen became a force in
homosexual politics, with an influence comparable to that of the
radicals who had launched the gay liberation movement.

This development sharpened the question implicit in ‘coming out’ from
the start, what exactly one was claiming to be. Dilemmas about the
nature of homosexual identity have been mentioned in chapter 7. For both
sexes coming out as gay meant repudiating central features of one
conventional sexual character. Did this mean claiming the other?
Attempting to mix masculine and feminine characteristics risked
dissolving the category of homosexuality itself. Where then was gay
pride, and the basis of movement and community? Though theorists like
David Fernbach insisted on gay men’s effeminacy and Mario Mieli argued
for the transsexual basis of gayness, the drift among homosexual men
during the 1970s was increasingly to resolve these tensions by defining
a gay masculinity. The ‘clone’ style of the late 1970s and early 1980s
was its most visible crystallization, the moustache, T-shirt and tight
jeans proclaiming a male body. This in turn produced tensions with
lesbian women, some of whom have found this uncomfortably like a claim
to the privileges of conventional masculinity.

In one dimension the deconstructionist argument does continue the logic
of ‘coming out’. To come out is to repudiate the business of keeping up
a front of heterosexuality. This front is not likely to be a trivial
part of personality, and may involve an elaborate ‘false-self’ system
like those described by Laing (see the case of ‘David’ discussed in
chapter 9). One cannot simply obliterate such a structure of
personality. Nor will it be replaced by some natural gayness that wells
up from the inner self. The deconstructionist argument extends the
critique of the false self to the constructed selves that replace it,
which equally may freeze the person in outmoded and repressive postures.

But ‘coming out’ was not just a gesture of personal reconstruction. It
was also an attempt to reach out, to create solidarity. A thorough
deconstruction of gay identity would undermine this, and risk
dismantling the personal and collective resources for dealing with
shared problems and combating the hostility that gay people still meet.
The spread of AIDS, creating a need to support those with the disease,
to work out strategies to halt its spread, and to deal with
scaremongering media, shows how important these resources are. As long
as the definition of homosexuality is sustained in the larger structure
of gender relations, gay people are not exactly free to adopt or deny it
as they please.

In the face of this the reconstruction of personal life is always done
under pressure and at risk. CR groups were vulnerable to criticism that
they did not go deep enough. The personality politics of ‘coming out’
likewise include strong motives to limit the amount and visibility of
change.

The emergence of women’s liberation and gay liberation challenged not
only the power of heterosexual men but also the worth of their
masculinity. While most ignored or dismissed the challenge, some were
affected strongly, an experience particularly well described by Vic
Seidler in his essay ‘Men and Feminism’. A historic moment was reached
on the American Left when one of the authors of Unbecoming Men saw his
girlfriend head off for one of the early feminist conferences and
realized he was no longer where the action was. The resulting essay,
‘Women Together and Me Alone’, is a classic of mixed emotions. After
some early experiments with mixed CR groups, feminism more or less told
the men to get their own house in order. The tangled public politics of
the resulting ‘men’s movement’ will be discussed in chapter 12; the
point of interest here is the two practices it developed for the
reconstruction of masculinity at a personal level.

The first was very simple in conception. The idea of a CR group was
borrowed from feminism and applied to men. A group of men would meet
regularly over a period of months to discuss their lives and emotions.
Such ‘men’s groups’ were central to the anti-sexist men’s movement
through the 1970s and some are running now. Documents such as Unbecoming
Men and the narrative of a men’s group in Warren Farrell’s The Liberated
Man show that even in the early days their focus was divided. In these
and later accounts by Paul Morrison and others, three main themes
emerge: recognizing and working on participants’ sexist attitudes and
behaviour towards women; discussing their own masculinity, how it was
formed in growing up, and how it constricts the expression of their
emotions and limits the depth of their relationships; and providing
emotional support to each other.

This contained both a political project intended to support feminism and
a therapeutic project intended to repair the damage bad gender relations
did to men. They were not necessarily consistent, and may even have been
contradictory. Certainly the political project of rooting out the sexism
in masculinity has proved intensely difficult. Work in men’s groups on
how one oppressed women was very different from work in women’s groups
on how one was oppressed. It provoked guilt rather than anger, a
reaction intensified by the accusatory tone of radical feminism’s
interactions with men. A massive sense of guilt runs through mid-1970s
literature such as Jon Snodgrass’s collection For Men Against Sexism. It
seems likely that guilt and frustration between them destroyed many of
the groups set up.

Frustration was a likely outcome and is obvious in Andrew Tolson’s
discussion of mid-1970s men’s groups in Britain. While women’s CR groups
fed into the construction of wider networks, counter-sexist men’s groups
made it more difficult to work in men’s networks outside. On the one
hand the routine and often vicious sexism in masculine milieux became
hard to handle at a personal level. On the other hand, sticking to the
task of raising issues about sexism and challenging patriarchal
practices was likely to result in a drastic loss of credibility. A man
pursuing issues about women’s interests was easily defined as a fool,
slightly mad, or a pervert.

An easier answer to the sense of guilt was to deny the oppression of
women; better still, to claim that men are equally oppressed. This path
was taken in the United States by authors such as Farrell and Jack
Nichols, whose Men’s Liberation presents the reform of masculinity as a
simple parallel to the feminist reconstruction of femininity. The
sex-role interpretation of gender relations made this very easy: if a
woman’s sex role was oppressive for the person in it, a man’s sex role
was also likely to be. The appropriate response was to try to break out
of the stereotypes and repair the psychic damage they caused.

The result was a practice that might be called ‘masculinity therapy’,
which rapidly outgrew the anti-sexist men’s movement. Some was
undertaken in self-directed men’s groups, but more occurred in settings
like encounter groups, retreats, courses, clinics and centres, and
one-to-one counselling and psychotherapy. The defining feature of these
settings was the presence of therapists with a message about
masculinity. Their writings, such as Herb Goldberg’s The Hazards of
Being Male and Albert Ellis’s Sex and the Liberated Man, make clear that
the message is one that depoliticizes gender. Guilt is treated as
irrational or obsolete. The oppression of women is treated as an
illusion or an excess of role rigidity. Homosexuality is, as far as
humanly possible, ignored. The main thing to be overcome is men’s
inhibitions and inexpressiveness which leads them into emotional binds.

I have seen no evidence whatever about the success or failure of this
therapeutic program. But it is clear what its point is: not contesting
inequality but modernizing heterosexual masculinity. The discontent many
men feel as holders of power under challenge is to be relieved by a
change of personal style – a change of tactics in dealings with women,
perhaps a changed self-concept – without any challenge to the
institutional arrangements that produce their power. Perhaps the most
interesting thing about this business is that it often requires a
therapist’s assistance.

It is easy to conclude from the difficulties in these attempts at
reconstructing sexual character that the politics of personality would
be best left alone. The trouble is that it will not be left alone by
others. The New Right, for instance, is actively constructing
aggressive, dominant and violent models of masculinity for adolescents
and children. Rocky has led to Rambo and Rambo to Rocky IV, nicely keyed
in with Reagan’s ‘Star Wars’ campaign. A large marketing program is
currently pushing exceptionally violent toys into young boys’ hands,
like the ‘Masters of the Universe’ whose he-man models seem to be based
on images from the Nazi cartoonist Mjölnir. It is difficult to justify
abandoning the field of personality politics to influences like these.

More positively, the experiences sketched in this section show that
there are several ways in which a self-help reconstruction of
personality can at least be started. Whether it goes very far depends on
other people; for this experience also suggests a strong connection
between personal change and social movements in sexual politics. Chapter
12 will come back to the issue in the collective context.

NOTES

Personality, Society and Life History

(pp. 219–23). Quotations from Freud (1905), pp. 77–8; Sullivan (1984),
p. 55; Paul in Ephesians 4:25. On the emotional dimension of teaching
see among others Otto (1982). The approach to the life history suggested
here was worked out in the research for Making the Difference and
especially Teachers’ Work. A recent revival of interest in the life
history as social science method – see Bertaux (1981) and Plummer (1983)
– looks promising. But it stops short of the most important body of
life-history research, psychoanalysis. And it has learnt nothing from
the most profound theorist of the method, Sartre.

Historical Dynamic in Personality

(pp. 224–8). Girls’ participation rates in schooling from Schools
Commission (1975). Faye Taylor quoted from Teachers’ Work, p. 188.

Politics of Personality

(p. 228–36). Textbook chapter headings from Casner and Gabriel (1955).
For the ‘hidden curriculum’ and business pressures see Bowles and Gintis
(1976). Accounts of CR groups can be found in Allen (1970) and Pogrebin
(1973). Discussions of coming out in Wolfe and Stanley (1980),
Silverstein (1982) and Clark (1983).

Part IV

Sexual Politics

11

Sexual Ideology

Discourse and Practice

When Mary Wollstonecraft wrote to vindicate the rights of women, it was
mainly questions of ideology that she had in mind: morals, manners,
education and religion. These topics have been constant friends in the
literature of gender since, and few authors have doubted the power of
ideology. Even so vigorous a materialist as Emma Goldman was content to
explain the difficulty of unionizing women this way:

  The woman considers her position as worker transitory, to be thrown
  aside for the first bidder. That is why it is infinitely harder to
  organize women than men. ‘Why should I join a union? I am going to get
  married, to have a home.’ Has she not been taught from infancy to look
  upon that as her ultimate calling?

In contemporary theory too there is a strong tendency to make ideology
the site of sexual politics. Julia Kristeva writes of the ‘inseparable
conjunction of the sexual and the symbolic’ as the terrain of the new
feminism. Juliet Mitchell and Roberta Hamilton treat patriarchy as the
realm of ideology in contrast to a realm of production governed by class
relations. A vigorous literature drawing on French semiotics and
discourse theory analyses patriarchal symbolism and language as,
effectively, a self-contained system.

Some notable research on the symbolization of women and men has
resulted, moving beyond the familiar research on stereotypes to the
implicit structure of whole discourses about gender. The most
penetrating, such as Jo Spence’s ‘What do People do all Day?’ and Wendy
Hollway’s ‘Gender Difference and the Production of Subjectivity’ go on
to trace change and contradiction in the process of symbolic
representation.

The results of these researches are important. But there are serious
difficulties with a theoretical program that gives an absolute priority
to ideology or to semiotic analysis and treats discourse as a closed
system. Lynne Segal remarks on the drift towards idealism in recent
feminist theory, and how an overemphasis on matters like language
marginalizes grass-roots concerns of the feminist movement. From a
theoretical viewpoint too, much of this writing appears startlingly
one-sided. Neglecting institutions, economics and the routines of
politics means that analyses of ideology are often parked on top of
crude categorical assumptions about power and the relations between
person and group. No matter how sophisticated the analysis of
symbolization much of its value must then be lost.

The way to resolve this is not only to give due attention to
institutions, economics and so forth. It is essential to recognize that
discourse and symbolization are themselves practices, which are
structurally connected with other practices and have a great deal in
common with other forms of practice. They too have to be analysed with
attention to context, institutionalization and group formation. It is
important to consider what groups engage in them and how specialists in
these kinds of practice are socially constituted within gender
relations. This is why I have delayed the analysis of ideology, despite
its prominence in current debate about gender, until after a framework
for the structural and personal analysis of gender has been established.

The practical context and institutionalization of language is more than
a question of ‘pragmatics’, the application or use of an existing
syntactic and semantic structure. Practice is constitutive of syntax and
semantics too, when considered over historical time. For instance,
historians of language have noted the increasing sexism of the English
language in the early modern period, as in the use of masculine pronouns
to refer to men and women together. As Casey Miller and Kate Swift
argue, this has to be seen in the context of the historical emergence of
intellectuals (Dr Johnson being one) able to act as ‘authorities’ on
language and impose sexist usage as standard. One of the major tools
invented was the dictionary. It is notable that early dictionaries were
in part directed to the education of women, as a substitute for
schooling.

The importance of social context in the ‘uptake’ of culture, in the
appropriation and use of elements of ideology, can be documented in a
wide range of situations. Angela McRobbie’s research on the ‘culture of
femininity’ in Britain is an especially convincing example because her
theory is structuralist. The field-work shows very clearly how the
impoverished, constricted and oppressive situation of working-class
teenage girls is made tolerable by a cultural practice exaggerating
femininity and romanticizing marriage as the main goal in life.

Studies of families similarly show ideology in context among adults.
Pauline Hunt’s research on the division of labour in an English village
shows how ‘the situation itself breeds traditionalism’ for wives who do
full-time childcare at home. They are obliged to adapt to their
husbands’ timetables, are isolated from the public world and intimidated
by politics, and find that childbearing has become the central
experience of life. Yet in some ways ideology is able to override the
logic of other practices. The belief that husbands are breadwinners is
sustained in families where the wife earns a wage. Even when she earns
more than he does, the ideology is not criticized but the couple’s
situation is – ‘it’s degrading for a man.’

It is, however, in studies of workplaces that the interplay of situation
and ideology is clearest. Michael Korda’s description of New York office
life in Male Chauvinism shows how sexist ideology is embedded in
management and supervisory practices, such as promotion of staff and the
segmentation of tasks, and acts as a discursive rationalization of
inequality. In this setting, Korda notes, the shift of feminist argument
onto issues of sexuality (for example in Germaine Greer’s The Female
Eunuch) came as a relief to men, as it excused corporate executives from
facing the issues that were the hard ones to them – about money. The
study of an insurance office in Britain by Collinson and Knights,
described in chapter 5, underlines the amount of work that goes into
constructing and defending sexist ideology.

The most complex and sophisticated account of the maintenance of sexual
ideology in the workplace is Cynthia Cockburn’s Brothers. Here the
analysis of ideology is set in the context of the historical development
of the British printing industry, from which women were expelled some
generations ago. The ideology of the ‘natural’ weakness of women and
their unsuitability for work as compositors is thus a suppression of
history as well as a rationalization of present practice. The collective
practice of the compositors is now being undermined by drastic
technological change, and with it the traditional justifications of the
sexual division of labour. Cockburn documents the passing of a
particular form of sexual ideology, traditional patriarchalism, while
the institutional bases of men’s power in these workplaces, the control
of management, unions and training, remain. New rationalizations, such
as the masculine mystique of high technology, are imperfect substitutes.

Parallel evidence of process and tension in sexual ideology can be found
in research on schools. In the literature on sex roles, schools are
frequently discussed as an ‘agency of socialization’ impinging on
children. They are also workplaces, with a workforce divided on gender
lines. Recent research on teachers shows a good deal of involvement in
issues of sexual politics. Teachers are one of the main occupational
groups to be influenced by the growth of the new feminism; their
reactions range from strong endorsement to bitter hostility. In many
schools the result is an active negotiation, sometimes turning into open
conflict, about issues of curriculum, promotion, sexual harassment and
so on. A school’s whole policy may be made over. A case in point is the
private secondary school for girls, ‘Auburn College’, mentioned in
chapter 8. This school was repositioning itself towards the professional
labour market and revamping its curriculum to emphasize maths and
sciences. A changed definition of femininity was at issue in almost
every aspect of the school’s educational policy.

Such evidence does not imply that ideology can be reduced to economics
or institutional arrangements, nor that ideology is to be contrasted
with a ‘material’ world. It does imply that ideology has to be seen as
things people do, and that ideological practice has to be seen as
occurring in, and responding to, definite contexts. Some ideological
practice is very plainly work. The school curriculum, for instance, is a
labour process for the teachers as well as a definition of the pupils’
learning. To understand it fully requires an investigation of the social
structure of the workplace and the political economy of the industry, as
well as its connections with patterns of ideology in other milieux.

These considerations lead to an approach to sexual ideology that is
closer to the tradition of the sociology of knowledge than it is to
contemporary theories of discourse. There are some well-recognized
difficulties with this approach. Some versions of the ‘sociology of
knowledge’ are reductionist, presenting ideology as a reflex of social
interest. Much of the sociology of knowledge takes a rather crude
approach to the internal structure of ideas and has little to say about
the process of symbolization. Finally, most of the sociology of
knowledge has been based on a class analysis of social structure and
ignores gender completely.

None of these problems is insoluble. Reductionism can be avoided, not by
claims for the autonomy of ideological practice, but by consistently
seeing it as practice, ontologically on a par with any other practice
and equally involved in the constitution of social interests. Some
classic researches in the sociology of knowledge, such as Georg Lukács’
analysis of reification and European philosophy, and Lucien Goldmann’s
analysis of Jansenism, are very concerned with the internal structure of
ideology. And there is a notable proof that the sociology-of-knowledge
approach can be effectively applied to gender: Viola Klein’s The
Feminine Character, which appeared as long ago as 1946.

The point is not to apply a precast ‘sociology of knowledge’ to the
subject-matter of gender but to use methods generated in that tradition
to expand the social theory of gender. In what follows I draw partly on
analyses of discourse and symbolization to characterize ideological
practice; and partly on ideology theory and the sociology of knowledge
to raise questions about the contexts of the production of sexual
ideology, its consequences for the gender order, and the social
character of its producers.

Ideological Processes

Gender relations involve the structuring of social practice around sex
and sexuality. The commonest process in sexual ideology involves
collapsing that structure, merging the elements into one by
‘naturalizing’ social practice.

The interpretation of gender relations as natural facts is
extraordinarily widespread. Sexual divisions of labour are constantly
interpreted this way. Cockburn, for instance, notes how women were
firmly believed to be naturally incapable of handling the machinery of
printing, in the teeth of the fact that women actually had done so. In
discussions of the division of labour in childcare women’s natural
desire to mother children is almost always taken for granted. The
mechanism operates equally powerfully on the structure of cathexis.
Heterosexual attraction is constantly interpreted as natural – the
‘attraction of opposites’ – and socially forbidden relationships,
especially homosexual, are interpreted as ‘unnatural’. Even the
structure of power is naturalized, for instance in sociobiology, though
this seems less insistent than with the other two structures.

The profoundly political character of this process becomes apparent when
quite opposite social relations are ‘naturalized’ in different times and
places. For instance women were treated as naturally frail in European
polite culture in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, naturally
tough in most peasant cultures. At times the mechanism of naturalization
is used in an argument for social change, for instance the suffrage
movement’s argument that the realm of politics needed an injection of
women’s natural qualities of compassion and purity. Some contemporary
eco-feminism is very close to this. Nevertheless the main effect of
naturalization is conservative; progressive uses of it risk being
incorporated. To interpret social relations as natural is,
fundamentally, to suppress their historicity. To do that is to close off
the possibility of human practice recreating humanity. Verena Stolcke’s
and Marie de Lepervanche’s studies of the ‘naturalization’ of inequality
show close connections between this process in relation to gender and in
relation to other forms of social inequality such as racism. Indeed one
becomes a condition of the other. As Stolcke notes, biologism leads to a
drive to control women’s sexuality in the name of racial purity.

Naturalization, then, is not a naive mistake about what biological
science can and cannot explain. At a collective level it is a highly
motivated ideological practice which constantly overrides the biological
facts. Nature is appealed to for justification more than for
explanation. To be able to justify, nature itself must be got in order –
simplified, schematized and moralized.

Naturalization thus implies a second basic process in sexual ideology,
the cognitive purification of the world of gender. Its most familiar
form is the stereotyping documented in media studies such as Patricia
Edgar’s Media She. Real practices are messy and complicated, ideological
representations of them squeaky-clean. The families in television
advertisements are all happy, their fathers are all employed, their
mothers just love housework. The ‘girls’ dancing on the screen all have
long legs, white teeth, ladder-resistant stockings and are certainly
free this evening. Children’s books, as Bob Dixon shows at length in
Catching them Young, are as packed with stereotyped images of gender as
they are with messages about race and class.

Jo Spence’s study of photographic images of women shows how the process
of stereotyping goes beyond the individual item. Taken as a set, a body
of advertising or photo-reportage constructs an ‘implicit narrative’ of
a woman’s life, in which individual items are embedded and to whose
logic they appeal. In the British popular media studied by Spence in the
1970s this narrative was a highly traditional life cycle (though
excluding death), presenting women as providers of services to men and
children. Spence noted, however, an altered narrative emerging in the
late 1970s with rather more acknowledgement of problems and of paid work
and rather more self-gratification for women.

The purification of the ideological world by excluding items that do not
fit the implicit narrative reaches a high point where the narrative
concerns the public world. It is a familiar finding in media research
that only a small percentage of news coverage is devoted to women. Women
are also liable to be dropped from view in other forms of communication.
The first human to step onto the moon announced to the waiting world:
‘That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.’ A highly
praised book that appeared in the same year (1969) called A History of
the Scottish People was almost entirely about men, often read as if men
were the only inhabitants of Scotland, and discussed every industry
except the one which had the greatest number of Scottish people working
in it (‘houses’ appear in its index, but not ‘housework’). A
high-powered international conference about the ‘Dialectics of
Liberation’ met in London; all of its speakers were men, who discussed
war, madness, the environment, imperialism, race, literature, capitalism
and socialism, but made no reference to the position of women or the
oppression of homosexuals.

These three examples were events of the late 1960s and at least some
areas of cultural practice have changed since. Formal language is less
likely to be openly sexist. Even so establishment a body as the American
Psychological Association introduced a policy of non-sexist language in
its journals in 1977. Most big publishers now have a feminist, women’s
studies, or women writers’ ‘list’; indeed this is one of the more
buoyant areas in contemporary book publishing. But the problem Sheila
Rowbotham noted in Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, the difficulty
even left-wing men have in acknowledging gender issues as serious
politics, remains – and not just on the Left. To some extent the
exclusion of women is replaced by marginalization, through such devices
as a separate publishing list, or media trivialization. The main
narrative of the public world – wars, rockets, governments falling,
profits rising – carries on as before.

The familiar public/private distinction is part of a process of
dichotomizing the world that is the most systematic form of
‘purification’ attempted by sexual ideology. In this simplification,
however, is a source of complexity. For if pushed to an extreme, the
qualitative distinction between men’s world and women’s world requires
different cultural mechanisms to operate in each. A curious illustration
of this is an obscure 1951 science-fiction novel by Philip Wylie called
The Disappearance. Its premiss is that women and men disappear from each
other’s physical world for four years; the results are different kinds
of social breakdown, nuclear war in one world and fire and pestilence in
the other.

The drive for purification reaches its greatest emotional intensity in
the treatment of men’s homosexuality as a symbol of disorder, dirtiness
and danger. There is a paradox about a patriarchal social order being so
hostile to erotic relations between members of the dominant sex. A sense
of this paradox is part of the ambivalent feelings between women’s
liberation and gay liberation. The explanation of Western culture’s
homophobia is complex, but part of it must be the degree to which the
fact of homosexuality threatens the credibility of a naturalized
ideology of gender and a dichotomized sexual world.

Within the dichotomized world of sexual ideology two devices for the
representation of social life become dominant. One is romanticism. Since
this term is often associated with fantasy in the style of Georgette
Heyer or J. R. R. Tolkien, I would stress its relevance to everyday
life. The Broadway musical is a notable illustration. Its classic
subject-matter is the lives of little people: farm workers (Oklahoma!);
soldiers (South Pacific); fairground workers (Carousel), small-time
crooks (Guys and Dolls), factory workers (The Pyjama Game), teenage
street ‘gangs’ (West Side Story). Everyday life is appealed to, its
difficulties even emphasized. But it is transformed by the glow of the
love affair on which every plot turns, beside which the other issues
pale. True love – in the Broadway musical, in Mills and Boon novels, in
women’s magazines – is a symbolic reconnection of the dichotomized
worlds. It both asserts the rightness of the dichotomy, and claims a way
for each woman as a loved individual to escape the narrow and
impoverished world the dichotomy constructs for women as a group.

On the other side, hegemonic masculinity is naturalized in the form of
the hero and presented through forms that revolve around heroes: sagas,
ballads, westerns, thrillers. The cultural focus on exemplary
individuals is not only a way of justifying privileges which happen to
be shared by the unheroic majority of men. Like romanticism it is also a
way of dealing symbolically with real problems.

One of the problems about gender relations for men has long been the
level of violence between men. It is no accident that the classic hero
is usually a specialist in violence. ‘I sing of arms and the man’,
announced Virgil at the start of the Aeneid, and one notes that the
‘arms’ come first. Aeneas, Achilles, Siegfried, Tristan and Lancelot
hack their respective ways through quite a tonnage of flesh and bones.
Tarzan, Bulldog Drummond, James Bond, Rambo and the Bruce Lee characters
have different techniques but much the same regard for human life.

The figures in the first list, however, are considerably more than
specialists in violence. The plot of the Iliad, for instance, revolves
not around Achilles’ superiority in war but around his refusal to use
it. When he returns to the fight it is because of his grief for his dead
friend Patroclus. Tristan is not only a champion duellist and
dragon-slayer but also a tormented lover, an ambivalent friend, a
lukewarm husband and something of a songwriter and practical joker to
boot. Violence is part of the framework of these epics, but it is also
posed as a moral and human issue.

By comparison, the twentieth-century killer–heroes are cardboard
cut-outs, and in modern pulp fiction the questioning is gone. There is a
disconnection of action from emotion – at least from emotional
complexity – which relates to the historical trajectory of alienation
and hegemonic masculinity sketched in chapter 7. A wonderful document of
this is a 1955 thriller by Clark Smith called The Speaking Eye. The
tough-guy hero is, of all things, an accountant, who is precipitated
into a Chandler-style narrative of murders and tight-lipped beatings
when sent to do an audit for a company take-over.

Cultural Dynamics

The historicity of sexual ideology is seen not only in details like the
content of heroism, but in its organization on the largest scale. In
pre-capitalist and early modern Europe sexual ideology was organized as
part of a religious world-view. The issues of sexual politics were
framed as moral questions, to be decided by appeal to revelation or to
priestly authority. The massive modern secularization of European
culture occurred in sexual ideology as much as elsewhere. The production
of a natural science of sexuality and a social science of gender were
the theoretical faces of this development.

From the viewpoint of mass practice, the key development was not the
shift from a religious to a scientific form of abstraction but the
shifting basis of authority. Secularization undermined the ability of
ministers and bishops to arbitrate questions of gender. It was by no
means a foregone conclusion who, if anyone, would succeed to the office.
Scientists, bureaucrats, teachers and philosophers all had claims, and
have kept some corner of the action. It was doctors, however, whose
claims were most effective and who took the hegemonic position in
constructing secularized discourses of gender and sexuality.

The medicalization of sexual ideology has now been traced by historians
in a number of areas. Jeffrey Weeks documents the application of the
‘medical model’ to homosexuality in Europe; Barbara Ehrenreich and
Deirdre English the medicalization of women’s bodies in the United
States; Kerreen Reiger the medical take-over of early childcare in
Australia. In all these cases, as Foucault also argues for France, the
crystallization of a medical theory of sexual life is accompanied by a
practice of control. A form of social authority is constructed, which
immediately reaches beyond the business of treating physical diseases.

A major consequence was the medicalization of problems of emotional life
and interpersonal relations in the form of psychiatry. Under the aegis
of psychiatry homosexual relationships were defined as an expression of
mental illness. Resistance by women to domestic subordination became
‘housewife’s neurosis’. A host of conflicts in everyday life were
reinterpreted as outcomes of unresolved childhood complexes.
Medicalization thus had a double effect. It depoliticized gender
relations directly, while building a more mediated power-structure based
on the authority of a masculine profession.

Of course the creation of this authority did not put an end to conflict.
The new authority is itself challenged, sometimes successfully. Gay
activists have forced official psychiatry to abandon the definition of
homosexuality as a pathology, though it is evidently still treated as
such in some psychiatric practice. Rather than ending conflict, the
growth of medical authority highlights the extent to which the dynamic
of sexual ideology is a struggle for hegemony. What is at issue is the
power to set the terms on which questions of gender are understood and
conflicts fought out.

Hegemony, as noted in chapter 8 for relations between masculinities,
does not mean total cultural control and obliteration of alternatives.
Such a degree of control does not happen in practice. In sexual ideology
generally, ascendant definitions of reality must be seen as
accomplishments that are always partial and always to some extent
contested.

Indeed we must see them as partly defined by the alternatives against
which they are asserted. Medicalized ideologies of gender, for instance,
are defined partly against alternative forms of authority such as the
Church. Hence the need to claim scientific warrant for what are actually
judgements of practical morality, like psychiatric interventions in
sexual politics. The claim is often made implicitly, by the use of a
technical language. Medical ideologies are also defined against attempts
to take control of healing into the people’s own hands. Hence the need
to assert a strong distinction between the sound judgement of
professionals and the ignorance and errors of ‘lay’ people. Here
medicine has actually adopted the language of the Church.

Contestation, then, is an integral part of ideology. The forms of
symbolic opposition to which it gives rise, for instance in erotica, are
intricate and fascinating. Here I will consider only one pattern of
contestation, the pattern that follows the lines of crisis tendencies as
defined in chapter 7.

Karl Mannheim made a famous distinction between ‘ideologies’,
world-views that are integrated with the established order, and
‘Utopias’ which transcend it. This is too neat a package; the argument
just made about the contested position of hegemonic sexual ideology
complicates the picture. It is still useful to distinguish perspectives
and frameworks that are broadly compatible with the existing gender
order from those that are not.

Such a distinction is implicit in the argument made in chapter 10 about
masculinity therapy, which adapts hegemonic masculinity to changed
conditions without risking the institutional bases of men’s power. The
anti-sexist men’s movement represented in Jon Snodgrass’s For Men
Against Sexism and Andy Metcalfe and Martin Humphries’s The Sexuality of
Men is looking for conceptions of masculinity that transcend those power
bases. It has clearly had a hard time finding them.

Feminism, by contrast, has generated Utopias both in Mannheim’s broad
sense and in the specific sense of imagined ideal worlds. Texts like
Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915), a novel about an all-woman
society hidden in the highlands of the Amazon, document in a striking
way both the break with hegemonic ideology and the limits of the shift.
In the case of Herland the limit of thought is sexuality. Gilman can
conceptualize an all-woman government and radical changes in education,
but cannot admit mass lesbianism in her imagined world. She has to get
around it by doing away with sexual impulses almost completely.

Formal Utopias are the exception, however intriguing; it is an
occupational hazard of academics to overemphasize systematic ideology.
Most of the cultural politics of gender is much less spectacular. Its
field of action is the possibilities that open up in particular milieux
and institutions: the curriculum changes possible in a particular
school, the repertory possible in a particular theatre and so on.

Taken case by case, the opportunities are likely to seem limited. The
objective possibilities in a particular high school, for instance, are
constrained by many forces outside it: the bureaucratic organization of
the state, the social composition of the school’s catchment, the nature
of the credentials market, as well as the strength of various ideologies
of gender. Yet possibilities for contestation and movement are there,
and some teachers do explore them. This goes beyond clearly labelled
issues of gender. As Lyn Yates argues, the mainstream curriculum is a
key field of implicit sexual politics in schools and has its
possibilities for change. The sense of overwhelming constraints in a
single milieu becomes less dampening when the connections between
milieux come into view. Grass-roots cultural politics does cumulate,
sometimes into social movements. And it provides the base on which the
makers of formal ideologies build.

Recognizing the importance of cultural politics within the sphere of
gender raises the reverse question, the impact of gender relations and
sexual ideology on culture generally. There is every reason to agree
with feminist cultural criticism that this impact is both powerful and
largely unacknowledged. The ‘naturalization’ of gender has extended to
the making of culture itself. Until recently it has not been a question
why most playwrights, physicists or newspaper editors were men. It is
still not a question in the majority of theatres, physics departments
and media corporate offices.

The view that sexual politics is the structural basis of culture in
general – that for instance our culture is patriarchal before it is
anything else – is another matter. The overall analysis in this book
would suggest that this view is wrong, at least as a transhistorical
generalization. The scope of gender relations is historically variable,
and their power to determine cultural processes in general must be
variable too. But a more limited strategic claim may be right. There are
likely to be historical moments where the possibilities of general
change in consciousness and culture depend more crucially on the dynamic
of gender relations than on any other social force. It can be argued
that we are in such a moment now. The case is a long way from being
proved but cannot be disregarded. I will come back to related questions
in the final chapter.

Ideologists and Interests

If the strategic argument is even partly correct, it highlights the
importance of the people who are engaged in remaking cultural forms.
Discussions of sexual ideology have to a remarkable extent ignored the
ideologists. The main exception is Viola Klein in The Feminine
Character. Her approach from Mannheim’s sociology of knowledge led to a
concern with the people who formulated the knowledge, the social
positions they occupied and the interests they articulated. The
resulting study remains, 40 year later, one of the most significant
analyses of sexual ideology.

What Klein’s analysis conspicuously lacked was the concept of gender as
a social structure in its own right. The same is true of more recent
histories of ideas that have dealt with movements in sexual ideology:
Paul Robinson’s The Sexual Radicals; Christopher Lasch’s Haven in a
Heartless World; Michel Foucault’s History of Sexuality. To the extent
that there are structural categories in this research, they are loosely
derived from class analysis. The result is a social analysis of ideas
conducted with a 90-degree twist in the middle. The argument constantly
has to move off the axis of class onto the subject-matter of sex and
gender. It remains a shade mysterious why whole groups of intellectuals
should arise who are concerned with sexual politics.

Nevertheless these studies point up the importance of the intellectuals
who construct accounts of gender relations. In understanding them it
should be possible to draw on existing theories of intellectuals in the
traditions of Mannheim and Gramsci; and perhaps also on ‘new class’
theorists who have focused on intellectuals, such as Gouldner, and
Konrad and Szelenyi. But there can be no simple translation of any of
these ideas, for all of them are constructed within a class framework
and ignore the structure of gender. New questions have to be asked about
intellectuals and gender relations.

In some recent research, strongly influenced by feminism, these
questions are opening up. Ehrenreich and English’s For Her Own Good and
Reiger’s The Disenchantment of the Home are perhaps the best examples.
Both trace the emergence of new forms of domination of women by men, in
which groups of intellectuals are central – professionals rather than
the academics who figure in Klein’s story. It is not only a question of
professional men justifying and exercising new powers. More strikingly,
the historical process surrounding these medical interventions into
women’s health and childcare constitutes groups of intellectuals in
terms of gender relations. An example is the category of ‘medical
authorities on childrearing’, a social category constituted by the
sexual division of labour that makes mothers primary carers for
children, and by the gender structure of power that makes medical
authority masculine.

This work points to a more general issue. From the perspective of a
theory of gender, the question is where and how intellectuals and
intellectual work fit into the structure of gender relations. From the
perspective of a sociology of intellectuals, the question is how and how
far they are constituted as a group by gender relations, and how far the
character and impact of intellectual work is determined by gender
dynamics. Once the questions are posed in these terms, the tools of
ideology–theory and the sociology of intellectuals can be put to work on
new bases.

A case in point is Gramsci’s category of ‘organic’ intellectuals,
meaning people who perform an intellectual function within a class,
giving it self-definition and helping to mobilize it as a political and
social force. There are, I would argue, people who perform that kind of
task in gender relations. A notable example is Harriet Kidd, a clerk at
the Women’s Co-operative Guild head office in Britain in the years
leading up to World War I. She was successively a mill worker, an
unmarried mother after rape by her employer, a local labour and
community organizer and then an administrator. The Guild, founded in the
1880s, was a mass organization of working-class women claiming over
60,000 members between the wars. The combative socialist feminism of
organizers like Kidd was clearly very important in its success.

An organic intellectual of a very different stripe is Marabel Morgan, a
Florida housewife and business woman of the 1970s. The Total Woman has
already been mentioned as a classic presentation of emphasized
femininity. The book grew out of a four-week course in which other wives
were taught the tactics of being a ‘total woman’, with homework
assignments about adapting to their husband’s wishes. Though the
authorities Morgan appeals to are men, mainly Biblical prophets and
psychiatrists, they are not very prominent in the text. Her main
argument is carried by dozens of little anecdotes from the ‘total woman’
classes. Morgan is, in effect, mediating an ideology constructed by
women and circulating among women. Though it is, as Andrea Dworkin
argues in Right-Wing Women, a response to their powerlessness in
relation to their husbands, this does not alter the organic character of
the intellectual work.

A more general formulation is worth attempting, even in a preliminary
way. Groups active in the making of sexual ideology include priests,
journalists, advertisers, politicians, psychiatrists, designers (for
example, of fashion), playwrights and film-makers, actors and actresses,
novelists, musicians, movement activists and academics. When the
activities of these groups are considered in relation to the gender
order, they fall broadly into three categories.

First is the regulation and management of gender regimes. The Catholic
priesthood is a clear example, for its involvement went far beyond papal
declarations on sacred motherhood and unholy contraception. Theology
justified a patriarchal power structure but hardly settled how it was
actually to work. The traditional village priest spent a great deal of
time sorting this out, giving advice, laying down interpretations of
rules and managing the domestic tensions of his parish via the
confessional, visits to homes and so forth. Psychotherapists, family
therapists and counsellors do a lot of the same kind of work now.

Second is the articulation of experiences, fantasies and perspectives
characteristic of particular groups in gender relations. Harriet Kidd
and Marabel Morgan, in different ways, did this. But in other cases the
relationship is anything but organic, as the mass fantasies of Hollywood
show. Clark Gable articulated fantasies for women, Raquel Welch for men.
Third is the theorization of gender relations, a business that implies a
degree of disconnection from daily practice and an effort at reflection
and interpretation. I mean this rather more broadly than just writing
treatises about the sociology of gender. As suggested in chapter 3,
novelists like Nadine Gordimer and Patrick White and autobiographers
like Anja Meulenbelt are engaged in ‘theorization’ in this sense.

Returning to the question of structural location, if a group of
intellectuals is constituted as a clear-cut group in gender relations it
implies a strong patterning of the sexual division of labour.
Intellectual work is work, with a labour process of its own and a demand
for material resources, not the least of them being time. Situations
vary and groups of intellectuals vary in the degree to which they are
formed around the sexual division of labour rather than around some
other structural pattern (for example, class relations).

If we now integrate these two classifications the result is the grid in
table 5, on which I have tentatively placed the groups mentioned above.

This is, obviously, only a beginning in thinking about these groups. It
is perhaps enough to suggest that there are some systematic links
between intellectuals and the structure of gender relations. If so,
further exploration on these lines should yield results of importance
for our understanding of both.

For the theory of gender, the potential dividend is a good deal more
than the deeper understanding of the history of ideas that has been
defined as the value of the sociology of knowledge. In chapter 6 a
definition of ‘interests’ was suggested in terms of inequalities
constructed by gender relations. At that level of definition the
interests are inert, in the sense of Sartre’s ‘practico-inert’. For them
to become active as political forces requires a mobilization, one of
whose conditions is a reflective awareness of the inequalities and the
oppositions of interest they define. The creation of that awareness is
intellectual work. Much of it has in practice been done by specialists,
the intellectuals of the groups just discussed.

Table 5 Intellectuals and the gender order

[Image]

We may say, then, that intellectuals have a historic place in the
translation of structural inequality into sexual politics, at least at
the level of public politics. To say that, however, is not to
circumscribe very much the form of politics that emerges. For the
reflective awareness of inequalities may take very different forms,
depending on the circumstances and character of the reflection. Marabel
Morgan is articulating such an awareness just as much as Andrea Dworkin;
Morgan calls the wife the ‘Executive Vice-President’ of the marriage,
leaving no doubt about who is President.

It matters, then, how the articulation of interests is done. To put it
another way, ideological struggle in gender relations is to be expected
and has effects. It is easy to exaggerate the significance of the
abstract clash of ideas. Some of the wars of academics have remarkably
little relevance to anything in the world outside. But intellectual work
and ideological struggle are scarcely confined to the academy. They
occur to some degree in every institution and setting. And if academic
abstraction has to be discounted from its own estimate, it is not to be
ignored. Generalized formulations of ideas can be important in
crystallizing consciousness, in giving names to things felt but not yet
stated. When the world is ready, ideas can be a revolutionary force. The
problem is to understand the readiness as well as the ideas.

NOTES

Discourse and Practice

(pp. 241–5). Quotations from Goldman (1972b), p. 163; Kristeva (1981),
p. 21.

Ideological Processes

(pp. 245–9). Gancian and Ross (1981) illustrate media research showing
the marginalization of women in news and how it varies over time. The
case of Scottish history, Smout (1969); the case of the London
conference, Cooper (1968). APA guidelines for non-sexist language
published in American Psychologist, (June 1977).

Ideologists and Interests

(pp. 253–8). To Klein’s work we can now add detailed histories of ideas
like Rosenberg (1982), which are an improvement in terms of detail but
still have a less sophisticated social analysis. Harriet Kidd’s brief
biography in Davies (1977).

12

Political Practice

The Scope of Sexual Politics

In ordinary speech ‘politics’ is a narrow and faintly disreputable term,
meaning elections, parliaments, presidents and party antagonisms.
‘Politician’ can be a term of abuse, ‘political’ a label for distrust.
Social science has found the negative overtones unnecessary and the
narrow definition untenable.

In what follows ‘politics’ is assumed to be neither bad nor good, simply
an essential part of social life and a very widespread one. The same
kinds of processes occur in companies, voluntary organizations, and in
stateless societies as occur in and around the state: contests for
power, mechanisms of succession, debates over policy. Sociological
research on families found power structures and power struggles even in
that haven, as soon as it looked. R. D. Laing’s The Politics of
Experience marked another discovery made in the cultural politics of the
1960s. When Kate Millett characterized politics as ‘power-structured
relationships, arrangements whereby one group of persons is controlled
by another’ and by applying the idea to relations between men and women
defined ‘sexual politics’, the term startled many people but her thought
followed a well-marked path.

Millett’s definition now appears too narrow, given the range of overt
social conflicts about sex and gender over the last two decades. It is
worth trying to get these conflicts in some sort of order to arrive at a
definition of the scope of sexual politics.

There is, first, a political process centred on the state, some of whose
dimensions were discussed in chapter 6. Its most visible moments have
been attempts to commit major states to guarantees of equality for
women, such as the Equal Rights Amendment in the United States, and the
United Nations declaration of the International Decade for Women. Of
course ‘sexual politics’ also include the counter-mobilization that
scuppered the Equal Rights Amendment and undermined UN policy, for
instance the repression of women in Pakistan and Iran. Attempts to
introduce equal opportunity policies have contested the sexual division
of labour in the state and provoked widespread, if muted, resistance.
Issues of access have been fought out in political parties, notably in
attempts to get more women endorsed as candidates, and in a few places
like San Francisco and Sydney, gay men too. Resources issues have been
opened with the creation of women’s units in the bureaucracy, and
specific welfare programmes directed towards women, gays, and even
transsexuals. A new resources politics is emerging around the unequal
impact of apparently gender-neutral state policies such as the form of
taxation or welfare-funding cuts. The 1985 ‘Women’s Tax Summit’ which
contested the Australian government’s proposed shift to indirect taxes
is a notable example.

Overlapping all this is a politics of workplaces and markets. Campaigns
to break down prohibitions on women’s employment, or restrictions on
promotion, continue. In 1985, for instance, women’s exclusion from the
steelworks in Wollongong was declared unlawful. Sexual pressure on women
employees by men, especially their bosses, is now defined as sexual
harassment and cases are being taken before tribunals – not always with
progressive results, as Jocelynne Scutt shows for a landmark Australian
case of 1983. The long-standing exclusion of women from power in trade
unions, and the corresponding lack of interest by unions in the
interests of women members, is also being challenged. In 1983 Jenny
George became the first woman elected to the executive of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions; in 1979 the Trade Union Congress in Britain
sponsored a mass demonstration in support of abortion rights. It is more
difficult to get leverage on a whole labour market than a particular
workplace, but the attempt is made. There are for instance programmes to
get girls into apprenticeships, to break down the sharp sexual division
of skilled trades; and to get more girls into professionally oriented
streams in schools and colleges.

The content of schooling, and other areas of cultural work, has become a
focus of struggle. The new feminism sparked the rewriting of sexist
textbooks and attempts to remove discriminatory material from curricula
and libraries; similar issues have been raised by gay liberation though
with less result. Right-wing politicians attempt the opposite: in 1978,
for instance, the Queensland government banned the use of the MACOS
primary curriculum because it was thought to undermine the sanctity of
the family. Mass-media content has come under fire for sexist
advertising and hostile stereotypes of gays, though media-reform groups
have not had much leverage. In book publishing rather more space has
been gained by feminism. Attempts to gain more space in performance
arts, like the ‘Women and Theatre’ project launched in Sydney in 1980,
have provoked remarkably hostile reactions from some of the men in the
same trades.

The politics of families has a public face. Official campaigns to
increase or to limit the number of children are familiar, with the
Catholic Church’s intransigence on contraception a curious counterpoint
to rising concern with world over-population. Negotiation of the
relations between husbands and wives often ends in the courts for
adjudication of terms of divorce and custody of children. A struggle
also surrounds the courts that do this, from parliamentary conflict over
divorce legislation, and feminist criticism of inadequate enforcement of
maintenance payments, to murderous attacks on family court judges by
embittered husbands. The use of force between family members is now a
public issue, with campaigns on domestic violence, child abuse and
incest. An informal political process has developed around the attempts
within parts of the Left to construct egalitarian households, working
through conflict-ridden issues over child-care, sexual relationships and
property ownership.

The politics of contraception raises the question of control over
sexuality. Some of the bitterest conflicts of the last fifteen years
have concerned abortion, with right-wing mobilizations in defence of the
‘unborn child’. Conservatism desires to confine sexuality to marriage,
though conservatives now divide over whether marital sex should
concentrate on procreation (the Pope) or pleasure (Marabel Morgan). Both
versions are homophobic. The control of men’s homosexuality is a
well-established area of state action, with the front-line police and
courts backed by security agencies, discrimination in employment and
exclusion from schools. Control of erotica and pornography is also well
established. In the 1960s a sudden liberalization occurred in the rich
capitalist countries, marked by the ‘Danish Sex Fairs’ of 1969–70. The
rapid growth of a mass-circulation pornography industry provoked bitter
criticism from some tendencies in feminism for its exploitative content;
some unexpected alliances in the politics of control have emerged in the
United States especially.

Finally, the movements addressing these issues have a politics of their
own presence. Quiet campaigns for legal reform on homosexuality were
transformed into a highly visible Gay Liberation movement in the rich
capitalist countries; these have since changed again in the context of
visible gay ‘communities’. The new feminism was divided early between
liberal and radical currents, with radical feminism in turn dividing
between socialist and cultural feminisms. New concerns with violence,
disarmament and ecology have emerged. There have been internal conflicts
over lesbianism, separatism, Marxism, connections with the state and a
range of other issues. There have been attempts to create a
counter-sexist movement among heterosexual men, which have not been very
successful. Nor have the attempts at permanent mobilization of
right-wing sexual politics. Organizations like the anti-feminist Women
Who Want to be Women remain small; parties like the Call to Australia
movement have minor electoral success. For the most part the churches
and conservative parties provide the organizational framework for
reaction. Their potential strength is shown by the fundamentalist
mobilization in the United States over the last ten years. At the time
of writing a television evangelist is making a strong bid for the
Republican nomination as President in succession to Reagan.

The six fields just sketched involve overt politics, with issues
publicly stated and the course of events readily accessible. This is not
the entire scope of politics by any useful definition. Tacit politics,
where conflicts of interest and power struggles are not publicly
articulated, are equally real though less easily documented. Some
examples have been given: the family and the street in chapter 6 and
workplaces in chapters 5 and 11. The difference between the two kinds of
politics is not just a matter of degree of publicity. It has to do with
the way interests are articulated and political movements formed.

The Articulation of Interests

The crucial moment in the social dynamic of politics is the constitution
of interests. In chapter 6 interests were defined in terms of the
inequalities constructed by gender relations. At that level the
interests are inert, and though they structure practice it is only as
the external conditions of practices which are directed to other ends.
In this sense we might speak of latent interests and demobilised
politics.

When practice is, however, directed to these conditions as its object,
the interest is articulated in a collective project. The most obvious
example is a social movement like gay liberation and women’s liberation.
As proposed in chapter 9 a collective project may also take an
institutionalized form. It may be embodied in the functioning of a
bureaucracy or the structure of a labour market, and may be pursued as a
project by the defence of those institutional arrangements. Broadly the
interests of heterosexual men in sexual politics are articulated in this
way. There is no need for an anti-liberation movement to defend
patriarchy.

The constitution of an interest as a collective project requires
awareness of inequalities and the social oppositions they define. While
that awareness may be aroused by any event – a police raid, a beauty
contest or whatever – to clarify and sustain it requires intellectual
work. In practice much of this is done by specialists, the groups
discussed in chapter 11. Thus intellectuals have often played a
strategic role in the constitution of social interests. The notion of
the ‘organic intellectual’ is best understood in these terms.

The classification of intellectuals suggested in chapter 11 is related
to forms of politics. Much of the interplay between social interests is
what Gramsci called for class relations a ‘war of position’, in contrast
to the ‘war of manoeuvre’. The tacit politics of bureaucracies and
families, for instance, seem constant though the conflicts are real.
Both the repetition and the conflict are acknowledged in the folklore of
the ‘battle of the sexes’ where drunken husbands, wives with
rolling-pins, flirtatious ‘girls’ and dim-witted boyfriends perform
their endless ballet.

In such politics the management function of intellectuals is uppermost.
Priests negotiate the tensions of the village; psychotherapists talk out
the tensions of the urban rich and drug or hospitalize the urban poor;
social planners fine-tune the welfare system to mop up the direst
effects of structural inequality. The interests of dominant groups can
be represented simply by providing rationalizations of the structure as
a whole. Such theory takes a degree of naturalization for granted,
suppresses the question of interests and concerns itself with explaining
deviations. Sex role theory is a classic solution to these requirements,
and can be regarded as an organic ideology of the gender regime in the
modern welfare state.

The contrast with the ‘utopias’ discussed in chapter 11, and the crisis
tendencies underlying them, is obvious. The interests of subordinated
groups are capable of articulation as collective projects which break
the bounds of the existing gender order. This may be only in fantasy, as
in the classic literary Utopias. But the crisis tendencies discussed in
chapter 7 create real conditions for transformative practice. Here the
formation of a collective project involves the articulation of some
group’s interest in a changed gender order, defining a historical
trajectory from deprivation or repression in the present to a future of
equality or liberation.

In this context the function of theorization is uppermost in
intellectual work. Simply to formulate such an interest requires some
mental distance from the current gender order, comparing it with
conceivable alternatives. In theorizing the existing order the conflict
of interest moves to the centre of attention. Categoricalism is an
understandable result, as we see in radical feminism. But categoricalism
creates difficulties with the need to grasp processes of transformation
and the construction of political forces. So even when ascendant this
kind of theory is unlikely to be under challenge or constantly modified
in practice.

The broad contrast just drawn has two major qualifications. First, the
interests of groups advantaged in the gender order may also be
articulated in a transcendent project. A case in point is the contest
for hegemony discussed in chapter 6, the displacement of authoritarian
patriarchy in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by a masculinity
oriented to technical rationality and institutionalized through
bureaucracy and markets. Among other things this involved the creation
of Utopias – social contract theory and political economy – which
articulated the interests of the ascending groups of men. Another case
is masculinity therapy and the ‘men’s liberation’ movement of the 1970s.
Here transcendence was pursued because the existing gender order was
felt to have become unworkable; the modernization of masculinity was
required as a rescue operation.

The second qualification is that the inert interest defined by existing
patterns of inequality can always be articulated in more than one way,
as the history of ideological conflict shows. For instance, a common
response to crisis tendencies is fear of losing what you already have.
Right-wing sexual politics attempts to articulate women’s interests in
this way, with some success; some of the bitterest opposition to
feminism has come from other women. The ‘threat to the family’ is a
threat to the mother where femininity is defined in relation to
childcare and domestic work and where ‘the family’ is the only sphere in
which women have any power.

These possibilities mean that the pattern of sexual politics cannot be
deduced mechanically from structural analysis. The line-up of political
forces is always a question of how interests have been constituted, and
what alliances are constructed between them. Equal opportunity
programmes in the state, to take one example, developed through an
alliance between technocratically oriented men pursuing efficiency and
professional women pursuing women’s interests as articulated in liberal
feminism.

To make this abstract argument concrete, the following sections examine
two patterns of political practice, one demobilized and the other highly
mobilized. The choice is not arbitrary. I would argue that a combination
between the two groupings discussed here is required for a general
transformation of the relations between women and men; though to make it
happen, both forms of politics would themselves have to change.

Working-class Feminism

  In plain language, both in law and in popular morality, the wife is
  still the inferior in the family to the husband. She is first without
  economic independence, and the law therefore gives the man, whether he
  be good or bad, a terrible power over her. Partly for this reason, and
  partly because all sorts of old half-civilized beliefs still cling to
  the flimsy skirts of our civilization, the beginning and end of the
  working woman’s life and duty is still regarded by many as the care of
  the household, the satisfaction of man’s desires, and the bearing of
  children. We do not say that this is the case in every working-class
  home, or that there are not hundreds of husbands who take a higher
  view of married life and practise it. What we do say is that these
  views are widely held, often unconsciously, and are taken advantage of
  by hundreds of men who arc neither good men nor good husbands and that
  even where there is no deliberate evil or viciousness, these views are
  responsible for the overwork and physical suffering among women and
  for that excessive child-bearing, of which more will be said later.

The author of this remarkable passage, written seventy years ago, was
Margaret Llewelyn Davies, general secretary of the Women’s Co-operative
Guild in England and one of the most effective organizers either
feminism or socialism has known. Here she sketched out both the main
arena of mass sexual politics, the working-class household, and some of
its major issues: economic dependence, ideological subordination and the
physical consequences of oppression.

The inequalities in such a setting are clear enough, and therefore the
inert opposition of interests between women and men. In terms of income,
authority, leisure time, prestige, access to organizations and public
life generally, working-class husbands had privileges to defend. Though
some of the details have changed, in broad terms they still do. This has
never gone without challenge, as is clear from the vivid autobiographies
of women in the co-operative movement collected by Davies and published
in Maternity and Life As We Have Known It. The articulation of this
challenge is the political practice I will call working-class feminism.

Power and inequality within the family are the objects of a widespread,
active, often vehement face-to-face politics. Most of it leaves no
record except in the memories of the participants. It therefore goes
undocumented, except for novels like Glen Tomasetti’s Thoroughly Decent
People and academic family research of the scientifically disreputable
kind that actually listens to people talking about themselves. From one
such study comes the following example. The setting is the working-class
Australian suburb in which the Princes (chapter 1) also live.

  Mrs Markham is very much the central person in her family, the hub of
  discussions and decisions, and emotionally the source of strength for
  others. She has been conscious of prejudice against women for a long
  time. She recalls being ‘bitterly disappointed’ when forced to leave
  school early, and thus miss out on her ambition to become a
  journalist, because her mother could see no point in education for
  women. Mrs Markham is determined that her girls will not repeat her
  frustration, and has pushed them hard at school.

  Elaine Markham, the oldest daughter, has taken over this project,
  internalized it, and become highly competitive at school. With
  success: she is in the ‘A’ class and indeed one of its academic stars.
  Like her mother she is contemptuous of ‘the little housewife’ and of
  her schoolmates who are growing up in that image. Though she will not
  go as far as ‘Women’s Libbists’ burning bras and demonstrating in the
  street, she firmly supports ‘the overall idea of women being equal’.
  But all this has not come easily. She sometimes comes home from school
  in tears from tension and frustration. She talks of the school as a
  ‘dead’ place. She is thinking about leaving early despite her academic
  success.

  The corollary of Mrs Markham’s strength is Mr Markham’s marginality.
  He is a storeman, earning below average wages. He came from a poor
  family, left school at 15, has held a range of jobs. He gets pushed
  around a good deal at work. While antagonistic to unions he is also
  angry at his bosses for not giving him recognition and a better wage.
  He finds their pressure for profit erodes the service his unit can
  give, and offends his pride in workmanship. The work situation, in
  short, constantly erodes his self-esteem. He tried to assert
  patiarchal rights in the family, for instance refusing to take on a
  share of housework when his wife took a job. But the main result was
  that he became increasingly marginal in the household. The women have
  concluded that he has failed as a husband and father. He too, rather
  wistfully, now accepts that opinion of himself.

This is only the barest outline of an intricate situation; even so it is
of interest. In the last few years a whole series of problems about
gender relations have been at issue inside the Markham family: ideas
about the proper place of women in the world, access to new resources
for girls, the division of labour in the household, the authority of
men, the character of masculinity.

These issues are not exactly light-years away from the concerns of
organized feminism. But the Markhams have no contact with that movement.
Their only knowledge of it is the media stereotype of ‘Women’s
Libbists’, with whom neither Elaine nor her mother care to identify.
Their sexual politics is developed out of their own experience.

A politics mostly generated in the family and mostly conducted in the
family is unlikely to make an issue of the family. The low level of
women’s wages, and the lack of collective provision for childcare, make
it extremely difficult for women who do not have the capital to buy a
house nor qualifications that would guarantee a good job – but who
usually do have children to be supported – to survive without a husband
and a husband’s wage. In working-class life, accordingly, the family as
an institution is not very much contested. The questions at issue are
the terms on which family relationships work.

Mrs Markham has a job in a factory, Elaine goes to school; both places
have their own gender regimes and surrounding politics. The workplace is
the second main site of working-class feminism, with the inequalities of
wages, power and conditions already discussed. The assembly-line workers
in the plant studied by Ruth Cavendish respond to these inequalities in
a way which I suspect is very general. They are basically disillusioned
with men, and are familiar with feminist arguments about men’s
unjustified privileges. In the daily struggles about work and conditions
in the factory they systematically support each other against the men
who are their supervisors and managers. Since most of them have a
household to run also, with a sharp sexual division of labour and little
help from their husbands, they are chronically tired and have no
leisure. Both facts make it difficult to organize. Men control the
union, which did little for them in ordinary times and undermined them
when they did go on strike. The union, as in the Melbourne factories
where the Centre for Urban Research and Action interviewed immigrant
women in the study But I Wouldn’t Want my Wife to Work Here, tends to be
seen as part of management.

The general picture is a consciousness of sex inequality developing in
an extremely constricting situation which prevents much expression
beyond a practice of face-to-face solidarity. Within those limits the
consciousness of oppression is vivid and the response active. Other
studies have found comparable responses; Judy Wajcman’s study of a group
of women in Britain who took over their failing factory is particularly
interesting. Not all women workers have such a consciousness. Yet there
is enough evidence to say that this is an important form of articulation
of women’s interests in industrial settings.

There is no platform that lists the demands of working-class feminism.
It is nevertheless possible to formulate in outline the issues around
which these family and industrial politics revolve and the direction of
movement implied.

(1) In relation to the division of labour and gender structuring of
production. In the family: control of the household budget; the search
for an independent wage for women and the right to spend it; sometimes,
more equal sharing of housework. In the workplace: more equal wages
between men and women; ending practices that keep women out of
better-paid or easier jobs.

(2) In relation to the structure of power. In the family: control over
decisions about the children, such as schooling and apprenticeship;
personal independence, notably freedom from put-downs and violence by
husbands or de facto husbands. In the workplace: freedom from arbitrary
authority, such as rough treatment by bosses or headmasters; being heard
by the unions that are supposed to represent women workers.

(3) In relation to cathexis and sexuality. In the family: adequate
contraception, including the right to abortion; control of one’s own
sexuality. (For teenagers, the right to be a sexual being and to be
active in initiating and controlling sexual adventures; for married
women, the right to set terms with husbands or leave unsatisfying
marriages.) In the workplace: freedom from sexual harassmemt.

Cavendish argues that the concerns of her factory workers are very
distant from those of middle-class feminism, and this is a reasonably
common view of the issue. I suspect the difference would have seemed
less if she had been able to study the same women in equal detail in
their families. Overall there seems no obvious reason why this kind of
politics should not be called ‘feminist’. It articulates women’s
interests and involves an extensive critique of the power of men. Its
forms and priorities are certainly different from those of ‘movement’
feminism, especially cultural feminism. It is also happening on a larger
scale.

That is, perhaps, the central paradox of working-class feminism. There
is every reason to think it is very widespread. The same kinds of
struggle bubble up in factories and families in different industries,
different countries, and at different times. But in both families and
factories the structures that generate this politics also localize it.
The result is a vast spectrum of small-scale political processes, each
disconnected from the others. They are known about, through folklore,
tradition and conversation; but they do not easily feed into each other.

There have been attempts to mobilize working-class women in a more
collective and public politics. Their high point was in the early
twentieth century, with movements like the Social Democratic women’s
organizations in Germany, the Women’s Co-operative Guild in Britain, and
women’s organizations connected with the Socialist Party in the United
States. More recently there are events like the Working Women’s Charter
campaign and Women Against Pit Closures in Britain; the involvement of
working-class women in refuges and the radicalization of Labor Women’s
conferences in Australia. Most of these mobilizations have been
connected with organizations constructed and dominated by men – parties,
unions, cooperatives – and have therefore involved a politics of
representation and access from a structurally weak position. The Labor
Women’s conferences, for instance, have no formal power at all; as was
shown in NSW in 1986 when the dominant right-wing faction in the party,
which could not control the women’s conference, simply abolished it. At
the national level 76 per cent of the delegates to the 1984 Labor Party
federal conference were men, and among the major power-brokers there
were no women at all.

To recognize the weakness of mobilizations is not to imply that
working-class feminism has been ineffective. Reading the British
accounts of family life in Round About a Pound a Week, Life As We Have
Known It, and Working-class Wives creates a strong impression of the
distance travelled during the twentieth century. Patriarchal authority
has been rolled back some way. Working-class women have won more space
and more resources. There is a cumulation, however modest each step in
it has been.

Liberation Movements: Birth and Transformation

The articulation of interests in the women’s liberation movement differs
from the articulation in working-class feminism in a number of ways. Its
main feature has been the construction of a collective project whose
theme is the generalization of women’s struggles across different
settings, relationships and areas of life. It arose on a much narrower
social base but achieved an intensity of commitment and degree of
self-consciousness unparalleled in sexual politics.

Much has been made of the ‘middle-class’ character of this movement,
which orthodox marxists commonly lumped with liberalism as ‘bourgeois
feminism’. While there always have been working-class activists in
women’s liberation, its major social base is undeniable. Most of the
early activists were white, tertiary-educated, belonged to a particular
generation, lived in big cities and either came from well-off families
or could expect to get well-paid jobs as teachers, journalists, welfare
workers and the like. The movement has continued to recruit more from
students in higher education than from elsewhere, though there is now a
second generation of activists. Broadly it is a movement of the
intelligentsia, if that is taken to include professions and
semi-professions.

To recognize this base is not to discredit the movement, except on the
crudest view of class interests. Rather it raises questions about the
particular kind of articulation of women’s interests accomplished here,
and the particular circumstances that allowed such a project to emerge.

The first point is the more debated. The account of women’s interests
produced in women’s liberation was for the most part based on
categorical theory. As Hester Eisenstein argues, this easily led to a
‘false universalism’ that assimilated the situations of Third World,
black and working-class women to the situation of affluent whites. This
has changed, at least at the level of movement practice. There have been
attempts to address the concerns of migrant and black women in the rich
countries, and to take a less imperialist view of women’s politics in
the Third World. They remain an amendment rather than a reconstitution
of the movement.

The impulse behind the earliest women’s liberation groups was the
contradiction between the radical democracy professed by the men of the
‘New Left’ and their actual exclusion and exploitation of women. Lynne
Segal convincingly argues that 1960s radicalism was more than a target.
Its critique of the family and its liberal attitudes to sex had helped
emancipate younger women despite the alienated sexuality and frequent
selfishness of radical men. The pursuit of personal freedom and attempts
to build a ‘radical self highlighted questions of emotional
relationships and personality, which were shortly to become central
concerns of women’s liberation consciousness-raising groups. The
contrast between student activism and the workers in Cavendish’s factory
highlights the importance of free time and material resources in
shifting the grounds of sexual politics. The movement has survived on a
material base which working-class feminism does not have: the incomes of
professional women (financing journals, films, conferences, women’s
houses etc.), access to the state for the funding of women’s services,
and the unpaid labour of women without young children.

The work of activists in the first half-dozen years created not only
campaigns against injustices but also a political resource. The
collective project was materialized, and to some extent
institutionalized, in definite ways. First and most important was the
allegiance of some thousands of women in each of the major cities of the
rich capitalist countries. ‘Allegiance’ meant practices like CR groups,
turning out for demonstrations, coming to meetings, reading and
sometimes subscribing to feminist publications. It also meant a loyalty
to the movement. Many participants came to define themselves politically
as feminists before anything else, and to identify closely with the
women who had been through the same campaigns and helped each other
change their lives.

The second dimension of the resource was a network of institutions and
enterprises based on feminist ideas or catering for a feminist
clientele. The listings in the New Woman’s Survival Catalog of 1973 are
a measure of what had been established in the United States in a few
years: feminist publishing houses, art galleries, rock bands, clinics,
schools and courses, rape crisis centres, businesses, legal practices,
women’s centres, newsletters and magazines, theatre companies, and
campaign groups of many kinds. Also growing by the mid-1970s was a
feminist presence in the state, notably in the welfare bureaucracy and
universities, and in political parties and unions.

Third, less tangible but also important, was the growing credibility of
feminist ideas and of the movement as a representative of women’s
interests; credibility both among women outside the movement and among
men. Ideas spread despite the lack of mass organization. Thus Elaine
Markham stated a general principle of sex equality in language
undoubtedly derived from feminism, and the workers in Ruth Cavendish’s
factory did much the same. We were surprised to hear, in schools like
Elaine’s, a considerable number of boys also endorsing the principle of
equality. The funding of feminist refuges, with some difficulties but
not intense resistance, illustrates the credibility acquired with men in
the bureaucracy over an issue like domestic violence.

In a sense feminist theory predicted the creation of this resource:
‘sisterhood is powerful’, women together can make things happen. But
categorical theory assumed it was a resource for women at large and had
little to say about which particular women did or should direct it. In
the mid-1970s several developments made this issue acute. The recession
squeezed state expenditure on welfare and made it progressively harder
to fund feminist welfare and education initiatives. It also led to mass
unemployment among younger women and made it harder to open up new
fields of employment. At the same time right-wing mobilizations
developed against feminism on issues like abortion rights and the
American ERA. Though there are no membership figures it seems likely
that in the second half of the 1970s the women’s liberation movement had
either stopped growing, or at best was expanding much more slowly than
the pace of the early 1970s.

In this context differences of opinion and strategy once easily
accommodated were liable to harden into factional conflict. A struggle
for hegemony developed within feminism whose stake was control of the
political resource that the movement had created. None of the major
tendencies proved strong enough to eliminate the others. In Britain for
instance the result of a deepening series of conflicts, over issues of
sexuality especially, was the shipwreck of the movement’s national
conferences, the last of which was held in 1978. In the first half of
the 1980s the public face of women’s liberation was increasingly
presented by the ‘woman-centred’ ethos of cultural feminism, and by the
political priorities of radical feminism (in the narrower sense) with a
focus on ‘male violence’ as the means of oppression, men’s hostility and
power-seeking as the reason, and separatism as the strategic response.
This strategy capitalized on resources generated within the movement and
the possibility of turning it into a community, at the price of making
the movement less accessible to those outside.

At one level this account reinforces a point already made, that there
can be no single articulation of a structurally defined interest. The
projects of socialist feminism, political lesbianism and so forth, have
common ground but also cut across each other. At another level it shows
the power of structural alignments once they are articulated at all. For
the most remarkable feature of these events is the persistence of the
movement despite sharp internal conflicts, changes of circumstance from
boom to recession, changes of practice with the rise and decline of CR
groups, and an increasingly hostile political environment.

In some ways the political history of gay liberation seems very like
that of women’s liberation. It emerged at much the same time and in the
same metropolitan centres, used similar political tactics and rhetoric,
grew rapidly in the same years, developed and factionalized in the
1970s. It too has been characterized by tension between a socialist wing
and another more concerned to build a self-sustaining community and to
develop gay culture. Like women’s liberation it has had a highly
ambivalent relationship with the state, often attacking it for
anti-homosexual laws, police violence against gays and court
discrimination against lesbian mothers, but also wanting to use it for
antidiscrimination legislation and welfare provision.

In other ways the story is very different. Women’s liberation developed
out of a long history of women’s mobilizations, and has operated as the
radical end of a spectrum of women’s organizations in parties, churches,
charities and so on. While there is a history of homosexual rights
groups going back to the turn of the century, among them Magnus
Hirschfeld’s ‘Scientific Humanitarian Committee’ in Germany, the
Mattachine Society and Daughters of Bilitis in the United States, they
had always been small. Modest successes in gaining toleration, for
instance through the 1958 Wolfenden Report in Britain, were achieved by
alliance with liberals in the establishment, not by mass mobilization of
gays. It was assumed that was impossible because of legal repression and
public hostility. The ‘Stonewall riots’ that launched gay liberation
were sparked by a routine piece of policing by New York’s Finest; only
the response was not routine. Within a very short time the mobilization
undoubtedly had brought into political campaigns more people than all
previous homosexual organizations put together. Gay liberation stood
alone to an extent women’s liberation never did, and at least in its
early days was the only significant articulation of the interest of gay
people.

The second difference is that gay liberation, an articulation of
interest based on the structure of cathexis, was built across the major
divide in gender relations. So far as the interests of women and men
diverge, the movement has an inbuilt tendency to divide. In law reform,
for instance, lesbians are more affected by the operation of marital
law, such as custody issues, and homosexual men more affected by the
criminalization of sexual intercourse. What constitutes them as members
of an oppressed group is in some ways different. There is much more
violence against homosexual men than against lesbians, and male
homosexuality has historically aroused more horror among straights. On
their side lesbians suffer not only the stigmatization of homosexuality
but also the social, psychological and economic penalties attached to
being women. Politicized lesbians often have a stronger commitment to
women’s liberation as a movement than to gay liberation. For the most
part ‘gay politics’ has been gay men’s politics; the 1984 conference of
the Campaign for Homosexual Equality (CHE) in Britain, to take one
example, had five women and fifty men. It is understandable that the
political relationship between lesbians and gay men has been complicated
and often tense.

Third, the relationship between politics and community is different from
that in women’s liberation. To some extent a gay community existed
before gay liberation, in clandestine networks and around beats and gay
bars. The movement brought it into the open and gave it a massive
stimulus. The growth of ‘gay capitalism’ since is familiar. There is
some parallel in the growth of entrepreneurial feminism but the balance
of forces is very different. By the late 1970s the proprietors of gay
businesses had emerged in a number of cities as an alternative
leadership. They articulated the interests of gay people in a very
different way, having themselves a strong interest in the consolidation
of gay identities and none at all in revolutionizing sexuality in the
rest of society. The early gay liberation slogan that ‘every straight
man is a target for gay liberation’ meant nothing in this context except
an invitation to trouble. Dennis Altman points to the tendency to
reconstitute gay politics as an interest group on the model of ethnic
communities, seeking accommodations with the state and other interest
groups.

As this tendency has gathered strength, the socially radical thrust of
gay liberation easily becomes pitted against the trends that are giving
social identity and personal self-confidence to homosexual people in
their ‘private’ lives. Gay liberation increasingly was at risk of losing
the base it had created. This strategic dilemma has not been easily
resolved. The deconstructionist debate already discussed is one
consequence. Another is a turn by political activists to electoral
politics and the local state, with some success in San Francisco, Sydney
and London. Thus gay politics have come by a different route from
feminism to the problem of maintaining a radical presence inside the
state.

Movements for a progressive sexual politics among heterosexual men have
been on a very small scale by comparison. The 1970s talk about ‘men’s
liberation’ has already been mentioned. Most of it was based on a
sex-role perspective on gender that ignored questions of power and
exploitation. The group that holds predominant social power cannot be
‘liberated’ The issues about the reconstruction of masculinity raised by
this beginning were real enough and keep coming back, in feminist
writing as well as men’s. The difficulty of constructing a movement of
men to dismantle hegemonic masculinity is that its logic is not the
articulation of collective interest but the attempt to dismantle that
interest. While there are good reasons to do this, some of which I
listed in the Introduction, the chances of a widespread mobilization on
this basis are slim.

The focus of counter-sexist politics among heterosexual men has
therefore been domestic. I would guess that most energy has gone into
the completely private renegotiation of relationships with feminist
women in the context of individual sexual relationships and households.
There has been little exchange of ideas or experience among the men
involved. The exceptions to this are the ‘men’s groups’, modelled on
feminist CR groups, that still exist, and a degree of networking in the
left-wing community politics discussed above.

NOTES

The Scope of Sexual Politics

(pp. 259–62). On conceptions of politics in the social sciences sec
Mackenzie (1967). There is no general survey of sexual politics in and
around the state; for more specific references see chapter 6. For the
sexual politics of labour markets and workplaces see O’Donnell (1984);
Game and Pringle (1983); Eardley et al. (1980). The sexual politics of
culture is formulated in many specific contexts, e.g., Easlea (1983). On
the concept of the politics of the family see Morgan (1975). The
politics of reproduction is explored in O’Brien (1981) and Sayers
(1982); for erotica and the Sex Fairs see Lauret (1970). On the politics
of movements see below

Working-class Feminism

(pp. 265–71). Quotation from Davies (1978), (pp. 7–8); for the other
British evidence see Reeves (1913) and Rice (1939). The Australian
research discussed in the text should be compared with the American
study by Lillian Rubin (1976); which in turn might be compared with the
political mobilization of working-class women in earlier stages of
American history, e.g., in Dancis (1976).

Liberation Movements

(pp. 270–77). ‘Women’s liberation’ means the radical feminism that
adopted this name at the end of the 1960s, partly to distinguish a
revolutionary perspective from the gradualism and compromises of liberal
feminism, partly to distinguish feminist priorities from those of the
‘male Left’. It embraced tendencies later distinguished as socialist
feminism, cultural feminism, eco-feminism. The term ‘radical feminism’
would be better, but during the 1970s was adopted by a specific tendency
in women’s liberation, particularly separatists, to distinguish their
views from those of socialist feminists. Ellen Willis’s argument that
this narrower usage conceals a retreat from the radicalism of early
women’s liberation has force.

        The best general account of a women’s liberation movement I have
seen is Coote and Campbell (1982); on the early stages in the United
States see Willis (1984); on preconditions, Segal (1983). On the history
of gay liberation see Gay Left Collective (1980) for Britain; D’Emilio
(1983) for the United States; Thompson (1985) for Australia. Figures on
the British CHE conference from Lumsden (1984). On the ‘men’s movement’,
Hanisch (1975) – con.; Bristol Anti-Sexist Men’s Conference (1980) –
pro; Lyttleton (1984) – thoughtfully mixed.

13

Present and Future

The Present Moment

Hegel invented, and Marx made popular, a way of schematizing history in
which there is an origin, a dialectic of necessary stages and a
culmination – the ethical state, the classless society. It is tempting
to schematize the history of gender relations the same way. Thus the
story of primitive matriarchy, disrupted by men who seized power and set
up a patriarchal society, which has now matured a feminist revolution in
its turn. Or the idea that the social subordination of women flowed from
their place in biological reproduction, was therefore technically
necessary while fertility was high, productivity low and life short, and
is now able to be abolished because technological change has freed women
from the need to spend their lives around babies.

In such thinking the present moment is one of culmination, or perhaps
the dark just before the dawn, and previous history was a kind of
preparation for the present. Interim oppressions and injustices may have
been nasty but they were in some sense historically necessary; they
allowed the maturing of the good society in the end. Indeed quite a lot
of nastiness in the present may also be justified to allow the good
society to emerge from the womb of history.

Hegelian thinking is seductive: it gives dignity to present oppressions,
a sense of connectedness to the past and a vision of the future
transfigured. But it is also slightly paranoid. The present we live in
was no more a historically necessary development than any of our
possible futures is. Human practice produced it, not the operation of a
mechanism, whether cosmic, logical or biological. That means that
patriarchy, sexism and sexual oppression have never been necessary.
Every society has been able to abolish it, whatever the level of
technological development; just as class inequality could be abolished
at any stage of history. What is changed by the level of technology is
not the possibility of altering gender relations but the consequences of
doing so. For example sharing childcare between women and men in an
agricultural society without scientific medicine means a different set
of arrangements from shared childcare in modern low-fertility cities.

So we live in a world shaped by the collective failure of our forebears
to abolish gender inequalities. The corollary is that our children may
also live in such a world. An end of gender inequality is by no means
inevitable now. This has been seen by some feminist critics of the idea
of revolution by bottle-babies, the idea that technologizing
reproduction will liberate women from the imperatives of the body and
social subordination, or will end the oppression of homosexuals by
abolishing distinctions of sex. There is no guarantee that the new
technology of reproduction will be under women’s control, or under any
kind of democratic influence at all. Indeed there is reason to expect
the opposite, given the current rapid development of genetic engineering
by big business and the state, and techniques like in vitro
fertilization by technocratic medical specialists. Our future could be
one of rejuvenated high-technology patriarchy.

The present moment, then, is not a culmination but a point of choice.
The purpose of analysis is to understand better the structure of the
choice and the collective projects that are feasible responses to it.

The emergence of women’s liberation and gay liberation reflect crisis
tendencies of a general kind, and are historically novel in the depth of
their critique of the gender order and the scope of the transformation
they propose. This surge in the pace and depth of sexual politics and
the power of theory opens the possibility of conscious social and
personal transformation in a degree unthinkable before. Yet the
liberation movements have nothing like the social power needed to push
this transformation through, except in limited milieux. And in some
respects their internal evolution has led them away from the project of
general structural reform, to focus on problems of survival rather than
on the fault-lines marking general crisis tendencies.

Other components of a larger transformative project, notably
working-class feminism and counter-sexist politics among heterosexual
men, exist in a dispersed state. The hegemony of an authoritative
masculinity, guaranteed by science if not religion, has been disrupted.
But the weakened integration of the gender order has led to a
fragmentation of opposition as well. In the absence of a unifying
practice this fragmentation could increase.

If some combination of social forces around a progressive programme were
achieved, contemporary social and physical technologies would allow a
collective choice of the following kind, at least in the richer
capitalist and Soviet-bloc countries. Childbearing can be made a fairly
short episode in any woman’s life, and can be made socially equivalent
to conception, pregnancy-support and infant care in men’s lives. We have
the knowledge and resources to share childcare and domestic work among
adults to any extent desired in a balance between efficiency and
privacy. Large numbers of men and women can choose to be childless
without any danger of depopulation; a free choice of forms of cathexis
becomes a general possibility. No average physical or psychological
difference between the sexes has the slightest bearing on the efficiency
of production in an age of numerically controlled machine tools,
automatic data-processing and mechanized agriculture. Thus there is no
economic sacrifice in a total abolition of the sexual division of
labour. Hegemonic masculinity is no collective asset in a struggle for
survival, in fact it is now a general menace. The social hierarchy of
masculinities can be abandoned, and with it the definition of an
emphasized femininity.

The situation in the rest of the world is different, and there is no
reason to expect that Western patterns of gender relations must provide
their model. I know so little about Third World situations that I
hesitate to say anything about feasible futures. But one thing is clear,
that the world has become an interconnected social order and this is
true of the dynamic of gender as well as other structures. Global
reconstructions of the sexual division of labour show this already. It
is not impossible that low-technology methods of equalizing gender
relations could emerge mainly from the poor countries. Such a
development could be powerfully reinforced by a transfer of resources
made possible by the pacification of gender relations in the rich
countries.

Strategies

If this is a practicable world, what are practicable ways of getting
there? The recent history of sexual politics offers two general
strategies, which might be called intensive and extensive.

I have mentioned the attempts to construct, in the social networks
involved in radical politics over the last two decades, households and
sexual relationships based on thoroughgoing equality. This involves,
first, finding ways of equalizing economic resources and decision-making
power. This is often difficult in a mixed household given men’s greater
earning capacity in a gender-structured labour market. Sometimes the
best that can be achieved is some guarantee of an economic ‘floor’ for
women, for instance by having property in a wife’s name rather than a
husband’s. Second, it involves the reorganization of relations between
children and adults, in the teeth of a vast array of institutional and
cultural arrangements that presuppose all early childcare is done by
women. Third, it involves a reworking of sexual character and sexuality,
on the run and often in the context of attachments to third parties and
terrible doubts about loyalty and personal worth. The process sometimes
feels like tearing out one’s hair, clump by clump, with a badly adjusted
mechanical harvester. It is no wonder that a good many people have
abandoned the attempt and that those who stick with it can be reluctant
to talk about it. It is perhaps important to make the experience more
public and cumulative. It is also important to find ways of expressing
its positive side: the generation of energy, the joys of being with
children, the pleasures of love between equals.

The attempt to create ‘liberated zones’, as this kind of practice is
sometimes called, may literally mean a physical space. A common demand
of feminist groups in institutions has been a room for women. Refuges,
rape crisis centres and women’s centres have often operated on the
principle of keeping all men out. More generally, however, a liberated
zone is a social ‘space’, a particular institution or part of one, a
network of relationships or simply a group of people, where a degree of
sex equality has been achieved, heterosexism eliminated, or
counter-sexist practice sustained.

The problems of sustaining such a ‘zone’ have something in common with
the problems of other enclaves. They require a constant expenditure of
energy to keep up. When it is a question of a radical departure from
common social practice, as a serious effort at sex equality is, the
energy level required is fairly high. People get tired of constant
meetings, monitoring and mutual criticism. Egalitarian practices
constantly confront hierarchical intrusions from outside the zone. An
example is the radical health collective whose one qualified doctor is
treated by the funding authorities, and many of the patients, as the
head of a conventional medical practice. Such matters can be worked on,
but at a further cost in energy, time and friction. Trade-offs have to
be made, things let slide. One of the things most often let slide is the
cleaning; liberated zones tend to be grubby.

Offsetting these costs are three kinds of gains. Bases are established
for politics of wider scope. Marches and rallies, for instance, do not
just happen; there have to be people who call them, people who get on
the phone and spread the word, people who paint banners and provide
places to store them. Next, liberated zones can generate energy by
giving a taste of the social world to come, what Sheila Rowbotham called
‘prefigurative’ politics in Beyond the Fragments. The sisterhood of
feminist activists, the solidarity generated in gay liberation
campaigns, the sense of sharing in collective households, are real
experiences and do matter in showing that the goals are practical ones.

Finally there is the personal dimension. Radical politics often
presuppose superhuman energy and result in burnout, or presuppose
superhuman virtue and result in disillusion. Critics of feminism rejoice
in claiming that feminists with power behave as crassly as patriarchal
men; and of course some do. Likewise some gay liberationists are
self-interested or insensitive, and some anti-sexist heterosexual men
fail dismally to love vegetables and babies. A relatively liberated zone
provides some chance of working on these issues, taking up the politics
of personality outlined in chapter 10. It may also provide an essential
kind of support. The main resource of radical politics is its activists.
Political practice can be personally demanding, wearing and damaging to
a high degree. Daily confrontation with sexist business men or
bureaucrats is no life for the thin-skinned. It matters to find ways of
conserving the human resources and repairing damage.

This issue is common to all radicalism, but sexual politics has a unique
personal dimension. Breaking down the gender system means, to some
extent, tearing down what is most constitutive of one’s own emotions,
and occupying strange and ill-explained places in social space. The
oldest jibe against feminists is that they are trying to turn women into
men and men into women. In one sense this is right; reform of the
division of labour must mean women doing things conventionally thought
masculine. Yet ‘role-reversal’ of the kind often advocated in the early
seventies has proved inadequate as a strategy. Feminism has attempted,
not just for tactical reasons, to hold on to qualities and practices
traditionally thought feminine too. Thus the movement has found itself
weaving across the conventional gender boundaries of sexual character
and the division of labour, and to the extent that bisexuality has
commended itself as a sexual practice, across the boundaries of the
structure of cathexis too.

To some theorists the occupation of what might be called ‘border
country’ has seemed a basic strategy. Fernbach and Mieli both insist on
the gender ambiguities of gayness. Chodorow and Dinnerstein derive
psychoanalytic arguments for the importance of men taking an equal part
in early childcare. The counter-sexist men’s movement, at least its more
radical wing, sought to purge masculinity of its connection with
hierarchy and easily tipped towards ‘effeminism’, attaching a male
tail-end to radical feminism.

‘Border’ like ‘zone’ is a spatial metaphor and perhaps too rigid for a
dynamic process. The point may be better made by saying that practice on
many questions of sexual politics requires living in and through
contradictions about gender. Sometimes it is necessary to intensify the
contradiction rather than try to resolve it. The problem with the
‘androgyny’ model discussed in chapter 8 is not with the idea that
feminine and masculine qualities can be combined in the same person, a
helpful if not wholly new insight. It is with the idea that combining
them somehow resolves the tension between them. It may do just the
reverse.

The domestic politics of the Left, the partly ‘liberated zone’ sketched
above, has another strategic significance. The attempt to create
egalitarian households and a non-sexist environment for children to grow
up in is the only form of progressive sexual politics in which
significant numbers of heterosexual men have become involved in a
continuing and active way. It is therefore something of a laboratory for
the possibility of alliance between groups normally divided by sexual
politics.

Gay liberation is another. The tensions between women and men in
homosexual politics mentioned in chapter 12 are real and continuing.
Given these pressures the continued existence of the movement over
fifteen years of fluctuating fortunes is a considerable achievement. Its
experience of discussion and compromise, joint and parallel action and
collective celebration is perhaps the most sophisticated practice of
cooperation between women and men that has yet been developed in the
radical reconstruction of gender relations.

These two cases raise the more general strategy of alliance, the
‘extensive’ side of sexual politics. Many, perhaps most, of the
campaigns waged by feminists and gay activists have involved acting in
alliance with people outside their ranks. Numbers, access, money or
technical skills may be needed from outside. Movement rhetoric usually
ignores this, stressing opposition from the rest of the world and
attributing all gains to women’s or gays’ own determination and
strength. The political reasons for talking this way are obvious enough;
but the habit does make it difficult to discuss what is actually going
on in sexual politics, and often creates an impression that alliance or
support is not wanted.

Homosexual law reform, as one example, involves lobbying ministers and
members of parliament, working on party platform committees, discussions
with police, liaison with civil liberties groups, detail work with
sympathetic lawyers, academics and journalists. Most of them are not gay
or are not admitting it. As another example, setting up women’s studies
courses in universities involves working with curriculum committees,
getting support from authorities who have money or staff to allocate,
co-operation from other teaching staff in the reallocation of labour,
organizing rooms, furniture, equipment, secretarial help, library
facilities and so on. Most of this requires the co-operation and labour
of people who are not feminists, a good many of them not even women.

These alliances are usually temporary affairs. The public side of sexual
politics in the last two decades has mainly been a patchwork of
campaigns. Local movements and alliances developed around particular
issues: setting up a health centre here, demonstrating on Anzac Day
there, organizing a lobbying day at Parliament House and so on. Each
grouping was liable to disband as soon as some resolution of the
particular matter was reached. There have been attempts to set up
permanent formal organizations, the National Organisation of Women in
the United States and the Campaign for Homosexual Equality in Britain
among the most successful. Both of these have provided a framework for
alliance in the context of pressure-group politics, for law reform and
like purposes. Across the wider spectrum of sexual politics, however,
permanent organization has been uncharacteristic. The continuity of
women’s liberation and gay liberation, considerable in both cases, is
due to overlapping membership of many different campaigns and networks
and to endless internal talk rather than to formal structures.

In the liberal capitalist countries this kind of politics could continue
indefinitely. There is enough tolerance and enough intermittent support.
It will sustain a feminist and gay political presence at the level of
pressure-group politics. But to pursue the project of transforming the
gender order something more formidable is required. This is a question
of putting together radical majorities in sexual politics, and keeping
them together for considerable periods of time.

This is an old aspiration, though it is one from which leading
tendencies in both gay and feminist politics have now retreated.
Majorities matter, if the process of social change is to come under
conscious human control. On the argument of this book, structures cannot
be levered into new shapes without mutations of grassroots practice. But
majorities do not fall from heaven. They have to be constructed; and if
they are to be constructed against the ruling powers, around a radical
program of equality, then we need a clear understanding of the social
dynamic that might make it possible.

The crisis tendencies discussed in chapter 7, which make radical
majorities conceivable, also give some leverage on the main structural
obstacle. The lion in the path is the calculus of interests. In a gender
order where men are advantaged and women are disadvantaged, major
structural reform is, on the face of it, against men’s interests. Even
subordinated masculinities share to some degree in this advantage – as
Mike Broker puts it, ‘I may be a queer, but at least I am a man’. With
the considerable number of women who gain wealth, prestige or other
advantage through their marriages or kin relationships, or through
applying an emphasized femininity, there would seem to be a permanent
majority for patriarchy.

For two reasons this calculation is not conclusive. First, ‘interests’
are relational as well as egocentric. A father, for instance, has an
interest defined by the advantages of men, but also has an interest in
the welfare of his children, and half of all children are girls. The
practices that articulate interest may be organized around these
relationships rather than around the gender category. The crisis of the
sexual division of labour in childcare invites this. Second, even
egocentric interests are liable to be ambiguous or divided. The ‘men’s
movement’ literature was wrong in thinking men had the same interest in
liberation as women but was right in pointing to tensions, costs and
unease with hegemonic masculinity as a fairly widespread experience. The
crisis tendencies in structures of power and cathexis are likely to
increase such internal divisions of interest.

Whether the gender order’s tendencies towards crisis have gone far
enough to provide a basis for majorities committed to major structural
reform, is perhaps the key strategic question radical politics now
faces. It involves, in some sense, a combination of intensive and
extensive strategies; the former to define directions and feasibility,
the latter to provide the muscle. That kind of combination has not so
far been realized. Tendencies towards it seem stronger in relation to
the sexual division of labour than elsewhere: one thinks of the
breakdown of the ‘family wage’ concept, the crisis of childcare and
changing views about fathering, the inability of the liberal politics of
equal opportunity to deal with mass youth unemployment. Yet the main
energies of movement radicalism are focused elsewhere. If radical
majorities are to materialize it is not just a matter of the masses
flocking to the banners already embroidered and raised. Some painful
reorientations of present radicalism will also have to happen.

Concluding Notes on the World to which a Social Theory of Gender Might Lead

For the ultimate goal of the transformation of gender relations there
are two logical candidates. One is the abolition of gender, the other
its reconstitution on new bases.

Along the first track some bold spirits have proposed the abolition of
sexual reproduction. David Fernbach, in a recent and sophisticated
version of this argument, goes so far as to suggest that this
transcendence of internal nature, modernizing our ‘palaeolithic’ system
of reproduction, would be the equivalent of the human transcendence of
external nature. Apart from the doubtful politics of reproductive
technology already discussed, this vision is based – like the
celebration of ‘woman and nature’ that is its mirror-opposite – on a
misunderstanding of how the social world of gender is constructed. The
gender order is not and never has been immanent in biology. Rather it
represents a particular historical response to human reproductive
biology. It is possible to make other collective responses. Attempting
to abolish biological sex is certainly one among them. But this would
not be a liberating transcendence of nature, because our existing gender
order is not given in nature. It would be a collective mutilation, that
would certainly reduce the diversity of human experience and very
possibly reinforce existing structures of power.

If the abolition of gender is a worthwhile goal, then, it must be the
abolition of gender as a social structure that is at issue. As defined
in chapter 6 gender is ultimately the linking of fields of social
practice to the reproductive division, the creation of a relevance. Its
abolition would be, logically, a matter of disconnecting those fields.
This implies no denigration or denial of biological difference; equally
no celebration of it. Difference between sexes would be simply a
complementarity of function in reproduction, not a cosmic division or a
social fate. There would be no reason for this to structure emotional
relationships, so the categories heterosexual and homosexual would
become insignificant. There would be no reason for it to structure
character, so femininity and masculinity would depart.

Such a future is implied in the deconstructionist wing of gay liberation
theory, and as an ultimate goal is more convincing than as an immediate
strategy. Its great virtue is that it eliminates the basis for gender
inequalities. The way biological difference and similarity have got
incorporated into structures of social inequality creates our dilemmas
about ‘nature’, not nature itself. Inequality is the basis of the social
constitution of interests, which generate the practices that
institutionalize injustices, the politics that defend them, the
ideologies that justify them. The concept of liberation is not about
freedom, in the sense of lack of constraint on personal behaviour, so
much as about equality.

That is easy to say, but as many details canvassed in this book show,
more than a little difficult to achieve, even in narrow settings.
Equality is an absolute concept. It allows of no qualifications however
well intentioned. Equality would be wholly unrealistic as a criterion
for practice if it required complete equality to be an immediately
achievable state. The arguments on the stability of personality
traversed in Part III are sufficient to demolish any idea of general
deconstruction as an immediate option. A strong concept of equality can,
however, be a practical criterion without being compromised, if it is
taken as a direction of movement which is never given up. That is, the
equality criterion of all practices is that they produce more equality
than the conditions they started from, with no intention of stopping at
the conditions produced. In that sense deconstructing gender is a
feasible ethical programme. The criterion of political practice becomes
the disconnection of some further area of social practice from the
reproduction complex.

The standard argument against the abolition of gender, like the
traditional argument against the abolition of class, is that it would
result in sameness. Without sex difference we must have grey uniformity
– we will all wear boiler suits and have hair just covering the ears.
The claim is perhaps effective as rhetoric, but as analysis it is simply
misconceived. The logical consequence of deconstruction is open-ended
variety. Marcuse’s discussion of ‘polymorphous perversity’ in Eros and
Civilization is not a bad summary of this conception, though with rules
dismantled nothing can be defined as normative and hence nothing as
‘perverse’. Polymorphous eroticism, perhaps; and also polymorphous
labour and polymorphous structures of decision-making.

The cost of the abolition of gender, then, is not sameness, but the loss
of certain kinds of structure. A judgement of this conception of
liberation turns on whether gender structures have any value. What would
be our loss if they went down the gurgle-hole of history?

It has to be said that a great deal of our culture’s energy and beauty,
as well as its barbarism, has been created through and around gender
relations. A gender-structured culture, and quite specifically sexist
sensibilities, have given us Othello, the Ring of the Nibelung and
Rubens portraits, to go no further. Much of the fine texture of everyday
life, from the feel of our own bodies, through the lore of running a
household, to popular songs and everyday humour, are predicated on
gender. Our eroticism and our imagination seem to be both limited and
fuelled by gender. To discard the whole pattern does seem to imply a way
of life that would be seriously impoverished by comparison with the one
we know. At best it would be so different from the world of our
experience that we can hardly know whether it would be desirable or not.

Yet the constraints that produce this experience, this richness of
culture, also produce the massive inequalities, bitter oppressions,
violence and potential disaster that are the reasons for the critiques
of gender discussed in this book. This raises the question whether the
cultural energy can be disconnected from the structure of inequality,
gender not abolished but reconstituted in unmurderous forms.

This implies restructuring rather than destructuring. It presupposes
that the elements of gender orders can be reshuffled in some sense. The
historical argument of Part II certainly supports this idea, though how
far it can be pushed remains open. It implies a process at the
collective level like what Piaget calls ‘assimilation’ in the psychology
of intelligence, in which the existing materials of a sexist culture are
taken up and made over to new purposes. A clear example on a small scale
is the appropriation of punk styles by girls mentioned in chapter 6.
Piaget defines play as almost pure assimilation, and it might be said
that what is involved is a qualitative growth of our collective ability
to play.

Playing with gender is not unknown at present. Elements of sexual
character, gender practice or sexual ideology are often disconnected and
recombined for enjoyment, erotic tension, subversion or convenience.
Such games are most developed, perhaps, in sexual subcultures. Peter
Ackroyd argues a historical connection between drag and the subversion
of everyday custom in ‘carnival’. Pat Califia describes how lesbian
sado-masochism disconnects power from masculinity for erotic purposes.
The erotica of fetishism – rubber, leather and others – systematically
ring the changes on gender symbols and relationships. But the same kind
of thing happens in less exotic contexts. Mass fashion began playing
with gender recombination in the 1930s, and more vigorously in the
‘unisex’ styles of the 1960s. Gender ambiguity has been a theme of rock
music presentation from David Bowie and the New York Dolls to Grace
Jones and Boy George. In a different vein, the Soviets’ creation of
women cosmonauts as media figures is also a game with
femininity/masculinity and the sexual division of labour, played for
political effect.

However the implication of restructuring is more than the reshuffling of
existing practices and symbols, more than the turning of a kaleidoscope;
and the ‘game’ analogy only goes so far. When the relations between
cultural elements change, new conditions for practice are created and
new patterns of practice become possible. Deconstruction implies that
the biology of sex would become a minimal presence in social life, a
kind of sexual cuisine minceur. The restructuring conception would admit
a cultural elaboration of difference and similarity in reproduction,
though with the weight of power, divisions of labour and rules about
cathexis lifted off it. The culture could attend to, and celebrate, the
nuances and variations of conception, gestation, birth and suckling,
growth and ageing.

More, it would be possible to explore and invent many different ways for
people to become involved in the process. We have for the most part
stuck at two sexes. But early gay theory conceived of a ‘third sex’, and
Olaf Stapledon, in one of the first classics of science fiction,
imagined human species in the far future with multiple sexes or
sub-sexes. These were imagined as biological types; the real
possibilities are social. While the ‘third sex’ concept is obsolete, it
would be quite possible for gay women and men who do not have children
of their own to be routinely involved in the raising of children. This
would construct specific patterns of relationship between children and
adults, able to complement and enrich the relationships constructed by
heterosexual adults. Gary Dowsett points to historical examples of
relationships between young children and adults who are not their
parents, such as aunts and uncles in the nineteenth-century bourgeois
family, as models that could be revived and given new meanings. The
symbolic participation of men in birth through the ‘couvade’ is another
historical experience that could be given a new meaning. If the
inequalities of the sexual division of labour are to be dismantled, men
must obviously take up much of the domestic work created by pregnancy,
birth and early childcare. The somewhat fragile industrial concept of
‘paternity leave’ is a small beginning with a shift that needs to be
given a much stronger social definition.

What would be lost in the restructuring conception of liberation is the
necessary connection of the elements of gender relations to
institutionalized inequality on one side and biological difference on
the other. The depth of this change should not be underestimated. It
would be a fundamental departure from a key condition of our present
culture, which might be summarized as the sense that gender is fatality.

At present this sense runs through every area of gender practice,
penetrating imagination and action alike. The naturalization of gender
is the basic mechanism of sexual ideology. A leaden fatality invests the
division of labour: ‘woman’s work’, ‘a man’s responsibilities’. A
sharper-edged fatality of cathexis is central to Western culture’s
treatment of the theme of love, from the Medea to Casablanca. A sense of
the psychological fatality of gender is expressed in the doctrine of
sexual character.

Given this, a society that eliminated sex inequality by the
recomposition of gender must have a different structure of feeling. Much
of the cultural inheritance will then only be recoverable as history, by
a shift back into alien frames of thought. Not wholly alien, of course;
there will still be love, hatred, jealousy and divided loyalties to keep
life interesting. But they will be experienced as relationships between
personal projects rather than as fatality. This may mean they have less
cultural power. The sense of fatality is not a passive consciousness but
a lever on experience and action, a generator (to change the metaphor)
of tragedy and exhilaration. If it narrows the world it also makes parts
of it more intense.

At that cost, a recomposed human society will gain a degree of practical
equality never yet achieved, and an enormous enrichment of its cultural
resources. This enrichment is worth spelling out. First there are more
players in the game. The ‘equal opportunity’ argument that sex
discrimination wastes human resources is, with all its limitations,
correct – and can be extended far beyond the issue of employment.
Second, the free reworking of gender relations which are at present
strongly constrained, and psychological and cultural patterns at present
strongly stylized, geometrically increases the possibilities of
experience and invention. Hermaphroditism or androgyny is hardly even a
beginning. Third, and perhaps most important, the emotional dimensions
of life that are opened up for exploration in a sexually equal society
are more complex than those of our own society because of the greater
possibilities of creation and diversity. Love between equals is no less
passionate than love under the star of gender inequality. It will be
differently passionate as the business of protection and dependence is
dispensed with. These themes in relationships will perhaps be replaced
by the excitement of the unknown and unpredictable, and of constructing
futures that are genuinely without preordained limits. Love will also
have new difficulties, such as problems of constructing new forms of
reciprocity and of balancing commitment with personal invention.

These possibilities, though argued here on the basis of change in the
structure of gender relations, have other presuppositions. Notably they
presuppose a move towards a society free of class and racial
inequalities, and a world free of imperialism and the obscene
inequalities of global living standards that we have today.

The analysis in this book rejects both the idea that gender is the basic
oppression from which these others spring, so sexual politics must take
priority, and the idea that gender inequalities are secondary, so sexual
politics can be sidelined while the main event proceeds. The main event,
the historic struggle for human equality which is now also a struggle
for human survival, is a complex of these constituents. Global
inequality is a composed structure in the sense of my argument about
gender, on a larger scale again.

This implies that the constituents react on each other. It is therefore
not possible to accept the arguments, which seem increasingly popular
with radical intellectuals, that fragment radical politics into a
plurality of struggles in different sites with no systematic connection
to each other. These arguments reflect a well-justified discontent with
attempts, for instance by orthodox Marxism, to hegemonize other groups,
campaigns and social struggles. But they leave us with no way of making
rational choices of strategy based on concepts like crisis tendencies.
Movements for social change need strategies if their priorities are not
to be set for them by the opposition.

It is possible to imagine a society with sex equality in which other
kinds of inequality are far from dead. One thinks of the guardians in
Plato’s Republic, or the aristocracy and bureaucracy of Ursula LeGuin’s
The Left Hand of Darkness. Conversely there are socialist Utopias with a
highly conventional idea of the naturalness of sexual character, like
Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward. The connection between structures of
inequality is not a logical connection: theorists who have assumed that
have been seduced by another kind of Hegelianism. The connection is
empirical and practical. As a matter of fact, the core institutions of
the contemporary structure of gender power cannot be torn down without a
class politics, because those institutions fuse gender and class
domination. As a matter of practice, equality is difficult to contain;
the origins of modern feminist radicalism in the New Left show that. The
historic association between socialism and feminism, however tense and
ragged it has been, expresses a basic truth about the global structure
of inequality and what social forces might dismantle it. For all its
resistances the British Trades Union Congress did march in support of
women’s abortion rights; the Confederation of British Industry did not.

There are other conceivable futures that are a great deal less
attractive. Margaret Atwood’s novel about a repressive future, The
Handmaid’s Tale, is a satire but not wildly implausible. A recomposition
of gender might well be undertaken as part of an authoritarian politics;
the current development of birth technology points in that direction. A
recomposition of gender that realizes the possibilities I have
discussed, constructing an egalitarian form of life, is only a
historical possibility and not a necessary future. If it is to happen
then its practice, the projects in which we undertake recomposition,
must be part of a politics that addresses oppression in all its forms,
that sets no limit to the principle of human equality. In undertaking
that we would be shifting the internal limits to our collective ability
to shape a future that is physically and environmentally safe, rich in
experience and historically open.

Bibliography

Abercrombie, N., Hill, S. and Turner, B. S. (1980) The Dominant Ideology
Thesis (London: George Allen and Unwin).

Ackroyd, P. (1979) Dressing Up: Transvestism and Drag (London: Thames
and Hudson).

Adler, A. (1956) The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler (New York:
Basic Books).

Adler, A. (1928) ‘Psychologie der Macht’, in F. Kobler, ed. Gewalt und
Gewaltlosigkeit (Zurich: Rotapfelverlag), pp. 41–6.

Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., and Sanford, R. N.
(1950) The Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper).

Alinsky, S. D. (1972) Rules for Radicals (New York: Vintage).

Allen, P. (1970) Free Space: A Perspective on the Small Group in Women’s
Liberation (United States: Times Change Press).

Altman, D. (1972) Homosexual: Oppression and Liberation (Sydney: Angus
and Robertson).

Altman, D. (1979) Coming Out in the Seventies (Sydney: Wild and
Woolley).

Altman, D. (1982) The Homosexualization of America, the Americanization
of the Homosexual (New York: St Martin’s Press).

Amato, P. R. (1980) ‘Man in a Woman’s World: The Hassles of a Male
Homemaker’, Social Alternatives, 1, 6/7, pp. 100–2.

American Psychological Association (1977) ‘Guidelines for Nonsexist
Language in APA Journals’, American Psychologist, 32, 6, pp. 487–94.

Anti-Discrimination Board, NSW (1982) Discrimination and Homosexuality
(Sydney: ADB).

Arendt, H. (1958) The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Meridan).

Aries, P. (1973) Centuries of Childhood (London: Jonathan Cape).

Atwood, M. (1986) The Handmaid’s Tale (London: Jonathan Cape).

Bachofen, J. J. (1967) Myth, Religion and Mother Right: Selected
writings (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Baldock, C. V., and Cass, B., eds (1983) Women, Social Welfare and the
State (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin).

Barbour, J. (1973) ‘That Thing of Silk’, Refractory Girl, 2 pp. 25–9.

Barnsley Women Against Pit Closures (1984) Women Against Pit Closures
(Britain: WAPC).

Barrett, M. (1980) Women’s Oppression Today (London: Verso).

Barry, K. (1979) Female Sexual Slavery (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall).

Bateson, G. (1973) Steps to an Ecology of Mind (St Albans: Paladin).

Beauvoir, S. de (1972 [1949]) The Second Sex (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Bebel, F. A. (1904) Women under Socialism (New York: Labor News
Company).

Bell, C. and Newby, H. (1976) ‘Husbands and Wives: The Dynamics of the
Deferential Dialectic’ in S. Allen and D. Barker, eds Dependence and
Exploitation in Work and Marriage (London: Longman).

Bellamy, E. (1888) Looking Backward (Boston: Ticknor and Co.).

Bern, S. L. (1974) ‘The Measurement of Psychological Androgyny’, Journal
Consult. Clin. Psychol., 42, 2, pp. 155–62.

Bertaux, D. (1981) Biography and Society: The Life History Approach in
the Social Sciences Beverley Hills: Sage, Sage Studies in International
Sociology, 23.

Biddle, B. J. (1979) Role Theory (New York: Academic Press).

Bland, L., Brunsdon, C., Hobson, D., and Winship, J. (1978) ‘Women
Inside and Outside’ the Relations of Production’, in Centre for
Contemporary Cultural Studies, Women’s Studies Group, Women Take Issue:
Aspects of Women’s Subordination (London: Hutchinson), pp. 35–78.

Bottomley, G. (1979) After the Odyssey: A study of Greek Australians (St
Lucia: University of Queensland Press).

Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).

Bowlby, J. (1953) Child Care and the Growth of Love (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Bowles, S. and Gintis, H. (1976) Schooling in Capitalist America
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Branca, P. (1978) Women in Europe since 1750 (London: Croom Helm).

Bray, A. (1982) Homosexuality in Renaissance England (London: Gay Men’s
Press).

Bristol Anti-Sexist Men’s Conference (1980) ‘A Minimum Self-Definition
of the Anti-Sexist Men’s Movement’, Achilles Heel, 4, pp. 2–3.

Brohm, J-M. (1978) Sport – A Prison of Measured Time (London: Ink
Links).

Broker, M. (1976) ‘I May be a Queer, But at Least I am a Man: Male
Hegemony and Ascribed versus Achieved Gender’, in D. Leonard Barker and
S. Allen, eds Sexual Divisions and Society (London: Tavistock), 174–98.

Brown, B. (1973) Marx, Freud and the Critique of Everyday Life (New
York: Monthly Review Press).

Brown, N. O. (1959) Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of
History (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press).

Brownmiller, S. (1975) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (New York:
Simon and Schuster).

Bryson, L. and Mowbray M. (1983) ‘The Reality of Community Care’,
Australian Society, 2, 5, p. 13.

Bullock, A. (1962) Hitler, rev. edn (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Bullough, V. L. (1979) Homosexuality: a History (New York: New American
Library).

Bujra, J., et al. (1984) ‘Challenging The Feminist Challenge: A Forum on
Bouchier’, Network (BSA Newsletter), 29, 6–7.

Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research, NSW (1978–9) Homosexual
Offences (Sydney: BCSR), Research Report 3.

Burgmann, M. (1980) ‘Revolution and Machismo’, in E. Windschuttle, ed.
Women, Class and History (Australia: Fontana).

Burnett, J., ed. (1982) Destiny Obscure: Autobiographies of Childhood,
Education and Family from the 1820s to the 1920s (London: Allen Lane).

Burney, C. (1977) From Village to Empire: An Introduction to Near
Eastern Archaeology (Oxford: Phaidon).

Burton, C. (1985) Subordination: Feminism and Social Theory (Sydney:
George Allen and Unwin).

Cahill, S. E. (1983) ‘Reexamining the Acquisition of Sex Roles: A Social
Interactionist Approach’, Sex Roles, 9, 1, pp. 1–15.

Caldwell, L. (1978) ‘Church, State, and Family: The Women’s Movement in
Italy’, in A. Kuhn and A-M. Wolpe, eds Feminism and Materialism (London:
Routlcdge and Kegan Paul), pp. 68–95.

Califia, P. (1983) Sapphislry: The Book of Lesbian Sexuality, 2nd edn
(United States: Naiad Press).

Campbell, B. (1984) Wigan Pier Revisited: Poverty and Politics in the
Eighties (London: Virago).

Cancian, F. M. and Ross, B. L. (1981) ‘Mass Media and the Women’s
Movement 1900–1977’, Journal of Applied Behavioral Sciences, 17, 1, pp.
9–26.

Carey, G. and Lette, K. (1979) Puberty Blues (Melbourne: McPhee
Gribble).

Carr, E. H. (1961) What is History? (London: Macmillan).

Carrigan, T. (1981) The Theoretical Significance of the Arguments of the
Gay Liberation Movement, 1969–1981, Ph.D. thesis, Dept of Politics,
University of Adelaide.

Carrigan, T., Connell, R. W., and Lee, J. (1985) ‘Toward a New Sociology
of Masculinity’, Theory and Society, 14, 5, pp. 551–604.

Carroll, J. (1977) Puritan, Paranoid, Remissive (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul).

Carter, A. (1974) Fireworks (London: Quartet).

Carter, A. (1979) The Sadeian Woman: An Exercise in Cultural History
(London: Virago).

Casner, M. B. and Gabriel, R. H. (1955) The Story of American Democracy,
(New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich) 3rd edn.

Cavendish, R. (1982) Women on the Line (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Central Office of Information, Great Britain (1984) Women in Britain
(London: COI).

Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Women’s Studies Group (1978)
Women Take Issue (London: Hutchinson).

Centre for Urban Research and Action (1976) ‘But I Wouldn’t Want my Wife
to Work Here …’ A Study of Migrant Women in Melbourne Industry
(Melbourne: CURA).

Chafetz, J. S. (1980) ‘Toward a Macro-Level Theory of Sexual
Stratification and Gender Differentiation’, Current Perspectives in
Social Theory, 1, pp. 103–25.

Chapkis, W ed. (1981) Loaded Questions: Women in the Military
(Amsterdam: Transnational Institute).

Chesler, P (1978) About Men (London: Women’s Press).

Childe, V G. (1936) Man Makes Himself (London: Watts).

Childe, V G. (1950[1925]) The Dawn of European Civilization, 5th edn
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Childe, V G. (1950) ‘The Urban Revolution’, Town Planning Review, 21, 1,
pp. 3–17

Chodorow, N. (1978) The Reproduction of Mothering Psychoanalysis and the
Sociology of Gender (Berkeley University of California Press).

Chomsky, N. (1971) Problems of Knowledge and Freedom (New York:
Vintage).

Cicourel, A. V (1964) Method and Measurement in Sociology (New York:
Free Press).

Clark G. and Piggott, S. (1965) Prehistoric Societies (London:
Hutchinson).

Clark, W (1983) ‘Home Thoughts from Not so Far Away A Personal Look at
Family’, in L. Segal, ed. What is to be Done about the Family? (London:
Penguin), pp. 168–89.

Cliff, T (1984) Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation (London:
Bookmarks).

Cockburn, C. (1983) Brothers: Male Dominance and Technological Change
(London: Pluto Press).

Cockburn, C. (1986) Machinery of Dominance (London, Pluto Press).

Collingwood, R. G. (1946) The Idea of History (Oxford: Oxford University
Press).

Collinson, D. and Knights, D. (1984) ‘ “Men Only” Theories and Practices
of Job Segregation’ paper to Society for Study of Social Problems, San
Antonio.

Comer, L. (1974) Wedlocked Women (Leeds: Feminist Books).

Connell, R. W. (1974) ‘You Can’t Tell Them Apart Nowadays, Can You?’
Search, 5, 7, pp. 282–5.

Connell, R. W. (1983) Which Way is Up? (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin).

Connell, R. W. (1985a) ‘Masculinity, Violence and War’, in P. Patton and
R. Poole, eds War/Masculinity (Sydney: Intervention), pp. 4–10.

Connell, R. W. (1985b) Teachers’ Work (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin).

Connell, R. W., Ashenden, D. J., Kessler, S. & Dowsett, G. W. (1982)
Making the Difference: Schools, Families and Social Division (Sydney:
George Allen and Unwin).

Connell, R. W., Dowsett, G. W., Kessler, S., & Ashenden, D.J. (1981)
‘Class and Gender Dynamics in a Ruling-Class School’, Interchange, 12,
2–3, pp. 102–17.

Connell, W. F. (1980) A History of Education in the Twentieth Century
World (Canberra: Curriculum Development Centre).

Connell, W. F., et al. (1975) 12 to 20 (Sydney: Hicks Smith).

Constantinople, A. (1973) ‘Masculinity-Femininity: An Exception to a
Famous Dictum?’, Psychological Bulletin, 80, 5, 389–407.

Constantinople, A. (1979) ‘Sex Role Acquisition: In Search of the
Elephant’, Sex Roles, 5, 2, pp. 121–33.

Cook, P., Davey, I. and Vick, M. (1979) ‘Capitalism and Working Class
Schooling in Late Nineteenth Century South Australia’, Australian and
New Zealand History of Education Society Journal, 8, 2, 36–48.

Cooper, D. (1968) The Dialectics of Liberation (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Cooper, D. (1971) The Death of the Family (London: Allen Lane).

Coote, A. and Campbell, B. (1982) Sweet Freedom: The Struggle for
Women’s Liberation (London: Pan).

Corrigan, P. (1984) ‘My Body, my “Self”? Trying to Sec my Masculine
Eyes’, Resources for Feminist Research, 12, 4, 29–32.

Costello, J. (1985) The Pacific War (London: Pan).

Court, D. (1986) The State and Women’s Liberation, unpublished
manuscript, Macquarie University.

Croll, E. J. (1983) Chinese Women Since Mao (London: Zed Press).

Cucchiari, S. (1981) ‘The Gender Revolution and the Transition from
Bisexual Horde to Patrilocal Band: The Origins of Gender Hierarchy’, in
S. B. Ortner and H. Whitehead, eds Sexual Meanings: The Cultural
Construction of Gender and Sexuality (Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press), pp. 31–79.

Curthoys, A. (1976) ‘Men and Childcare in the Feminist Utopia’,
Refractory Girl, 1, pp. 3–5.

Dahrendorf, R. (1973) Homo Sociologicus (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Dalla Costa, M. and James, S. (1975) The Power of Women and the
Subversion of the Community (Bristol: Falling Wall Press).

Daly, M. (1978) Gyn/Ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism (Boston:
Beacon Press).

Dancis, B. (1976) ‘Socialism and Women in the United States, 1900–1917’,
Socialist Revolution, 6, 1, pp. 81–144.

Darwin, C. (1928[1859]) Of the Origin of Species by means of Natural
Selection (London: Dent).

Darwin, C. (1890[1874]) The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to
Sex, 2nd edn (London: John Murray).

Dasey, R. (1985) Women Workers: Their Employment and Participation in
the Labour Movement. Hamburg 1880–1914. Ph.D. thesis, University of
London.

David, D. S. and Brannon, R.(1976) The Forty-Nine Percent Majority: The
Male Sex Role (Reading, MA: Addington-Wesley).

Davidson, B. (1974) Africa in History: Themes and Outlines, rev. edn
(London, Macmillan).

Davies, M.L., ed. (1977[1931]) Life As We Have Known It, By Cooperative
Working Women (London: Virago).

Davies, M. L. (1978[1915]) Maternity: Letters from Working-Women
(London, Virago).

Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene (Oxford University Press).

Delphy, C., (1977) The Main Enemy: A Materialist Analysis of Women’s
Oppression (London: Women’s Research and Resources Centre).

D’Emilio, J. (1983) Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Making of a
Homosexual Minority in the United States 1940–1970 (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).

Denno, D. (1982) ‘Sex Differences in Cognition: A Review and Critique of
the Longitudinal Evidence’, Adolescence, 17, 68, pp. 779–88.

Department of Health, Australia (1984) Alcohol in Australia: A Summary
of Related Statistics (Canberra: Australian Government Publishing
Service).

Dinnerstein, D. (1976) The Mermaid and the Minotaur (New York: Harper
and Row).

Dixon, B. (1977) Catching them Young (London: Pluto Press), Vol. 1: Sex,
Race and Class in Children’s Fiction.

Dobash, R. E. and Dobash, R. P. (1979) Violence Against Wives: A Case
Against the Patriarchy (New York: Free Press).

Dollard, J. (1935) Criteria for the Life History (New Haven: Yale
University Press).

Dollard, J. (1937) Caste and Class in a Southern Town (New Haven: Yale
Univerity Press).

Dolto, F. (1974) Dominique: Analysis of an Adolescent (London: Souvenir
Press).

Donzelot, J. (1979) The Policing of Families (New York: Pantheon).

Dowsett, G. (1982) ‘Boiled Lollies and Bandaids: Gay Men and Kids’, Gay
Information, 11, pp. 34–8.

Du Bois, E., Buhle, M. J., Kaplan, T., Lerner, G., & Smith-Rosenberg, C.
(1980) ‘Politics and Culture in Women’s History: A Symposium’. Feminist
Studies, 6, 1, 26–64.

Duffy, M. (1972) The Erotic World of Faery (London: Hodder and
Stoughton).

Dunbar, R. (1970) ‘Female Liberation as the Basis for Social
Revolution’, in R. Morgan, ed. Sisterhood is Powerful (New York:
Vintage), pp. 477–92.

Dworkin, A. (1981) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (London: Women’s
Press).

Dworkin, A. (1983) Right-Wing Women (London: Women’s Press).

Eardley, T., Gould, S., Metcalfe, A. & Morrison, P. (1980) The Sexual
Politics of Men’s Work’, Achilles Heel, 4, pp. 15–19.

Easlea, B. (1983) Fathering the Unthinkable: Masculinity, Scientists and
the Arms Race (London: Pluto Press).

Edgar, D. and Ochiltree, G. (1982) ‘Family Change and Early Childhood
Development’, Institute of Family Studies Discussion Paper, 6.

Edgar, P. and McPhee, H. (1974) Media She (Melbourne: Heinemann).

Edwards, A. R. (1983) ‘Sex Roles: A Problem for Sociology and for
Women’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 19, 3, pp.
385–412.

Ehrenreich, B. (1977) ‘Towards Socialist Feminism’, Heresies, 1, pp.
4–7.

Ehrenreich, B. (1983) The Hearts of Men (London: Pluto Press).

Ehrenreich, B., and English, D. (1979) For Her Own Good (London: Pluto
Press).

Ehrhardt, A. A. and Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. (1981) ‘Effects of Prenatal
Sex Hormones on Gender-Related Behaviour’, Science, 211, pp. 1312–18.

Eisenstein, H. (1984) Contemporary Feminist Thought (London: Unwin
Paperbacks).

Eisenstein, H. (1985) ‘The Gender of Bureaucracy: Reflections on
Feminism and the State’, in J. Goodnow and C. Pateman, eds Women, Social
Science and Public Policy (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin), pp. 104–15.

Eisenstein, H. and Jardine, A., ed. (1980) The Future of Difference
(Boston: Hall).

Eisenstein, Z. R. (1979) Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for
Socialist Feminism (New York: Monthly Review Press).

Ellis, A. (1976) Sex and the Liberated Man (Secaucus: Lyle Stuart).

Ellis, H. (1923[1897]) Studies in the Psychology of Sex, Vol. 2: Sexual
Inversion. (Philadephia: Davis).

Engels, F. (1970[1884]) ‘The Origin of the Family, Private Property and
the State’, in K. Marx and F. Engels Selected Works (Moscow: Progress
Publishers), vol. 3.

Erikson, E. H. (1965) Childhood and Society, 2nd edn, (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Esterson, A. (1970) The Leaves of Spring: A Study in the Dialectics of
Madness (London: Tavistock).

Fairweather, H. (1976) ‘Sex Differences in Cognition’, Cognition, 4, 3,
pp. 231–80.

Fanon, F. (1967) Black Skin, White Masks (New York: Grove Press).

Fanon, F. (1968) The Wretched of the Earth (New York: Grove Press).

Farrell, W. (1974) The Liberated Man (New York: Random House).

Fendrich-Salowey, G., Buchanan M. and Drew, C. (1982) ‘Mathematics,
Quantitative and Attitudinal Measures for Elementary School Boys and
Girls’, Psychological Reports, 51, 1, pp. 155–62.

Fernbach, D. (1981) The Spiral Path (London: Gay Men’s Press).

Firestone, S. (1971) The Dialectic of Sex (London: Paladin).

Foucault, M. (1980) ‘Introduction’, in Herculine Barbin (Brighton:
Harvester).

Foucault, M. (1980) The History of Sexuality (New York: Vintage), vol.
1: Introduction.

Franzway, S. and Lowe, J. (1978) ‘Sex-Role Theory: Political
Cul-de-sac?’, Refractory Girl, 16, pp. 14–16.

Freud, S. (1905) ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’, in his
Complete Psychological Works, standard edn, (London: Hogarth, 1953),
vol. 7, pp. 1–122.

Freud, S. ‘Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality’, in his Complete
Psychological Works, standard edn, (London: Hogarth, 1953), vol. 7, pp.
123–243.

Freud, S. (1908) ‘ “Civilized” Sexual Morality and Modern Nervous
Illness’, in his Complete Psychological Works, standard edn, (London:
Hogarth, 1959), vol. 9, pp. 177–204.

Freud, S. (1913) ‘Totem and Taboo’, in his Complete Psychological Works,
standard edn (London: Hogarth, 1953), vol. 13, pp. 1–161.

Freud, S. (1918) ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’, in his
Complete Psychological Works, standard edn, (London: Hogarth, 1955) vol.
17.

Freud, S. (1923) ‘The Ego and the Id’, in his Complete Psychological
Works, standard edn (London: Hogarth, 1961) vol. 19.

Freud, S. (1930) ‘Civilization and its Discontents’, in his Complete
Psychological Works, standard edn, (London: Hogarth, 1961), vol. 21.

Friedan, B. (1963) The Feminine Mystique (New York: Norton).

Friedan, B. (1982) The Second Stage (London: Michael Joseph).

Friday, N. (1979) My Mother/My Self (Glasgow: Fontana/Collins).

Fromm, E. (1942) The Fear of Freedom (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Gagnon, J. H. and Simon, W. (1974) Sexual Conduct: The Social Sources of
Human Sexuality (London: Hutchinson).

Gamarnikow, E. (1978) ‘Sexual Division of Labour: The Case of Nursing’,
in A. Kuhn and A.-M. Wolpe, eds Feminism and Materialism (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul), pp. 96–123.

Game, A. and Pringle, R. (1979) ‘Sexuality and the Suburban Dream’,
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 15, 2, pp. 4–15.

Game, A., and Pringle, R. (1979) ‘The Making of the Australian Family’,
Intervention, 12, pp. 63–83.

Game, A., and Pringle, R. (1983) Gender at Work (Sydney: George Allen
and Unwin).

Garfinkel, H. (1967) ‘Passing and the Managed Achievement of Sex Status
in an Intersexed Person, Part 1’, in his Studies in Ethnomethodology
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall), pp. 116–85.

Gay Left Collective, ed. (1980) Homosexuality: Power and Politics
(London: Allison and Busby).

Genet, J. (1966) Our Lady of the Flowers (St Albans: Panther).

Giddens, A. (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory (London:
Macmillan).

Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society (Cambridge: Polity
Press).

Gilder, G. (1975) Sexual Suicide (New York: Bantam).

Gilding, M. (1984) Theory and History of the Family. A Case Study:
Sydney from the 1870s to the 1930s, Ph.D. thesis, Sociology, Macquarie
University.

Gilman, C. P. (1979[1915]) Herland (London: Women’s Press).

Godelier, M. (1981) ‘The Origins of Male Domination’, New Left Review,
127, pp. 3–17.

Goffman, E. (1979) Gender Advertisements, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).

Goldberg, S. (1973) The Inevitability of Patriarchy (New York: William
Morrow).

Goldberg, H. (1976) The Hazards of Being Male (New York: Nash).

Goldhamer, H. (1949) ‘Public Opinion and Personality’, American Journal
of Sociology, 55, pp. 346–54.

Goldman, E. (1972a) ‘The Traffic in Women’, in her Red Emma Speaks (New
York: Vintage), pp. 143–57.

Goldman, E. (1972b) ‘Marriage and Love’, in her Red Emma Speaks (New
York: Vintage), pp. 158–67.

Goldmann, L. (1964) The Hidden God (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Goldmann, L. (1977) Cultural Creation in Modern Society (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell).

Goode, W. J. (1982) ‘Why Men Resist’, in B. Thome and M. Yalom, eds
Rethinking the Family (New York: Longman), pp. 131–50.

Goot, M. and Reid, E. (1975) Women and Voting Studies (London: Sage
Publication), Sage Professional Papers in Contemporary Political
Sociology vol. 1.

Gordimer, N. (1979) Burger’s Daughter (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Gough, K. (1971) ‘The Origin of the Family’, Journal of Marriage and the
Family, 33, pp. 760–71.

Gouldner, A. W. (1979) The Future of Intellectuals and the Rise of the
New Class (New York: Seabury Press).

Gramsci, A. (1971) Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London:
Lawrence and Wishart).

Greene, G. and Greene, C. (1974) S–M: The Last Taboo (New York: Grove
Press).

Greer, G. (1970) The Female Eunuch (London: McGibbon and Kee).

Griffin, C. (1985) Typical Girls? (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Griffin, S. (1980) Woman and Nature (New York: Harper).

Griffin, S. (1981) Pornography and Silence: Culture’s revenge against
nature (London: Women’s Press).

Habermas, J. (1976) Legitimation Crisis (London: Heinemann).

Habermas, J. (1979) Communication and the Evolution of Society (London,
Heinemann).

Hacker, A. (1983) US: A Statistical Portrait of the American People (New
York: Viking).

Hall, R. (1974[1928]) The Well of Loneliness (London: Corgi).

Hall, R. (1978) Marie Slopes: A Biography (London: Virago).

Hamilton, R. (1978) The Liberation of Women (London: George Allen and
Unwin).

Hamilton, A. (1981) ‘A Complex Strategical Situation: Gender and Power
in Aboriginal Australia’, in N. Grieve and P. Grimshaw, eds Australian
Women: Feminist Perspectives (Melbourne; Oxford University Press) 69–85.

Hanisch, C. (1975) ‘Men’s Liberation’, in Feminist Revolution (New York:
Redstockings), pp. 60–4.

Hargreaves, D. H. (1967) Social Relations in a Secondary School (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Harper, J. and Richards, L. (1979) Mothers and Working Mothers
(Melbourne: Penguin).

Harré, R. (1979) Social Being (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).

Harré, R. (1983) Personal Being (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).

Harris, J. (1970) The Bitter Fight (St Lucia: University of Queensland
Press).

Hartmann, H. I. (1979) ‘The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism:
Towards a More Progressive Union’, Capital and Class, 8, pp. 1–33.

Hartsock, N. (1979) ‘Feminist Theory and the Development of
Revolutionary Strategy’, in Z. Eisenstein, ed. Capitalist Patriarchy
(New York: Monthly Review Press), pp. 56–77.

Haug, F. (1987) Sexualization of the Body (London: Verso).

Henriques, J., Hollway, W., Urwin, C., Benn, C., and Walkerdine, V.
(1984) Changing the Subject: Psychology, Social Regulation and
Subjectivity (London: Methuen).

Herdt, G. H. (1981) Guardians of the Flutes: Images of Masculinity (New
York: McGraw Hill).

Heron House, ed. (1979) The Book of Numbers (London: Pelham Books).

Hicks, N. (1978) This Sin and Scandal: Australia’s Population Debate
1891–1911 (Canberra: Australian National University Press).

Hirschfeld, M. (1942) Sexual Anomalies and Perversions (London: Torch).

Hoch, P. (1979) White Hero, Black Beast (London: Pluto Press).

Hodson, P. (1984) Men… An Investigation into the Emotional Male (London:
BBC Publications).

Hollway, W. (1984) ‘Gender Difference and the Production of
Subjectivity’, in J. Henriques et al., Changing the Subject (London:
Methuen), pp. 227–63.

Horkheimer, M., ed. (1936) Studien über Aulorität und Familie (Paris:
Alcan).

Horney, K. (1967) Feminine Psychology (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

House of Representatives, Australia, Standing Committee on Aboriginal
Affairs (1979) Aboriginal Health (Canberra: AGPS).

Howe, L.K. (1977) Pink Collar Workers: Inside the World of Women’s Work
(New York: Avon).

Hunt, P. (1980) Gender and Class Consciousness (London: Macmillan).

Hyde, J. S. (1981) ‘How Large arc Cognitive Gender Differences?’,
American Psychologist, 36, 8, pp. 892–901.

Inglis, A. (1974) ‘Not a White Woman Safe’: Sexual Anxiety and Politics
in Port Moresby, 1920–1934 (Canberra: ANU Press).

Irigaray, L. (1981) ‘This Sex Which Is Not One’, in E. Marks and I. de
Courtivron, eds New French Feminisms (Brighton: Harvester), pp. 99–106.

Janeway, E. (1971) Man’s World, Woman’s Place (New York: Dell).

Johnson, O. and Harley, C. (1980) ‘Handedness and Sex Differences in
Cognitive Tests of Brain Laterality’, Cortex, 16, 1, pp. 73–82.

Johnston, C. (1982) ‘Foucault and Gay Lib’, Arena, 61, pp. 62–70.

Johnston, J. (1973) Lesbian Nation: The Feminist Solution (New York:
Simon and Schuster).

Jones, E., ed. (1924) Social Aspects of Psycho-Analysis (London:
Williams and Norgate).

Joyce, J. (1960) Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (Harmondsworth:
Penguin and Jonathan Cape).

Jung, C. G. (1953[1928]) ‘Anima and Animus’, Part II, ch. ii of ‘The
Relations between the Ego and the Unconscious’, in Collected Works,
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul), vol. 7, pp. 187–209.

Kelly, P. (1984) Fighting for Hope (London; Chatto and Windus).

Kenyon, K., et al. (1960–83) Excavations at Jericho (5 vols, London:
British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem).

Kessler, S., Ashenden, D. J., Connell, R. W. & Dowsett, G. W. (1982)
Ockers and Disco-maniacs (Sydney: Inner City Education Centre).

Kessler, S., Ashenden, D. J., Connell, R. W. & Dowsett, G. W. (1985)
‘Gender Relations in Secondary Schooling’, Sociology of Education, 58,
1, pp. 34–48.

Kessler, S. J. and McKenna, W. (1978) Gender: An Ethnomethodological
Approach (New York: Wiley).

Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B. and Martin, C. E. (1948) Sexual Behavior
in the Human Male (Philadelphia: Saunders).

Kipling, R. (1908) Just So Stories (London: Macmillan).

Klein, V. (1946) The Feminine Character (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Klima, B. (1962) ‘The First Ground-Plan of an Upper Palaeolithic Loess
Settlement in Middle Europe and its Meaning’, in R. J. Braidwood and G.
R. Willey, eds Courses Toward Urban Life (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press), pp. 193–210.

Kollontai, A. (1977) Selected Writings (London: Allison and Busby).

Komarovsky, M. (1946) ‘Cultural Contradictions and Sex Roles’, American
Journal of Sociology, 52, pp. 184–9.

Komarovsky, M. (1950) ‘Functional Analysis of Sex Roles’, American
Sociological Review, 15, pp. 508–16.

Komarovsky, M. (1964) Blue-Collar Marriage (New York: Vintage).

Konrad, G. and Szelenyi, I. (1979) The Intellectuals on the Road to
Class Power (Brighton: Harvester).

Korda, M. (1973) Male Chauvinism (New York: Random House).

Kosík, K. (1976) Dialectics of the Concrete (Dordrecht: D. Reidel).

Kovel, J. (1981) The Age of Desire: Reflections of a radical
psychoanalyst (New York: Pantheon).

Krafft-Ebing, R. von (1965 [1886]) Psychopathia Sexualis, 12th edn (New
York: Paperback Library).

Kramer, S. N. (1963) The Sumerians (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).

Kristeva, J. (1981) ‘Women’s Time’, Signs 7, 1, pp. 13–35.

Kuhn, A. and Wolpe, A-M. (1978) Feminism and Materialism (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Lafitte, P. (1957) The Person in Psychology (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Laing, R. D. (1960) The Divided Self (London, Tavistock).

Laing, R. D. (1968) The Politics of Experience (New York, Ballantine
Books).

Laing, R. D. (1976) The Politics of the Family (Harmondsworth, Penguin).

Laing, R. D. and Cooper, D. G. (1964) Reason and Violence (London:
Tavistock).

Laing, R. D. and Esterson, A. (1964) Sanity, Madness and the Family
(London: Tavistock).

Lane, D. and O’Dell, F. (1978) The Soviet Industrial Worker (Oxford:
Martin Robertson).

Lang, T. (1971) The Difference Between a Man and a Woman (New York: John
Day).

Lasch, C. (1977) Haven in a Heartless World: The Family Besieged (New
York: Basic Books).

Latin American and Caribbean Women’s Collective (1980) Slaves of Slaves
(London: Zed Press).

Lauret, J-C. (1970) The Danish Sex Fairs (London: Jasmine Press).

Lefebvre, H. (1976) The Survival of Capitalism: Reproduction of the
Relations of Production (London: Allison and Busby).

LeGuin, U. (1973) The Left Hand of Darkness, (London: Panther).

Lepervanche, M. de (1984) ‘The “Naturalness” of Inequality’, in G.
Bottomley and M. de Lepervanche, eds Ethnicity, Class and Gender in
Australia (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin), pp. 49–71.

Lessing, D. (1962) The Golden Notebook (London: Michael Joseph).

Lewis, G. (1983) Real Men Like Violence (Sydney: Kangaroo Press).

Lévi-Strauss, C. (1969[1949]) The Elementary Structures of Kinship, rev.
edn (Boston: Beacon Press).

Lewontin, R. C., Rose, S. and Kamin, L. J. (1984) Not in Our Genes:
Biology, Ideology and Human Nature (New York: Pantheon).

Linstone, H. A., Lendaris, G. G., Rogers, S. D., Wakeland, W., and
Williams, M. (1979) ‘The Use of Structural Modeling for Technology
Assessment’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 14, 4, pp.
291–327.

Lipman-Blumen, J. and Tickamyer, A. R. (1975) ‘Sex Roles in Transition:
A Ten-Year Perspective’, Annual Review of Sociology, 1, pp. 297–337.

Lippert, J. (1977) ‘Sexuality as Consumption’, in J. Snodgrass, ed. For
Men Against Sexism (Albion, CA: Times Change Press), pp. 207–13.

Lloyd, S. (1955) Foundations in the Dust: a Story of Mesopotamian
Exploration (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Lukács, G. (1971) History and Class Consciousness (London: Merlin
Press).

Lukes, S. (1974) Power: A Radical View (London: Macmillan).

Lumsden, A. (1984) ‘Gayness is Good for You’, New Statesman, (31
August), pp. 13–15.

Lyttleton, N. (1984) ‘Men’s Liberation, Men Against Sexism and Major
Dividing Lines’. Resources for Feminist Research, 12, 4, pp. 33–4.

Maccoby, E. E. and Jacklin, C. N. (1975) The Psychology of Sex
Differences (Stanford: Stanford University Press).

Mcintosh, M. (1968) ‘The Homosexual Role’, Social Problems, 16, 2, pp.
182–92.

Mcintosh, M. (1978) ‘The State and the Oppression of Women’, in A. Kuhn
and A-M. Wolpe, eds Feminism and Materialism (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul), pp. 254–89.

MacKenzie, W. J. M. (1967) Politics and Social Science (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

MacKinnon, C. A. (1982) ‘Feminism, Marxism, Method and the State: An
Agenda for Theory’, Signs, 7, 3, pp. 515–44.

McRobbie, A. (1978) ‘Working class girls and the culture of femininity’,
in Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Women’s Studies Group Women
Take Issue (London: Hutchinson), pp. 96–108.

Magarey, S. (1985) ‘Conditions for the Emergence of an Activist Feminism
in Late Nineteenth Century Australia’, paper to Sociological Association
conference, Brisbane.

Mahler, V. (1981) ‘Work, Consumption and Authority within the Household:
A Moroccan Case’, in K. Young, et al., eds Of Marriage and the Market
(London: CSE Books), pp. 69–87.

Malinowski, B. (1955) Sex and Repression in Savage Society (New York:
Meridian).

Mannheim, K. (1940) Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction (London:
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner).

Mannheim, K. (1954) Ideology and Utopia (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Mannoni, O. (1964) Prospero and Caliban: The Psychology of Colonization,
2nd edn (New York: Praeger).

Marcuse, H. (1955) Eros and Civilization (Boston: Beacon Press).

Marcuse, H. (1964) One Dimensional Man (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul).

Marcuse, H. (1972) An Essay on Liberation (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Marks, E. and de Courtivron, I. (1981) New French Feminisms (Brighton:
Harvester).

Marshall, T. H. (1950) Citizenship and Social Class (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).

Martin, W. (1972) The American Sisterhood: Writings of the Feminist
Movement from Colonial Times to the Present (New York: Harper and Row).

Matthews, J. J. (1984) Good and Mad Women: The Historical Construction
of Femininity in Twentieth-Century Australia (Sydney: George Allen and
Unwin).

May, R. (1980) Sex and Fantasy (New York: Norton).

Mead, M. (1935) Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies (New
York: Morrow).

Mead, M. (1950) Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a Changing
World (London: Gollancz).

Mellaart, J. (1967) Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia (London:
Thames and Hudson).

Men’s Consciousness Raising Group (1971) Unbecoming Men (New York: Times
Change Press).

Metcalfe, A. and Humphries, M., eds (1985) The Sexuality of Men (London:
Pluto Press).

Meulenbelt, A. (1976) Feminisme en Socialisme: Een Inleiding (Amsterdam:
Van Gennep).

Meulenbelt, A. (1980) The Shame is Over (London: Women’s Press).

Mieli, M. (1980) Homosexuality and Liberation (London: Gay Men’s Press).

Miles, K. (1974) Women’s Liberation, Class Struggle (Sydney: Words for
Women).

Mill, J. S. (1912[1869]) The Subjection of Women’, in Three Essays
(London: Oxford University Press) pp. 427–548.

Miller, C. and Swift, K. (1979) Words and Women (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Miller, P. (1986) Long Division: State Schooling in South Australian
Society (Adelaide: Wakefield Press).

Miller, S. M. (1971) ‘The Making of a Confused, Middle-Aged Husband’,
Social Policy, 2, 2, pp. 33–9.

Millett, K. (1972) Sexual Politics (London: Abacus).

Mitchell, J. (1966) ‘Women: The Longest Revolution’, New Left Review,
40, pp. 11–37.

Mitchell, J. (1971) Woman’s Estate (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Mitchell, J. (1975) Psychoanalysis and Feminism (New York: Vintage
Books).

Molyncux, M. (1979) ‘Beyond the Domestic Labour Debate’, New Left
Review, 116, pp. 3–27.

Molyncux, M. (1981) ‘Women in Socialist Societies: Problems of Theory
and Practice’, in K. Young, C. Wolkowitz and R. McCullagh, eds Of
Marriage and the Market (London: CSE Books), pp. 167–202.

Money, J. (1970) ‘Sexual Dimorphism and Homosexual Gender Identity’,
Psychological Bulletin, 74, 6, pp. 425–40.

Morgan, D. H. J. (1975) Social Theory and the Family (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul).

Morgan, L. H. (1963[1877]) Ancient Society (Cleveland World Publishing).

Morgan, M. (1975) The Total Woman (London: Hodder and Stoughton).

Morris, D. (1969) The Naked Ape (St Albans: Panther).

Morris, J. (1974) Conundrum (London: Faber and Faber).

Morrison, P., Holland, G. and Trott, T. (1979) ‘ “Personally speaking …”
3 Men Share the Experience of their Men’s Groups’, Achilles Heel, 2, pp.
12–16.

Moses, J. C. (1978) ‘Women in Political Roles’, in D. Atkinson, A.
Dallin and G. W. Lapidus, eds Women in Russia (Hassocks: Harvester).

Newland, K. (1975) Women in Politics: A Global Review (Washington, DC:
Worldwatch Institute).

Newland, K. (1980) Women, Men and the Division of Labor (Washington, DC:
Worldwatch Institute).

Nichols, J. (1975) Men’s Liberation (New York: Penguin).

Niland, C. (1983) Credit your Right, speech to ‘Money Matters’ seminar,
Woy Woy, 26 February.

Nye, F. I., et al. (1976) Role Structure and Analysis of the Family
(Beverley Hills: Sage), Sage Library of Social Research, vol. 24.

O’Brien, M. (1981) The Politics of Reproduction (Boston: Routledge and
Kegan Paul).

O’Donnell, C. (1984) The Basis of the Bargain (Sydney: George Allen and
Unwin).

Offe, C. (1984) Contradictions of the Welfare Stale (London:
Hutchinson).

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (1980) Women and
Employment: Policies for Equal Opportunities (Paris: OECD).

Orwell, G. (1962[1937]) The Road to Wigan Pier (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Orwell, G. (1970[1941]) ‘The Art of Donald McGill’, in his Collected
Essays, Journalism and Letters (Harmondsworth: Penguin), vol. 2.

Otto, R. (1982) Occupational Stress Among Teachers in Post-Primary
Education: A Study of Teachers in Technical Schools and Some Comparative
Data on High School Teachers, La Trobe University, Department of
Sociology.

Owen, R. (1972[1813]) A New View of Society, and Other Writings (London:
Dent).

Padgug, R. A. (1979) ‘Sexual Matters: On Conceptualizing Sexuality in
History’, Radical History Review, (Spring/Summer), pp. 3–23.

Pahl, J. M. and Pahl, R. E. (1972) Managers and their Wives
(Harmondsworth, Penguin).

Pahl, R. E. (1984) Divisions of Labour (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).

Parsons, A. (1964) ‘Is the Oedipus Complex Universal? The
Jones-Malinowski Debate Revisited and a South Italian “Nuclear Complex”
‘, The Psychoanalytic Study of Society, 3, pp. 278–326.

Parsons, T. (1942) ‘Age and Sex in the Social Structure of the United
States’, American Sociological Review, 1, pp. 604–16.

Parsons, T. and Bales, R. F. (1956) Family Socialization and Interaction
Process (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Pateman, C. (1983) ‘The Fraternal Social Contract: some Observations on
Patriarchal Civil Society’, unpublished paper.

Perchenok, Y. (1985) Women in the USSR: Facts and Figures (Moscow:
Novosti Press Agency Publishing House).

Pericot, L. (1962) ‘The Social Life of Spanish Palaeolithic Hunters as
Shown by Levantine Art’, In S. L. Washburn, ed. Social Life of Early Man
(London: Methuen), pp. 194–213.

Perkins, R. (1983) The ‘Drag Queen’ Scene: Transsexuals in Kings Cross
(Sydney: George Allen and Unwin).

Piaget, J. (1962) Play, Dreams and Imitation in Childhood (New York:
Norton).

Piaget, J. (1971) Structuralism (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Pleck, E. H. and Pleck, J. H. (1980) The American Man (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall).

Pleck, J. H. (1976) ‘The Male Sex Role: Definitions, Problems, and
Sources of Change’, Journal of Social Issues, 32, 3, pp. 155–64.

Pleck, J. H. (1981) The Myth of Masculinity (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Plomin, R. and Foch, T. T. (1981) ‘Sex Differences and Individual
Differences’, Child Development, 52, 1, pp. 383–5.

Plummer, K., ed. (1981) The Making of the Modern Homosexual (London,
Hutchinson).

Plummer, K. (1983) Documents of Life (London: George Allen and Unwin).

Pogrebin, L. C. (1973) ‘Rap Groups: The Feminist Connection’, Ms, 1, 9,
pp. 80–3, 98–104.

Polatnick, M. (1973–4) ‘Why Men Don’t Rear Children: A Power Analysis’,
Berkeley Journal of Sociology, 18, pp. 45–86.

Poole, R. (1982) ‘Markets and Motherhood: The Advent of the New Right’,
Intervention, 16, pp. 37–52.

Power, M. (1975) ‘The Making of a Woman’s Occupation’, Hecate, 1, 2, pp.
25–34.

Pringle, R. (1973) ‘Octavius Beale and the Ideology of the Birth-Rate:
the Royal Commissions of 1904 and 1905’, Refractory Girl, 3, pp. 19–27.

Pringle, R. (1979) ‘Feminists and Bureaucrats: The Last Four Years’,
Refractory Girl, 18/19, pp. 58–60.

Pritchard, J. B., ed. (1950) Ancient Near Eastern Texts (Princeton:
Princeton University Press).

Ram, K. (1981) ‘Sexual Violence in India’, Refractory Girl, 22, pp. 2–8.

Raymond, J. G. (1979) The Transsexual Empire (Boston: Beacon Press).

Red Collective (1978) The Politics of Sexuality in Capitalism (London:
Red Collective and Publications Distribution Cooperative).

Reeves, P. (1913) Round About a Pound a Week (London: G. Bell).

Reich, C. A. (1970) The Greening of America (New York: Random House).

Reich, W. (1970) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (New York: Farrar
Strauss and Giroux).

Reiche, R. (1970) Sexuality and Class Struggle (London: New Left Books).

Reiger, K. M. (1985) The Disenchantment of the Home: Modernizing the
Australian family 1880–1940 (Melbourne: Oxford University Press).

Reik, T. (1967) Of Love and Lust: On the Psychoanalysis of Romantic and
Sexual Emotions (New York: Bantam).

Reiter, R. R. (1977) ‘The Search for Origins: Unravelling the Threads of
Gender Hierarchy’, Critique of Anthropology, 9/10, pp. 5–24.

Rice, M. S. (1981 [1939]) Working-Class Wives: Their Health and
Conditions, 2nd edn, (London: Virago).

Rich, A. (1980) ‘Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence’,
Signs, 5, pp. 631–60.

Richards, L. (1985) ‘A Man’s Not a Neighbour? Gender and Local
Relationships in a New Estate’, paper presented to Sociological
Association of Australia and New Zealand annual conference, Brisbane.

Riesman, D. (1950) The Lonely Crowd (New Haven, Yale University Press).

Robinson, P. A. (1972) The Sexual Radicals (London: Paladin).

Rosen, S. A. (1980–81) ‘Police Harassment of Homosexual Women and Men in
New York City’, Columbia Human Rights Law Review, 12, pp. 159–90.

Rosenberg, R. (1982) Beyond Separate Spheres: Intellectual Roots of
Modern Feminism (New Haven: Yale University Press).

Rosenthal, R. and Rubin, D. B., (1982) ‘Further Meta-Analytic Procedures
for Assessing Cognitive Gender Differences’, Journal of Educational
Psychology, 74, 5, pp. 708–12.

Rowbotham, S. (1973) Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Rowbotham, S. (1974) Women, Resistance and Revolution (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Rowbotham, S. (1974) Hidden From History 2nd edn (London: Pluto Press).

Rowbotham, S., Segal, L., and Wainwright, H. (1979) Beyond the
Fragments: Feminism and the Making of Socialism (London: Islington
Community Press).

Rubin, G. (1975) The Traffic in Women: Notes on the “Political Economy”
of Sex’, in R. R. Reiter, ed. Toward an Anthropology of Women (New York,
Monthly Review Press), pp. 157–210.

Rubin, L. B. (1976) Worlds of Pain: Life in the Working-Class Family
(New York: Basic Books).

Russell, G. (1983) The Changing Role of Fathers? (St Lucia: University
of Queensland Press).

Ryan, E. and Conlon, A. (1978) Gentle Invaders: Australian Women at Work
1788–1974 (Melbourne: Nelson).

Sade, M. de (1966[1791]) Justine…and Other Writings (New York: Grove
Press).

Sade, M. de (1976[1797]) Juliette (New York: Grove Press).

Sahlins, M. (1977) The Use and Abuse of Biology: An Anthropological
Critique of Sociobiology (London: Tavistock).

Sargent, D. (1983) ‘Reformulating (Homo)Sexual Polities’, in J. Allen
and P. Patton, ed. Beyond Marxism (Sydney: Intervention), pp. 163–82.

Sartre, J-P. (1958) Being and Nothingness (London: Methuen).

Sartre, J-P. (1968) Search for a Method [The Question of Method] (New
York: Vintage Books).

Sartre, J-P. (1976) Critique of Dialectical Reason (London: New Left
Books).

Sartre, J-P. (1971–2) L’Idiot de la famille (Paris, Gallimard).

Sauer, C. (1962) ‘Sedentary and Mobile Bents in Early Societies’, in
S.L. Washburn, ed. Social Life of Early Man (London: Methuen), pp.
256–66.

Sawer, M. (1985) ‘From Motherhood to Sisterhood: Attitudes of Australian
Women MPs to their Roles’, paper at Australasian Political Studies
Association Annual Conference, Adelaide.

Sayers, J. (1982) Biological Politics (London: Tavistock).

Schlegel, A. (1977) Sexual Stratification (New York: Columbia University
Press).

Schmidt, J.’ (1977) ‘Praxis and Temporality: Karel Kosik’s Political
Theory’, Telos, 33, pp. 71–84.

Schools Commission, Australia (1975) Girls, School and Society
(Canberra: Schools Commission).

Scott, J. W. and Tilly, L. A. (1975) ‘Women’s Work and the Family in
Nineteenth-Century Europe’, Comparative Studies in Society and History
17, 1, pp. 36–64.

Scutt, J. A. (1983) Even in the Best of Homes: Violence in the Family
(Melbourne: Penguin).

Scutt, J. (1985) ‘In Pursuit of Equality: Women and Legal Thought
1788–1984’ in J. Goodnow and C. Pateman, ed. Women, Social Science and
Public Policy (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin), pp. 116–139.

Seale, P. and McConville, M. (1978) Philby, rev. edn (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Secord, P. F., ed. (1982) Explaining Human Behavior (Beverley Hills:
Sage).

Segal, L., et al. (1979–80) ‘Family Life: Communal Living and Childcare.
Living Your Politics: A Discussion of Communal Living Ten Years On’,
Revolutionary Socialism: Big Flame Magazine, 4, pp. 4–8.

Segal, L. ed (1983) What is to be Done About the Family? (Harmondsworth:
Penguin).

Segal, L. (1987) Is the Future Female? (London: Virago).

Seidler, V. (1979) ‘Men and Feminism’, Achilles Heel, 2, pp. 32–6.

Sennett, R. (1970) Families Against the City (Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press).

Shaver, S. (1983) ‘Sex and Money in the Welfare State’, in C. Baldock
and B. Cass, eds Women, Social Welfare and the State in Australia
(Sydney: George Allen and Unwin), pp. 146–63.

Sichtermann, B. (1986) Femininity (Cambridge: Polity Press).

Silverstein, C. (1982) Man to Man: Gay Couples in America (New York:
Quill).

Silverstein, M. (1977) ‘The History of a Short, Unsuccessful Academic
Career’, in J. Snodgrass, ed., For Men Against Sexism (Albion, CA: Times
Change Press), pp. 177–97.

Smith, C. (1959) The Speaking Eye (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Smith, R. and Knight, J. (1981) ‘Political Censorship in the Teaching of
Social Sciences’, Australian Journal of Education, 25, pp. 3–19.

Smith-Rosenberg, C. (1975) ‘The Female World of Love and Ritual:
Relations Between Women in Nineteenth-Century America’, Signs, 1, 1;
reprinted in E. Abel and E. K. Abel, The Signs Reader (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1983), pp. 27–55.

Smout, T. C. (1969) A History of the Scottish People 1560–1830 (Britain:
Collins).

Snodgrass, J., ed. (1977) For Men Against Sexism (Albion, CA: Times
Change Press).

Spence, J. (1978/9) ‘What do People Do all Day? Class and Gender in
Images of Women’, Screen Education, 29, pp. 29–45.

Spence, J. T. and Helmreich, R. L. (1978) Masculinity and Femininity
(Austin: University of Texas Press).

Spender, D. (1982) Women of Ideas and What Men have Done to Them
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul).

Stacey, J. (1979) ‘When Patriarchy Kowtows: The Significance of the
Chinese Family Revolution for Feminist Theory’, in Z. R. Eisenstein, ed.
Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism (New York:
Monthly Review Press), pp. 299–348.

Stapledon, O. (1937) Last and First Men (London: Penguin).

Stearns, P. N. (1979) Be a Man! Males in Modern Society (New York:
Holmes and Meier).

Steinmann, A. and Fox, D. J. (1974) The Male Dilemma (New York:
Aronson).

Stevens, G. L. (1984) ‘The Flowering of Sex’, The Sciences, 24, 3, pp.
28–35.

Stevens, J. The First Ten Years (forthcoming).

Stille, A. (1985–6) ‘Election v. Appointment: Who Wins?’, National Law
Journal (US), (30 Dec. 1985–6 Jan. 1986), pp. 1–9.

Stolcke, V. (1981) ‘Women’s Labours: The Naturalisation of Social
Inequality and Women’s Subordination’, In K. Young et al., eds Of
Marriage and the Market (London: CSE Books), pp. 30–48.

Stoller, R. J. (1968, 1976) Sex and Gender, (London: Hogarth Press and
Institute of Psychoanalysis), vol. 1: On the Development of Masculinity
and Femininity, vol. 2: ‘The Transsexual Experiment’ (New York:
Aronson).

Straus, M. A. (1978) ‘Wife Beating: How Common and Why?’, Victimology,
2, 3–4, pp. 443–58.

Strober, M. H. (1976) ‘Toward Dimorphics: A Summary Statement to the
Conference on Occupational Segregation’, Signs, 1, 3, part 2, pp.
293–302.

Strouse, J. (1975) Women and Analysis (New York: Laurel).

Sullivan, E. V. (1984) A Critical Psychology (New York: Plenum).

Szasz, T. S. (1978) The Myth of Mental Illness rev. edn, (New York:
Harper and Row).

Task Force on Domestic Violence, New South Wales (1981) Report (Sydney:
Government Printer).

Taylor, B. (1983) Eve and the New Jerusalem: Socialism and Feminism in
the Nineteenth Century (London: Virago).

Taylor, G. R. (1959) Sex in History, 2nd edn (London: Thames and
Hudson).

Tension, E. (1978) You Don’t Need a Degree to Read the Writing on the
Wall (London: No Press).

Thomas, D. (1976) The Marquis de Sade (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson).

Thomas, W. I. (1907) Sex and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press).

Thompson, D. (1985) Flaws in the Social Fabric: Homosexuals and Society
in Sydney (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin).

Thompson, E. P. (1968) The Making of the English Working Class, 2nd edn
(Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Thompson, E. P. (1978) The Poverty of Theory (London: Merlin Press).

Tieger, T. (1980) ‘On the Biological Basis of Sex Differences in
Aggression’, Child Development, 51, 4, pp. 943–63.

Tiger, L. (1969) Men in Groups (London: Nelson).

Tiger, L. and Fox, R. (1971) The Imperial Animal (New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston).

Tolson, A. (1977) The Limits of Masculinity (London: Tavistock).

Tomasetti, G. (1976) Thoroughly Decent People (Melbourne, McPhec
Gribble).

Touraine, A. (1981) The Voice and the Eye: An Analysis of Social
Movements (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Trigger, B. G., Kemp, B. J., O’Connor, D., and Lloyd, A. B. (1983)
Ancient Egypt: A Social History, (Cambridge University Press).

United Nations-Asian and Pacific Centre for Women and Development (1979)
Draft Report of International Workshop on Feminist Ideology and
Structures in the First Half of the Decade for Women, 24–30 June 1979
(Bangkok: United Nations).

Vatsyayana (1963) Kama Sutra (London: Panther).

Wajcman, J. (1983) Women in Control: Dilemmas of a Workers’ Cooperative
(Milton Keynes: Open University Press).

Wallace, A. (1986) Homicide: The Social Reality (Sydney: NSW Bureau of
Crime Statistics and Research).

Walter, A., ed. (1980) Come Together: The Years of Gay Liberation
1970–1973 (London: Gay Men’s Press).

Ware, H. (1981) Women, Demography and Development (Canberra: ANU
Development Studies Centre).

Weeks, J. (1977) Coming Out: Homosexual Politics in Britain, from the
Nineteenth Century to the Present (London: Quartet).

Weeks, J. (1985) Sexuality and ils Discontents (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul).

Wesley, F. and Wesley, C. (1977) Sex-Role Psychology (New York: Human
Sciences Press).

Wesson, G., (1975) Brian’s Wife, Jenny’s Mum (Melbourne: Dove).

West, J. (1978) ‘Women, Sex and Class’, in A. Kuhn and A. Wolpe, eds
Feminism and Materialism (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul), pp. 220–53.

White, A. (1939) Frost in May (Harmondsworth: Penguin).

White, P. (1979) The Twyborn Affair (London: Jonathan Cape).

White, R. W. (1975) Lives in Progress: A Study of the Natural Growth of
Personality, 3rd edn, (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston).

Whyte, W. F. (1955) Street Corner Society, enlarged edn, (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).

Williams, C. (1981) Open Cut (Sydney: George Allen and Unwin). Williams,
G. (1960) ‘Gramsci’s Concept of Egemonia’, Journal of the History of
Ideas, 21, 4, pp. 586–99.

Williams, T. R. (1959) ‘A Critique of Some Assumptions of Social Survey
Research’, Public Opinion Quarterly, 23, pp. 55–62.

Willis, E. (1984) ‘Radical Feminism and Feminist Radicalism’, in S.
Sayres, et al., eds The 60s Without Apology (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press/Social Text), pp. 91–118.

Willis, P. (1977) Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids get Working
Class Jobs (Farnborough, Saxon House).

Willis, P. (1979) ‘Shop Floor Culture, Masculinity and the Wage Form’,
in J. Clarke, C. Critcher and R. Johnson, eds Working Class Culture
(London: Hutchinson), pp. 185–98.

Wilson, E. O. (1978) On Human Nature (Cambridge MA/London: Tavistock).

Wilson, E. (1977) Women and the Welfare Stale (London, Tavistock).

Wilson, E. (1982) ‘Women, the “Community” and the Family’, in A. Walker,
ed. Community Care: The Family, the State and Social Policy (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell and Martin Robertson).

Wilson, J. A. (1951) The Culture of Ancient Egypt (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press).

Wolfe, S. J., and Stanley, J. P. (1980) The Coming Out Stories
(Watertown MA: Persephone Press).

Wollstonecraft, M. (1975[1792]) Vindication of the Rights of Woman
(Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Women’s Bureau, Department of Employment and Youth Affairs, Australia
(1981) The Role of Women in the Economy, Position paper for OECD High
Level Conference on the Employment of Women 1980 (Canberra: AGPS).

Wylie, P. (1974[1951]) The Disappearance (St Albans: Panther).

Yates, L. (1983) ‘The Theory and Practice of Counter-Sexist Education in
Schools’, Discourse, 3, 2, pp. 33–44.

Young, I. (1981) ‘Beyond the Unhappy Marriage: A Critique of the Dual
Systems Theory’, in L. Sargent, ed. Women and Revolution (Boston: South
End Press), pp. 43–69.

Young, K. (1978) ‘Modes of Appropriation and the Sexual Division of
Labour: A Case Study from Oaxaca, Mexico’, in A. Kuhn and A-M. Wolpe,
eds Feminism and Materialism (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul), pp.
124–54.

Young, K., Wolkowitz, C. and McCullagh, R., eds (1981) Of Marriage and
the Market: Women’s Subordination in International Perspective (London:
CSE Books).

Young, M. and Willmott, P. (1962) Family and Kinship in East London
(Harmondsworth: Penguin).

Zaretsky, E. (1976) Capitalism, the Family and Personal Life (London:
Pluto Press).

Ziller, A. (1980) Affirmative Action Handbook (Sydney: Review of NSW
Government Administration).

Zmroczek, C. (1984) ‘Women’s Work: Laundry and Technical Change in the
Last 50 Years’, paper at British Sociological Association conference,
Bradford.

Index

abolition of gender, 286–8, 289

abortion, 37, 261, 292

accumulation, gendered logic of, 105–6

Ackroyd, P., 289

actor and script in role theory, 47

additive concept of society and nature, 73–5

adjustment, gender, 33

Adler, A., 82, 199, 206–7, 211

adolescents, 80, 195

and housework, 122

and sex, 115

see also children; education; family

adornment see clothing

Adorno, T.W., 200, 201

advertisements, 102, 115, 133, 246–7; see also media

affirmative action, 49

Africa, 58, 125, 138, 154; see also Egypt

agencies of socialization, 49; see also institutions

aggression

and genetics, 69

and hormones, 38, 70

physical see violence

Agnes’ (case study), 76

agricultural civilizations, 154

AIDS, 37, 186, 233

alcoholism, 86

Algeria, Kabyle society in, 138

Alinsky, S. D., 65

allegiance, 272; see also alliance

Allen, P., 237

alliance, strategy of, 284; see also

liberation; mobilization; solidarity

Althusser, L., 44, 62, 92, 96, 202, 221

Altman, D., 36, 37, 208

Amato, P. R., 100

ambiguity, gender, 289

Anatolia, 151

ancient civilizations, 144–6, 150–5

Andrews, B., 176, 177, 224–5

androgyny, 33, 47, 171, 291

Anglo-Saxons, 155

antagonisms, gender, 97, 114

Anthony, S. B., 131

anthropology/ethnomethodology, 26, 27, 30–1, 62, 194

and archaeology, 146

culture-and-personality school, 194

and natural difference theory, 75

structural, 45

anxiety, 82

appearance, see clothing

appropriate technology, 102

archaeologv, see prehistoric

Arendt, H., 228

Aries, P., 155, 206

armies see military

articulation of interests, 262–5

ascendancy see hegemonic

Ashenden, D.J., xiv, xvii, 18

Asia, 8, 9, 72, 126, 128, 136, 158, 176, 260; see also China; India;
Japan

assertiveness training, 37

Assyrians, 144

attribution, gender, 75–6, 78–81

Atwood, M., 292

Australia

Aborigines, 125

ancient, 154

capitalism, 44

case study see Prince

education, 34, 120, 177–9, 192, 225–6, 244, 261

equal opportunities, 49

family, 100, 120, 122–5, 135, 195, 225–6

health care, 250

homosexuality, 36, 232, 260

psychiatric incarceration, 177–8

state, 126, 129

street life, 133, 134, 135

taxation, 260

transsexuals, 76

violence, 11–14

women: movement, 44, 45, 230, 262, 270, 284; in power, 15; working, 10,
103, 162, 260, 268

authority, 109, 224

see also power

Bachofen, J. J., 26

bad faith, 213

Baldock, C. V., 65

Bali, 136

Bangladesh, 128

Barassi, R., 185

‘Barbin, H.’ (case study), 76, 148

Barbour, J., 83

‘Barr, Angus’ (case study), 177, 178, 189

Barrett, M., 95

Barry, K., 58

Bateson, G., 123

Beale, D., 86

Beauvoir, S. de, 31–2, 175, 211, 213, 214, 217

Bebel, F. A., 26, 44

Bell, C., 110, 122

Bellamy, E., 292

Bern, S. L., 33, 47, 64, 171, 174

Sex Role Inventory, 47

Bertaux, D., 236

Biddle, B.J., 48, 52

biology/biological

dichotomy/reductionism see natural

evolutionary, 26–7

pseudo see sociobiology

birth, 290

control see contraception

bisexuality, 27, 28

Bland, L., 65

block differences, 168–70

body

history of, 83, 86–7

see also natural

Bogart, H., 184–5

Bottomley, G., 123

boundary exchange, capitalism and patriarchy as, 46

Bourdieu, P., 44, 62, 65, 94–5, 117, 138

Bowlby, J., 200

Bowles, S., 237

Branca, P., 65, 147

Brannon, R., 65

Bray, A., 148

Brazil, 8, 9

Britain

abortion, 260, 292

contraception, 86

co-operatives, 266, 270

education, 193

family, 121, 122, 270; housework, 100

feminism see women below

homosexuals, 36, 126, 137, 147–8, 284

industry, 243

men’s groups, 235

military, 14

miners’ strike, 143, 270

personality, 176, 225

sex roles, 32, 175, 180–1

sexual ideology, 243, 247, 255

state, 126, 131

street life, 133

violence, 11

women: movement, 45, 230, 266–8, 270; in power, 15

Brohm, J.-M., 88

Broker, M., 285

Broughton, F., 181, 189

Brown, N. O., 207

Brownmiller, S., 35, 55, 56

Bryson, I., 230

Bujra, J., xvii

Bullock, A., 142

Bullough, V. L., 147, 163

Burgess, G., 185, 190

Burgmann, M., 180

Burnett, J., 142, 189

Burney, C., 164

Burton, C., xv, 35, 40, 64, 146

Cahill, S. E., 218

Califia, P., 84, 88, 182, 289

Campaign for Homosexual Equality (Britain), 284

Campbell, B., 64, 65, 106

Canada, 13, 14, 129, 139, 223, 230

Cancian, F. M., 258

capitalism

and crisis, 159–63

and family, 125

mode of production, 103

reproduction of, 35–6

and socialization, 42, 43, 45–6

and women’s subordination, 41–7

Carey, G., 115, 228

Carr, E. H., 163

Carrigan, T., xv, 39, 40, 64, 65, 163

Carroll, J., 224

Carter, A., 39, 88

Carter, J., 126, 128

case studies, 76, 148, 200; see also ‘Barr’; ‘David’; ‘Markham’;
‘Prince’; ‘Wolf Man’

Casner, M. B., 237

Cass, B., 65

castration anxiety, 82, 205

Çatal Hüyük, 151

categorical gender theory, 54–61, 65, 135–9, 271

cathexis

defined and described, 98, 111–16, 118

and domestic power, 124

and feminism, 269

in future, 280, 290

and psychoanalysis, 212: displaced, 201–2; see also Oedipus

reciprocity of, 161

and street, 134

and structures, 181–2, 245

see also love; sexuality

Catholicism, 108, 160, 161, 255, 261

Cavendish, R., 45, 99, 101, 102, 162, 268, 269, 271

Central America see Latin and Central

Chafetz, J. S., 55

Chapkis, W., 20

Chesler, P., 124

Childe, V.G., 77, 144, 152

children see adolescents; psychoanalysis; socialization; sexual
reproduction and under family

Chile, 7

China

ancient, 152, 154

contraception, 126

extrinsic theories, 42

patriarchal atrocities, 58

secular morality, 23

women, 8, 9

Chodorow, N., 56, 167, 201–5, 283

choice of gender, 75–6; see also transsexualism; transvestism

Chomsky, N., 83, 98

chromosome testing, 75; see also genetics

Cicourel, A. V., 189

civilization see ancient; social

Clark, G., 163

Clark, W., 136, 237

class

and categorical theory, 59

and disease and malnutrition, 86

produced by state, 127–8

relations/struggle, 42–3, 46, 221

see also middle class; working class

Cliff, T., 42

clothing and adornment

emphasizing differences, 73, 79–80, 81, 151, 178, 181–2

history of, 151

and liberated femininity, 179

playing with, 289

and sexuality, 113, 289: in street, 133; symbolic purpose, 115;
transvestism, 75–6

and textile industry, 102, 103

Cockburn, C., 36, 105, 186, 216, 243–5

collective practices, 222; see also

projects

Collingwood, R. G., 163, 164

Collinson, D., 101, 243

Colombia, 9, 15

colonialism see imperialism

Comer, L., 36

competition

with men, 226, 228

in sport, 75, 85

compliance, 187

praxis of, 123

computer industry, 99, 100, 104

Confucianism, 154

Conlon, A., 164

Connell, R. W., xiv, xvii, 18, 39, 64–5, 88, 117, 142, 189

Connell, W. F., 122, 218

consciousness-raising, 230–2, 235

Constantinople, A., 172, 174, 218

constitution of interests, 263, 285

consumption, gender structure of, 103–4

contestation, 251

contraception, 86, 160, 261; see also abortion

control see power

Cooper, D., 36, 258

co-operative movement, 255, 266

Coote, A., 64

core

figure, mother as, 93, 124

in power structure of gender, 109

Corrigan, P., 88

cosmetics see clothing and adornment

Costello, J., 164

counter-position in role theory, 47

Court, D., xv, 64

CR (consciousness-raising), 230–2, 235

credit, 10–11

crime, 13–14, 128–9; see also police

criminalization of homosexuality, 28

crisis tendencies, 158–63, 164, 264, 285–6

Croll, E. J., 64

Cucchiari, S., 164

cultures/cultural

dynamics and sexual ideology, 250–3, 258

enrichment, 291

marginalization of women, 30

other see anthropology; ethnicity

and personality, 31

current frameworks of gender theory, 41–65

categorical theory, 54–61, 65

extrinsic theories, 41–7, 64

practice-based theory, towards, 61–4, 65

sex role theory, 47–54, 64–5

Curthoys, A., 106

cyclical practice, 141

Czechoslovakia, 7, 151

Dahrendorf, R., 48, 221

Dalla Costa, M., 46

Daly, M., 34, 55, 58

Dancis, B., 39

Dante, 24

Darwin, C., 26, 27, 29, 37

Dasey, R., 39

‘David’ (case study), 214, 233

David, D. S., 65

Davidson, B., 154

Davies, M. L., 43, 142, 258, 266

deconstruction of gender, 286–8, 289

Delphy, C., 34, 42, 56, 64, 105, 122, 138, 145, 163

Denmark, 261

Denno, D., 189

depression, 82

desemanticization, 173

design of work, 101–2

desire/desirability, 97, 112–13

determinism, 50, 67; see also natural

deviation

biological bases for, 57

of family, 51

from sex role, 30, 49, 50, 52

sexual, 27: see also bisexuality; homosexuality; transsexualism;
transvestism

and socialization, 194–5

dichotomy

biological see natural

public/private 248; see also family;

workplace

dictionaries, 242

diet, poor, 86, 108

dimorphism, 16, 55

Dinnerstein, D., xi, 65, 218

on childcare, 35, 202–3, 205, 227, 278

on emotional interactions, 202–3, 204, 209, 216–17

on masculinity and femininity, 205–6

on women’s liberation, 207–8

disarmament, 262

discourse and practice and sexual ideology, 241–5, 258

disease, 37, 86, 186, 233

division of labour

sexual, 29, 268–9, 285: and categorical theory, 56; in family, 121–3,
125; see also family, childcare and housework; history of 150, 157–58;
reform, 277–8

and sexual ideology, 243–4, 245

and structuralism, 91, 96, 98–100, 116

see also sex roles and under industry

social 103, 105

divorce, 108, 160, 261

Dixon, B., 246

Dobash, R. E., and R. P., 19

Dollard, J., 220

Dolto, F., 193

domestic see family

Donzelot, J., 108, 127, 148, 228

Dowsett, G. W., xiv, xvii, 18, 290

drama see media

Du Bois, E., 118

dual systems theory, 46, 128

duality of structure, 94–5

Duffy, M., 84

Dunbar, R., 54–5

Duncan, G., 12

Dworkin, A., 35, 55, 56, 255, 257

dynamic

in history, 224–8, 237

unconscious, 196–211, 218

and cultural and sexual ideology, 250–3, 258

Easlea, B., 57

ecology, 262

Edgar, D., 164

Edgar, P., 246

education, 1, 8–9, 19, 99, 192, 195–6

differential training, 100

and gender regime, 120

gender formation in, 195–6

physical, 87

reform, 25–6: counter-sexist, 49; and new feminism, 260–1

and sexual character, 177–9, 225

and sexual ideology, 244, 252

of women, 109, 160

Edwards, A. R., 51, 54, 65 ego, 208

egocentric interests, 285

Egypt, 7, 9

ancient, 144, 151–3

Ehrenreich, B., 46, 138, 161, 185, 250, 254

Eisenstein, H., 40, 58, 65, 67, 142, 271

Eisenstein, Z. R., 46, 128

El Salvador, 7

Ellis, A., 235

Ellis, H., 27

embedding, theory of, 201–4

empires see imperialism

empirical psychoanalysis, 211

employment see labour

Engels, F., 26, 44, 144, 145, 163

English, D., 250, 254

Enlightenment, 24–5

environment

damaged, 57–8

and sexual character, 175–7; see also social; structures

equal rights, movements for and against, 37, 49, 126, 136, 259–60

equality and reconstitution of gender, 286–91

Erhardt, A., 71

Erikson, E. H., 194, 200, 206

eroticism, 113

symbolic, 83–4

see also libido; pornography; sexual

Esterson, A., 121, 193, 212, 214, 216

ethnicity, 59, 71

ethnomethodology see anthropology

Etruscans, 144

Europe

ancient, 144, 150, 154

Eastern, 7, 8, 9, 151

Western, 7, 8, 9, 25, 87, 261: see also Britain; France; Germany; Italy

evolutionary biology, 26–7

pseudo see sociobiology

exchange system, 92–3

exclusion of women see invisibility

existential

phenomenology, 31; see also Sartre

psychoanalysis, 210, 211–17, 218 expectations, role, 47

expressive

sex roles, 32

traits, 167

extensive strategies, 284–6

extrinsic gender theory, 41–7, 64

Fairweather, H., 189

family

and categorical theory, 56

childcare and rearing: birth, 290; bonding, 38; and emotional
relationships, 93, 97, 114, 187; liberal parenting, 227; men and, 100,
106, 275, 283, 290; and socialization, 71, as structural basis of
feminism, 106; as women’s role, 35, 42, 45, 56, 96, 106, 122; and
working women, 80, 134–5; see also mothers; Oedipus

crisis of, 158–60, 161–2, 205

division of labour in, 121–2; 125, 134–5; see also childcare above;
housework below

housework, 45, 86, 96, 100, 225–6: new attitudes to, 280; technology of,
102; wages for, 35; and working women, 134–5

as institution, 121–5, 142, 192

nuclear: Chinese attempt to create, 42; as norm, 36, 38, 51–2, 57, 226;
as restraint on inequality, 105; and sociobiology, 72; unwanted, 94

power in, 36, 97, 110–11, 123–4, 276

prehistoric, 144–6, 150–1, 152

sex role, 32, 34, 51–2

violence in, 11, 13, 51, 58, 123

violence produced by, 123, 124–5

working class 93–4, 111, 121–2, 265–8

see also adolescents; children; divorce; kinship; marriage; mothers

Fanon, F., 158, 223

fantasy, 168, 185, 248, 256

Farrell, W., 65, 185, 234, 235

fascism, 131, 200, 224

fashion see clothing and adornment

fatality, 290–91

fatigue of political practice, 282

femininity

and cathexis, 112–13

constructed, 80

emphasized, 183, 186–8, 190, 255

and masculinity see personality; psychoanalysis and gender formation;
sexual character and under masculinity

structured in work, 103

see also gender; women

feminism, 162–3, 234

and capitalism, 42–3

and categorical theory, 54–5, 60, 62

and gay liberation, 32–7, 39

liberal, 33–4, 73–4, 193, 127, 227–8

and Marxism, 35, 40, 42, 45, 54, 56, 64, 127, 140

middle class, 269–72

and natural difference theories, 73–4

new, 260–1

radical, 34–5

and social production, 67

socialist, 29, 35, 287

working class, 265–70, 274

Fendrich-Salowey, G., 189

Fernbach, D., 37, 63, 115, 128, 152, 233, 278, 281

fertility and state, 130

fetishism, 84, 115, 289

fiction see media

films see media

Firestone, S., xii, 34, 54–5, 204, 217, 223

Foch, T T., 169

foot-binding, 58

Foucault, M., 37, 76, 111, 127, 148, 221, 228, 250, 254

Fox, D.J., 64

Fox, R., 67, 87

France

class struggle, 42

health care, 250

marriage, 105

military, 14, 126

revolution, 24

semiotics, 241

sex roles, 34, 175

Franzway, S., 50, 65

Freud, S./Freudian, x, xii, 49, 82

on ambivalence, 203

biological determinism of, 67

on bisexuality and homosexuality, 27, 28

and cathexis, 112

on emotional conflict, 27

on femininity and masculinity, 168, 173, 200, 202–6, 209

Left, 36, 127

on primary process, 194

on psychic and social, 197–9, 210–11

on repression, 207–8

on self-knowledge, 212

on symptomatic acts, 219

on ‘Wolf Man’, 204, 209, 221

see also Oedipus; psychoanalysis

Friday, N., 114, 115

Friedan, B., 33, 37, 48, 74, 142, 193

friendship, 85, 109; see also solidarity

Fromm, E., 200, 201, 224

functionalism, 62

future of social theory of gender, 281–8

and present, 273–5

Gable, C., 256

Gabriel, R. H., 237

Gagnon, J. H., 111

Gamarnikow, E., 101

Game, A., xv, 36, 99, 104, 225, 226

Gandhi, I., 159

gangs, 133

Gardiner, N., 202

Garfinkel, H., 76

gay people see homosexuality

gender

abolition and reconstruction, 286–93

adjustment, 33

ambiguity, 289

attribution, 75–6, 78–81

defined and institutionalized, 139–41

dynamic see history

formation see psychoanalysis

identity, 194

order, 91, 98–9, 134–9, 142

patterns, 31–2

regimes and institutions, 99, 120, 119–42, 255; definition and
institutionalization of gender, 139–41; gender order, 134–9, 142;
street, 132–4, 142; see also family; state

relations, structure of, 16–17, 79: see also gender regimes; history;
structures

scaling see tests

theory see current frameworks; history, roots; natural

Genet, J., 84, 214

genetics, 98

explanation for differences, 69–71, 75

genital

mutilation, 58

primacy in sexuality, 161–2

valorization, 213

George, J., 260

Germany

Frankfurt School, 200, 207, 224

personality, 176

prison and military, 14

women in, 7, 9; movement, 29, 270

Giddens, A., 62, 94–5, 117, 140–1

Gilder, G., 38, 68

Gilding, M., 96, 122, 225

Gilgamesh, Epic of, 153

Gilman, C. P., 252

Gintis, H., 237

Godelier, M., 146

Goffman, E., 79

Goldberg, H., 33, 235

Goldberg, S., 38, 69–70, 74

Goldhamer, H., 189

Goldman, E., 112, 113, 123, 134, 241

Goldmann, L., 98, 245

Goode, W.J., 223

Groot, M., 119, 141

Gordimer, N., 61, 256

Gough, K., 146

Gouldner, A. W., 254

Gramsci, A., 184, 254, 255, 263

Grant, C., 182

Greece, ancient, 144, 154

Greek families in Australia, 123–4

Greene, G. and C., 88

Greer, G., 243

Griffin, C., 18, 180

Griffin, S., 55

guilt, 235

Habermas, J., 77, 136, 158, 203

Hacker, A., 20

Hall, R., 86

Hamilton, A., 125

Hamilton, R., 241

Hargreaves, D. H., 178

Harley, C., 169

Harper, J., 110

Harré, R., 219, 220

Hartmann, H. I., 40, 46

Hartsock, N., 46

hatred and love, 114–15

see also Oedipus

Haug, F., 223

health care, 45, 108

collective, 281–92

see also medicalization

Hegel, G. W. F., 273, 292

hegemonic masculinity, 183–6, 190, 199, 206, 215

Helmreich, R. L., 171, 172, 174

Henriques, J., 220

Herdt, G. H., 72

hermaphroditism, 291

Herrick, R., 83

heterosexuality

as category, 137, 159, 161

dismantling, 161–2

as front, 233

presumed, 36

see also sexual

Hicks, N., 88

hidden nature of women’s experience, 188, 247

Hirschfield, M., 28

history, 143–64, 273–4

course of, 150–8, 164

crisis tendencies, 158–63, 164

dynamic in, 224–8, 237

historicity, 63–4: and origins, 26, 143–50, 163–4

process concept, 198

roots of contemporary gender theory, 23–40: feminism and gay liberation,
32–7, 39; reaction and paradox, 37–8; science and radicalism, 26–9;
secular morality, 23–6; sex roles and syntheses, 29–32

textbook, biased, 229

women invisible in, 188, 247

Hitler, A., 131, 142

Hittites, 144

Hoch, P., 224

Hollway, W., 241

home see family

homosexuality/lesbianism

and categorical theory, 62–3, 137

egalitarian, 116

and feminism, 32–7, 39

frequency of, 51

history of, 147–9

homophobia, 12–13, 19, 60: sanctions, 28, 72

and jobs, 103

liberation and ‘coming out’, 32–7, 39, 62, 110, 148, 162–3, 231–4, 248,
260, 262, 283–4

as mental illness, 250–1

as natural, 200, 246: genetic explanation, 69

production of, 97

and psychoanalysis, 28

social definition, 80–1

solidarity, 182: see also liberation above

and state, 28, 126, 129, 130, 131, 136, 159

and subordination, 186

as symbol of disorder, 248

Horkheimer, M., 200

hormones and aggression, 38, 70

Horney, K., xv, 200

hostility see antagonism

house-husbands, 100: see also family, housework

housewife as construction, 226

Howe, L. K., 36

Humphries, M., 252

Hungary, 7

Hunt, P., 110, 121, 243

Hyde, J. S., 189

hysteria, 82

id, 208

ideology, sexual see under sexual

illiteracy, 8

images see under media

imperialism 86–7, 157–58

income/wages see under working women

India

ancient, 152

contraception, 126

education, 8, 9

illiteracy, 8

patriarchal atrocities, 58

secular morality, 23

women in power, 15

individual see personality

Indonesia, 8

industry

power in, 109

and sexual character, 180–1

sexual division of labour in, 99–106, 243, 260, 269

inequality see power

Inglis, A., 158

institutions

crisis of, 159–60

and personality, 222

and psychoanalysis, 192–3

violent see military; police; prison

see also gender regimes

instrumental sex roles, 32

instrumental traits, 167

intellectuals and gender order, 254–7, 263–4

intelligence, 71, 98

intensive strategies, 281–4

interactionism, symbolic, 62

interests

articulation of, 262–5

constitution of, 263, 285

formation of, 102–3

and ideologists, 253–8

social, 137–8

invention/inventiveness, 94, 95

inventories, structural, 91: see also gender order

invisibility of women, 188, 247

Iran, 126, 260

Ireland, 136, 195–6

Irigaray, L., 183, 202

Jacklin, C. N., 33, 66, 73–4, 87, 88, 169, 170, 189

James, S., 46

Japan

education, 8, 9

personality, 176

prison, 14

women in power, 15

women’s wages, 7

Jardine, A., 67

Johnson, O., 169

Johnston, C., 163

Johnston, J., 54, 65, 162

Jones, E., 223

Joyce, J., 195–6

Jung, C. G., 114, 175, 206–7, 209

Kabyle society in Algeria, 138

Kamin, L. J., 88

Kelly, P., 65

Kenyon, K., 164

Kessler, S., xiv, xvii, 18, 75–6, 78, 141

Key, E., 195, 218

Kidd, H., 255, 256, 258

Kinsey, A. C., 51

kinship, 26

and sex roles, 31

structural view of, 92, 98

as system of categories, 79

see also family

Kippax, S., xv, 117

Klein, V., 39, 168, 183, 245, 253, 254, 258

Klima, B., 164

Knights, D., 101, 243

knowledge, sociology of, 245, 253

Kollontai, A., 29, 39, 136

Komarovsky, M., 30, 32, 39, 48, 52, 110, 111, 122, 193

Konrad, G., 254

Korda, M., 101, 243

Kosik, K., 62, 79, 88, 211

Kovel, J., 88, 218

Krafft-Ebing, R. von, 27

Kramer, S. N., 164

Kristeva, J., 241

Kuhn, A., 64

labelling, 52

labour

market/jobs, 6–7, 9–10, 19

and structure, 99–106, 118

see also division of labour; equal opportunities; industry; working

Lafitte, P., 173, 189

Laing, R. D., 121, 123, 173, 193, 195, 212, 214, 222, 233, 259

Lane, D., 138

language

sexist, 242, 247

structure of, 94

‘Larry’ (case study), 200

Lasch, C., 254

Latin and Central America, 7, 8, 9, 75, 25, 152, 154

laundries, communal, 102

layering, 209

Lee, J., xv, 39, 64, 65

Lefebvre, H., 65, 116

legislation: equal opportunities and rights, 37, 49, 259–60

LeGuin, U., 287

Lepervanche, M. de, 68, 246

lesbians see homosexuality

Lessing, D., 61

Lette, K., 115, 228

Lévi-Strauss, C., 45, 62, 92–3, 98, 202

Lewis, G., 182

Lewontin, R. C., 88

liberal feminism, 33–4, 73–4, 127, 193, 227–8

liberated zones, 281–2

liberation, 270–2, 284: see also feminism; mobilization and under
homosexuality

libido, 207–9, 212–13: see also sexual life history analysis, 27–8,
219–23,

236–7

linking concept, gender as, 140

Lipman-Blumen, J., 65

Lippert, J., 180

literature see media

Lloyd, S., 163

Locke, J., 131

love, 185–6

and hate, 114–15: see also Oedipus

project of, 216–17

Lowe, J., 50, 65

Lukács, G., 245

Lukes, S., 118

Maccoby, E. E., 33, 66, 73–4, 87, 88, 169, 170, 189

McConville, M., 190

McGill, D., 65

machinery, 109–10

Mcintosh, M., 128, 163

‘Mack’ (case study), 200

McKenna, W., 75–6, 78

MacKinnon, C. A., 128

McRobbie, A., 243

Magarey, S., 226

magazines see media

Mahler, V., 125

majorities, construction of, 285

Malinowski, B., 30

malnutrition, 86, 108

Mannheim, K., 200, 251–4

Mannoni, O., 158, 223

Marcuse, H., 63, 83, 115, 127, 161, 198, 200–1, 207, 228, 288

‘Markhams’ (case study), 266–7, 268

marriage, 223

divorce, 108, 160, 261

gender structure of, 105

and psychoanalysis 197

and role theory, 48

and state, 130

see also family

Marshall, T. H., 160

Martin, W., 39

Marx, K./Marxism, ix, xii, 17, 96, 145, 262, 272, 292

on class relations and modes of production, 45, 103

and feminism, 35, 40, 42, 45, 54, 56, 64, 127, 140

and psychoanalysis, 200

masculinity

and cathexis, 112–13

constructed, 81, 83–6

and femininity see personality; psychoanalysis and gender formation;
sexual; tests

hegemonic, 183–6, 190, 199, 206, 215

and power, 107–9

protest, 199, 207

and state, 126, 128, 130, 155–7

see also gender; hegemonic; men; patriarchy; violence

mass media see media

matriarchy, primitive, 145

Matthews, J. J., 63, 98–9, 225

May, R., 67, 168

Mead, M., 30–2, 33, 72, 119, 176

media (literature and mass)

and capitalism, 45

fantasy and science fiction, 256, 292–3

and gender relations, 61

images: of feminism, 45, 267; of masculinity, 184–5, 236; of women, 48,
102, 113, 179, 188, 226, 246–8, 289; see also advertisements

sexist and homophobic, 108, 229 see also images above

and sexuality: cathexis, 115–16; character, 182; ideology, 246–9, 252;
love, 217, 248; morality, 24; symbolic eroticism, 83–4; see also images
above

medicalization of sexual ideology, 250–1, 254, 279; see also health care

Mellaart, J., 151

men

as category, 137–8

movement, xi, 34, 234–6, 252, 264, 285–6

see also gender; masculinity; sexual

menstruation, 82

mental illness, 197, 213, 250–1

Mesopotamia, 151

Metcalfe, A., 252

Meulenbelt, A., 46, 61, 115, 256

Mexico, 75, 125

Meyer-Bahlburg, H., 71

middle class

and categorical theory, 59

feminism, 269–72

Middle East, 7, 9, 126, 151, 260

Mieli, M., 36, 162, 208, 233, 283

migration and decline of patriarchy, 123–4

Miles, K., 42–3

military, 14, 20, 107, 109, 126, 129, 135–6, 152–3

Mill, J.S., 25, 131

Miller, C., 242

Miller, P., 192

Miller, S. M., 195

Millett, K., 259

miners’ wives, 143, 270

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 171

Minoans, 144

Mitchell, J.

on kinship, 92–3

on patriarchy, 43, 241

on psychoanalysis, 202, 203, 207

on social reproduction, 35, 64

structuralist model, 56, 62, 96, 149

MMPI see Minnesota Multiphasic etc.

mobilization 284; see also feminism; liberation; men, movement

modelling, structural, 91, 98: see also sex roles; socialization and
under sexual character

modes of production, 103

Mohammed Ali, 185

Molyneux, M., 19, 40

Money, J., 51, 65 Monroe, M., 188

morality

crisis of, 160–1

panic about AIDS, 37

secular, 23–6

Morgan, L. H., 26

Morgan, M., 123–5, 188, 255–7, 261

Morocco, 125

Morris, D., 68, 87

Morris, J., 134

Morrison, P., 234

mortality rates, 108

Moses, J. C., 109

mothers, 202, 204

as core figures, 93, 124

relationships with, 38, 93, 114, 187

see also family, childcare, Oedipus; women

Mowbray, M., 230

multiple models of sexual character, 175–9, 189

Mycenaeans, 144

myths, 98

love, 217

mental illness, 213

of Origin, 26, 143–50, 163–4

narcissism, 115

National Organization of Women (USA), 284

natural/nature

deviance as, 28, 57, 200

difference theories, 17, 26, 64, 66–88, 137, 245–6, 253, 280, 290:
additive, 73–5; objections to, 74–7; practical transformation of, 83–7,
88; sociobiology, 66, 68–73; transcendence and negation, 78–82, 88;

homosexuality as, 200

and science, additive concept of, 73–5

sex roles as, 50–1, 53

and social, conflict between, 197–8

negation of body and transcendence, 78–82, 88

neurosis, 197

neutral arbiter, state seen as, 127

New Caledonia, 126

new feminism, 260–1

New Guinea (Papua), 72, 158

New Left, 100, 160, 203, 217, 227, 271

New Right, 38, 126, 136, 229–30, 236

New Zealand, 25, 126

Newby, H., 110, 122

Newland, K., 16, 19, 20

newspapers see media

Nichols, J., 34, 235

Nightingale, F., 101

Niland, C., 19

norm/normative: not standard, 51–4: see also family, nuclear;
heterosexuality

North America, 28, 75, 154; see also Canada; United States

novels see media

nuclear complexes, 206

nursing, 101, 181

Nye, F. I., 65

object, woman as, 92–3, 108, 113

Ochiltree, G., 164

O’Dell, F., 138

O’Donnell, C., xv, 36, 100

Oedipus complex, 27, 112, 124

and castration fear, 213

and cathexis, 205

and embedding theories, 204

and guilt, 198

non-Oedipal nuclear complex, 141

twofold nature of, 114

universality assumed, 30, 206, 218

see also Freud; psychoanalysis

office, work in, 101, 225, 243

Olympics, 75, 85

oppression, collective project of, 215–16

order, gender, 91, 98–9, 134–9, 142

organic intellectual, 263

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 10, 34

Origin myths, 26, 143–50, 163–4

Orwell, G., 29, 39, 65

Otto, R., 236

Owen, R., 25

Padgug, R. A., 147

Pahl, J. M., 223

Pahl, R. E., 100, 122, 135, 223

Pakistan, 128, 151, 260

Palestine, 151

Panama, 7

Papua see New Guinea

paradox and reaction, 37–8

parenting see family, childcare; mothers

parliaments

women in, 15–16

see also power; state

Parsons, A., 124, 141, 206, 218

Parsons, T., 30–3, 38–9, 46, 49, 53, 62, 72, 119, 161, 167–8

Pateman, C., 128, 130

paternity leave, 290; see also men

patriarchy, 34–5, 264, 285

and capitalism, 43–6

and categorical theory, 55, 56

Chinese attempts to change, 42

and exchange system, 93

in family, 123–4

and state, 128–30

see also masculinity; power

patriotism, 86–7; see also imperialism

patterns, gender, 31–2

Paul, St, 222, 236

penis, valorization of, 213

Perchenok, Y., 20

Pericot, L., 164

Perkins, R., 76

personality, 30–1, 287

as practice, 219–37: historical dynamic in, 224–8, 237; politics of,
228–36, 237; society and life history, 219–23, 236–7;

and sex roles, 48–9

see also sexual character; tests

phenomenology, existential, 31; see also Sartre

physical

body see natural

sense of masculinity, 83–6

Piaget, J., 92, 98, 117, 289

Piggott, S., 163

Plato, 292

playing with gender, 289

Pleck, E. H., 147

Pleck, J. H., 33, 65, 147

Plomin, R., 169

Plummer, K., 236

poetry see media

Pogrebin, L. C., 237

Poland, 7, 8, 9

Polatnick, M., 106

police, 11–14, 20, 109, 129, 133, 136

politics/political

and body, history of, 83, 86–7

and categorical theory, 60

economy of masculinity, 106

of personality as practice, 228–36, 237

practice, 259–72: articulation of interests, 262–5; liberation
movements, 270–2; scope of sexual politics, 259–62; working-class
feminism, 265–70

of reform and sex role theory, 49

sexual see gender

women in, 15–16, 20

see also state

polymorphous gender, 288

Poole, R., 164

pornography, 261–2

campaigns against, 167

and categorical theory, 55, 58

fetish, 84

poverty, feminization of, 136

Power, M., 56, 101

power

absent in role theory, 52

of adults, 195, 199

and analysis of gender, 34–5

conflicts of interest, 54–61

and masculinity, 107–9

physical, 85

and sex roles, 32

and structure, 107–11, 118, 269

top jobs, 10, 15–16, 20, 107, 126

see also patriarchy; state; violence; and under family

practical transformation of body, 83–7, 88

practice

-based gender theory, towards, 61–4, 65

and discourse and sexual ideology, 241–5, 258

and institutions, 140–1

natural, 78–82

routine, 203

social see natural

and structure, 62

structure of power as, 107–8; see also personality as practice

practico-inert practices, 81

prefigurative politics, 277

prehistoric family, 144–6, 150–1, 152

present and future, 278–93

primitive societies see ancient

‘Prince, Delia’ (case study), 1–6, 17, 18, 111, 120, 121, 193, 223, 266

Pringle, R., xv, 36, 88, 99, 104, 142, 225, 226

prisons, 14, 20, 109

Pritchard, J. B., 164

private see public/private

process, gender as, 140

processes, ideological, 245–9, 258

production

modes of, 103

relation of, 43–6, 56

projects, collective 263, 264, 270–2

of oppression, 215–16

see also existential psychoanalysis; liberation; mobilization;
solidarity

property see object

prostitution, 103, 134

protest, masculine, 199, 207

pseudo-biology/pseudo-evolutionism see sociobiology

psychoanalysis

and ambivalence, 114

and family, 124

and gender formation, 191–218; classical, 196–211, 218; existential,
211–17, 218; see also socialization

life history analysis, 27–8

and personality, 31

and sex roles, 30

and social reproduction, 45

see also Freud

psychology, 30

public/private dichotomy, 248; see also family; workplace

race see ethnicity

radical/radicalism, 271

feminism, 34–5

politics, 230, 282

and science, 26–9

Ram, K., 58

rape, 11, 55, 56, 107, 128

Raymond, J. G., 65

reaction and paradox, 37–8

Reagan, R., 136, 236, 262

reciprocity, 113

reconstruction

of gender, 286, 289–93

of personality, 230–4

Red Collective, 111, 114–15, 210–11, 218

reductionism, biological see natural; sociobiology

regimes see under gender

regulation and soft domination by state, 127; see also legislation

Reich, C. A., 224

Reich, W., 127, 199, 200

Reiche, R., 207

Reid, E., 119, 141

reification, 245: of gender scaling, 174–5

Reiger, K. M., 96, 132, 225, 250, 254

Reik, T., 67, 168, 200

Reiter, R. R., 146

relational interests, 285

relations

of production, 43–6, 56; see also under gender

and morality, 23–4, 25

and sexual ideology, 250, 251, 255–6

and women, 108; see also Catholicism

religion, 25

repression, 31, 114, 197–208

reproduction

of capitalism, 35–6

social, 35–6, 43–6

as structure, 96

see also under sexual

resistance, 52–3

Rice, M. S., 86

Rich, A., 62, 141, 161

Richards, L., 106, 110

Riesman, D., 167, 224

ritual and sexuality, 84

Robinson, P. A., 39, 254

rock music, 284; see also media

Roheim, G., 30

role theory, 47–8, 50, 170; see also sex roles

role-reversal, 277–8

Roman Empire, 144, 154

romanticism, 248; see also love

Rose, S., 88

Rosen, S. A., 19

Rosenberg, R., 39, 168, 258

Rosenthal, R., 189

Ross, B. L., 258

Rousseau, J.-J., 197

Rowbotham, S., 39, 149, 188, 216, 247, 282

Rubin, D. B., 189

Rubin, G., 16, 56, 62, 79–80, 88, 92–3, 140

Rubin, L. B., 110, 121, 123, 193

Russell, G., 100

Russia, 221; see also Soviet Union

Ryan, E., 164

Sade, M. de, 24, 39

Sahlins, M., 68–9

Samoa, 176

sanctions in role theory, 47, 50

Sargent, D., 163

Sartre, J.-P., xv, 62, 65, 88, 195

on consciousness and motivation, 210

on existential psychoanalysis, 211, 212–15, 218; bad faith, 213; class
dynamics, 215

on practico-inert and seriality, 80–1, 137, 256–7

on unification, 221, 222

Sawer, M., 20

Sayers, J., 69

scaling, gender see tests

schizophrenia, 121

Schlegel, A., 55

Schmidt, J., 88

schools see education

science/technology

appropriate, 102

and masculinity, 58, 279

nature and, additive concept of, 73–5

and power, 109–10

pseudo-, see sociobiology

and radicalism, 26–9

see also medicalization

Scientific Humanitarian Committee, 28

Scotland, 11, 247

Scutt, J. A., 19, 260

Seale, P., 190

Secord, P. F., 220

secular morality, 23–6

Segal, L., 100, 118, 242, 271

Seidler, V., 234

self see personality

self-knowledge, difficulty of, 212

semiotics, 45, 241

Sennett, R., 192

seriality, 81

sex roles, 33–4

deviation from, 30, 49, 50, 52

history of, 146–7

and psychoanalysis, 192

socialization and, 33, 34, 49, 73

syntheses, 29–32

theory, 47–54, 64–5, 73

see also division of labour; sexual

sexism see sexual ideology

sexual/sexuality

bisexuality, 27, 28

character, 167–90, 224–5, 286; multiple models, 175–9, 189; reworking,
281; unitary models and sex difference research, 167–71, 189; see also
hegemonic; femininity, emphasized

crisis of, 160–2

differences in work see division of labour

fetishism, 84, 115, 284

harassment, 12, 260, 269

history of, 147

ideology, 241–58: cultural

dynamics, 250–3, 258;

discourse and practice, 241–5,

258; ideologists and interests, 253–8; processes, 245–9, 258

intercourse, 51, 82

marketing of, 103, 104; see also advertisements

morality, 23–6, 37, 160–1

non-heterosexual see deviation; homosexuality

pornography, 55, 58, 84, 167, 261–2

and psychoanalysis, 197, 200, 204–5, 207–10; see also Oedipus

rape, 11, 55, 56, 107, 128

reproduction, 34, 72, 81, 286

sexology, 27

socially constructed see cathexis

and state, 126

stratification, 55

as structure, 96

taboos, 112, 161

see also cathexis; gender; politics, practice; present and future; sex
roles; and under media

Shakespeare, W., 24

Shaver, S., xv, 108, 132

Sichtermann, B., 216

significance testing, 168–9

Silverstein, C., 237

Silverstein, M., 195

Simon, W., 111

Smith, C., 249

Smith, K., 242

Smith-Rosenberg, C., 109

Smout, T. C., 102, 258

Snodgrass, J., 235, 252

social/society

bases of sexual politics see gender determinism, 50

division of labour, 103, 105

interest, 137–8

and life history, 219–23, 236–7

and nature, conflict between, 197–8

practice see natural

production of sexual differences, 67

reproduction, 35–6, 43–6

space, 276

structure, gender as see gender relations

as unnatural, 78

socialism, 29, 35, 104, 292

socialization

and capitalism, 42, 43, 45–6

and psychoanalysis, 191–6, 218

and sex roles, 33, 34, 49, 73

as structure, 96

sociobiology, 38, 66, 68–73

sociology, 30, 31, 62

of knowledge of, 245, 253

soft domination by state, 127

South America see Latin and Central America

South Korea, 9

Soviet Union, 289

extrinsic theories, 42

family, 136

militarism, 109

women, 15, 29; workers, 8, 9, 126, 138

see also Russia

space, 281–3

Spain, 150

Spence, J., 171, 172, 174, 241, 247

Spender, D., 65

Spenser, E., 84

sport, 75, 85

Stacey, J., 64

Stalin, 29, 217

Stanley, J. P., 237

Stapledon, O., 290

state, 11–18, 19, 45, 259

control, 96, 109; see also legislation; military; police; prisons

crisis of, 160

history of, 152–3

as institution, 125–32, 135–6, 142

reconstruction of, 155–7

welfare, 127, 129, 131–3; cuts, 135–6, 230, 260

see also politics; power

Stearns, P. N., 38, 147

Steinmann, A., 64

stereotypes, 33–4, 73; see also sex roles

Stevens, G. L., 87

Stevens, J., 64

Stille, A., 20

Stolcke, V., 246

Stoller, R.J., 194

Stopes, M., 86

strategy, present and future, 280–86

Straus, M. A., 19, 51

street as institution, 132–4, 142

Strober, M. H., 55

structures/structuralism

and anthropology, 45

and cathexis, 111–16, 118

and labour, 99–106, 118

loss with abolition of gender, 288–9

and power, 107–11, 118

and practice, 62

and sexual character, 180–3, 189

social gender as see gender relations

structural analysis, 92–9, 117–18

system and composition, 116–17

subordination

of men, 186

of women, 41–7, 73, 92–3, 96, 183

see also sex roles

suffrage see voting

Sullivan, E. V., 220, 223

Sumer, 144, 151, 152–3

super-ego, 197, 208

Sweden, 87

symbolic

eroticism, 83–4

interactionism, 62

purposes of sex, 115

symbolization, 241–2, 248

system idea of, 46

systems theory, 62

Szasz, T. S., 213

Szelenyi, I., 254

taboos, sexual, 112, 161

Taft, J., 30

taxation, 230, 260

Taylor, B., 39

Taylor, F., 227, 228, 237

Taylor, G. R., 146

technology see science

television see media

testosterone, 70; see also hormones

tests of sexual character and

personality, 30, 47, 168, 169, 171–5, 189, 221

textiles see clothing

Thatcher, M., 159

theatre

homosexuals in, 103

street as, 133

see also media

theory see gender theory

therapy for men, 235–6, 264

third sex, 285

Third World, 271, 280

aid to, 18

industry, 158

radical movements, 104

industry, 158

Thomas, D., 39

Thomism, 17

Thompson, D., 65

Thompson,. E. P., 65

Tickamyer, A. R., 65

Tieger, T., 87

Tiger, L., 68, 87, 145

Tolkein, J. R. R., 248

Tolson, A., 43, 59, 175, 235

Tomasetti, G., 266

top jobs see power

Touraine, A., 126, 163

tradesmen, 181

training see education

transcendence and negation of body, 78–82, 88

transformation of body, practical, 83–7, 88

transsexualism, 57, 76, 81, 148

transvestism, 75–6

Trigger, B. G., 164

Tristan and Isolde, 24, 217

Trotskyites, 42

Ulrichs, K., 28

unconscious, dynamic, 196–211, 218

unification, 222

unions, 29, 45, 214, 260, 292

unitary models of sexual character, 167–71, 189, 206

United Nations

Asian and Pacific Centre for Women and Development, 59

International Decade for Women, 260

United States, 16

anthropology, 31

black people, 160

capitalism, 44

education, 8, 9, 228–9

equality see equal rights

extrinsic theories, 42

family, 48, 121, 122, 123, 139, 193

health care, 250

homosexuality, 36, 37, 51, 162, 232, 260

illiteracy, 8

industry/workplace, 101, 109

intrinsic theories, 62

marriage, 111

men: flight from commitment, 161; movement, xi, 34, 235; role models,
185

military, 14, 109, 126

New Left, 160, 203, 227

New Right, 126, 136, 229–30, 236

personality, 221, 227, 228

pornography, 58, 262

religion, 262

sex roles, 30, 33, 34, 38, 53, 180 tests, 169, 171

sexual ideology, 243, 247, 255

state, 126, 128, 131, 136; welfare cuts, 37

street life, 133

violence, 11, 12, 13–14

women: movement, 24–5, 29–30, 44, 203, 230, 234, 284; in power, 15;
working, 9, 10

universalism, false, 58, 271

urban civilizations, history of, 154, 155

Utopianism, 26, 29, 251–2, 264, 292

Vatsyayana, 115

Vikings, 155

violence, 11–14, 19, 37, 85, 96, 128, 249, 260

domestic see under family

and masculinity, 57–8, 85–6; hegemonic, 184, 185

organized see military; police; prisons

and power, 107

voluntarism, 62

voting rights for women, 24–5, 131

wages see under working women

Wajcman, J., 268

Wallace, A., 19

Walter, A., 40

war

and conscription, 135

genetic explanation of, 69

Ware, H., 107

Wayne, J., 185

wealth, 6–7, 18–19

accumulation of, 105–6

weapons, 107; see also military

Weeks, J., 39, 111, 127, 147, 250

Welch, R., 256

welfare, state, 127, 129, 131–3

cuts, 135–6, 230, 260

Wesley, F. and C., 64

Wesson, G., 43

West, J., 141

White, P., 61, 202–3, 256

White, R. W., 122, 221

wife-burning, 58

Wilde, O., 28

Williams, C., 45, 110

Williams, T. R., 189

Willis, E., 40, 65

Willis, P., 88, 178, 180

Willmott, P., 32, 93

Wilson, E., 141, 230

Wilson, E. O., 69–70, 73–4, 87

Wilson, J. A., 164

‘Wolf Man’, 204, 209, 221

Wolfe, S. J., 237

Wollstonecraft, M., 24, 25, 131, 241

Wolpe, A.-M., 64

women

as category, 137–8

invisible, 188, 247

voting rights for, 24–5, 131

see also education; femininity; feminism; gender; mothers; sexual;
working women

Women Against Pit Closures, 143, 270

Women Who Want to be Women, 262

Women’s Christian Temperance Union, 25

Women’s Co-operative Guild, 255

work see labour

Working class

and capitalism, 42

and categorical theory, 59 education, 1, 193

family, 93–4, 111, 121–2, 265–8

feminism, 265–70, 279

movements, 29

and physical aggression and toughness, 85, 109

women, 35

working women, 35–6, 45, 162, 260

numbers of, 9, 52

part-time, 134–5

wages, 6–7, 8–10, 18–19, 42, 45, 96, 103, 162, 267

see also division of labour

workplace, 243–4; see also industry; labour; office; working women

World Bank, 8–9

writing, 151–2

Wylie, P., 248

Yates, L., 252

Young, I., 64

Young, K., 16, 125

Young, M., 32, 93

Zaretsky, E., 104

Zetkin, C., 29

Ziller, A., 49

zones, liberated, 281–2

Index by Ann Hall
