The Mystery in Broad Daylight
Gender Formation and Psychoanalysis

How are the structures of personal life discussed in the last chapter
formed? There are two main approaches to this question that are
compatible with a social analysis of gender. Socialization theory treats
gender formation as the acquisition and internalization of social norms.
It stresses continuity between social context and personality, and the
homogeneity of personality itself. Psychoanalysis treats gender
formation as the effect of an encounter with power and necessity rather
than normative prescriptions. It emphasizes discontinuity between social
context and personality, and points to radical division within
personality. I will make only a brief examination of socialization
theory as it quickly appears inadequate to the problem; then turn to the
two main branches of psychoanalysis that offer some grip on the
question.

Socialization

In both academic social science and the popular literature on gender in
the last two decades the commonest approach has been through concepts of
social moulding or ‘socialization’.

Schematically, the main argument runs like this. The new-born child has
a biological sex but no social gender. As it grows older society
provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviour
appropriate to the one sex or the other. Certain agencies of
socialization – notably the family, the media, the peer group and the
school – make these expectations and models concrete and provide the
settings in which they are appropriated by the child. The sequence of
agencies may be important and distinctions between primary and secondary
socialization are often made. Various mechanisms of learning come into
play: conditioning, instruction, modelling, identification, rule
learning. There is much debate in the gender-socialization literature
about the relative importance of these mechanisms. Whatever the details,
the social models or prescriptions are internalized to a greater or
lesser degree. The result is a gender identity that in the usual case
corresponds to the social expectations for that sex. Some cases will
‘deviate’ because of the abnormal functioning of an agency of
socialization (for example, a father-absent family), or because of
exceptional biology. The products of these deviations are homosexuals,
transsexuals, intersexes and others whose gender identity fails to
correspond in the usual way to their sex.

A close affinity between socialization concepts and sex role theory is
obvious. The social prescriptions are often called ‘norms’ and the
process of social learning is often called ‘role learning’, ‘role
acquisition’, or ‘sex role socialization’. To this extent the critique
of role theory stated in chapter 3 applies in full force. Role-learning
theory is internally incoherent, and incapable of providing a genuinely
social analysis of social process. But though they are commonly phrased
in sex role terms, strictly speaking the main elements of socialization
analyses can be separated from the role framework and need to be
considered in their own right.

The notion of a school, family, peer group or television network as an
‘agency of socialization’ implies a definite script, a charter under
which the agency acts on behalf of the society, and a degree of
consensus about what it is to do and how to do it. Such smooth pictures
of socializing agencies are given by most of the literature on sex-role
socialization, including the writings of liberal feminism.

Both historical evidence about the institutions involved, and close-up
studies of their contemporary working, oblige us to reject this picture
of consensual agencies acting on behalf of the social order as a whole.
Social history shows schools and families often in conflict with each
other and with larger social structures. Examples are Richard Sennett’s
Chicago study Families Against the City, and Pavla Miller’s Long
Division which shows how the mass school system in South Australia was
imposed as an intervention into working-class families and in the teeth
of considerable resistance from them.

Nor are these institutions internally homogeneous, consensual, or even
roughly consistent in their dealings with the people being ‘socialized’.
Psychoanalytic studies of families such as Laing and Esterson’s Sanity,
Madness and the Family and Françoise Dolto’s Dominique show intolerable
contradictions in the pressures and demands placed on children. These
cases are, by definition, exceptional in the intensity of the pressures
they generate. But other evidence goes far to show that internal
conflict and cross-pressure is quite normal. Examples are American
research on families like Mirra Komarovsky’s Blue-Collar Marriage and
Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain, and the British research on
working-class schools cited earlier. The classic of liberal feminism,
Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique, was precisely an exploration of
contradiction within the American bourgeois family. When institutions
appear consensual and consistent, closer examination is likely to show
this is because a great deal of energy has been put into overriding
conflicts of interest to create a front of harmony and good order. This
is shown for ruling-class schools in Teachers’ Work, and is evident in
case studies of families like the Princes in chapter 1.

These data have considerable implications for our understanding of the
way institutions shape people. The notion of ‘socialization’ rests on
the idea of internalization through one or other of the mechanisms
described by the psychology of learning. What is produced inside the
person is a psychological structure that reproduces or reflects the
characteristics of the socializing agency. The notion of ‘modelling’,
taking on the attributes of the socializer, encapsulates this feature of
socialization theory.

This becomes untenable as a general conception of gender formation once
we recognize the fact of contradiction within the process. This
eliminates the possibility of mechanical causation: the only mechanical
outcome of contradiction would be randomness, and the evidence will not
support that. Instead it introduces two possibilities, both of which
lead away from ‘socialization’ notions to something radically different.
One is the production within the person of psychological structures
qualitatively different from the properties of the institution or
milieu. This is the basis of classical psychoanalysis. The other is the
possibility of constitutive choice in a field opened up by
contradiction. This is the basis of existential psychoanalysis.

The popularity of socialization notions in academic research has been
supported by two occupational blindnesses, the inability of sociologists
to recognize the complexities of the person, and the unwillingness of
psychologists to recognize the dimension of social power. Both groups
have been willing to settle for a consensual model of intergenerational
transfer – playing down conflict and ignoring violence – and for a
consensual model of the psychological structure produced.

The notion of a ‘gender identity’ at the core of femininity and
masculinity is the psychological counterpart of the notion of a ‘sex
role’ into which one is socialized. Indeed its basis seems to be the act
of recognizing oneself as the kind of person that conventional images of
femininity and masculinity define. Accordingly investigators like Robert
Stoller trace the foundations of gender identity back to the first years
of life, when the child is introduced to definitions of femaleness and
maleness. Likewise the origins of aberrant gender identity, in Stoller’s
case studies of transsexuals, are traced to aberrant family
constellations at that stage of life.

The notion of identity as a coherent core to personality or sexual
character was popularized in the 1940s and 1950s by Erik Erikson in
Childhood and Society and by the culture-and-personality school of
anthropology. It is not accidental that this happened at the same time
as the rise of role theory in sociology. Identity theory traded on the
psychoanalytic idea of different levels in personality, but gutted it by
removing the idea of fundamental conflict between the levels. Surface
levels of personality became the more or less straightforward expression
of the core.

A full critique of such models of personality would involve a long
detour. I will state the main points briefly. A homogeneous or
consensual model of gender identity loses the ability to account for
creativity and resistance. It recognizes the production of different
gender practices only as deviance resulting from inadequate or aberrant
socialization. Its homogeneous picture of the core misses or
marginalizes that mixing of elements of gender which classical
psychoanalysis referred to as normal bisexuality and which even scalar
conceptions of personality have now acknowledged as important (androgyny
etc.). And it makes a cognitive act – recognizing oneself as male or
female – central to the structuring of emotion without acknowledging
either the social structuring of such cognition (gender involves social
categories presented to the child in the practices of adults) or its
dependence on emotional processes that are not cognitively organized
(what the Freudians call ‘primary process’).

Socialization theory, supposing a mechanism of transmission and a
consensual model of what is produced, has been credible only to the
extent that social scientists have been willing to ignore both choice
and force in social life. I would argue, with Sartre and Laing, for
seeing them as constitutive. ‘Agencies of socialization’ cannot produce
mechanical effects in a growing person. What they do is invite the child
to participate in social practice on given terms. The invitation may be,
and often is, coercive – accompanied by heavy pressure to accept and no
mention of an alternative. The emotional pressure involved has been well
brought out in autobiographical writings from the American antisexist
men’s movement, such as those by Seymour M. Miller and Michael
Silverstein. Yet children do decline, or more exactly start making their
own moves on the terrain of gender. They may refuse heterosexuality,
though gay autobiographies show it often takes a long time to construct
a positive alternative as homosexual. They may set about blending
masculine and feminine elements, for example girls insisting on
competitive sport at school. They may start a split in their own lives,
for example boys dressing in drag when by themselves. They may construct
a fantasy life at odds with their actual practice, which is perhaps the
commonest move of all.

If socialization were as smooth and successful as socialization theory
presupposes, it would be difficult to account for the degree of violence
that has existed historically in relations between adults and children.
It seems that its level has declined a great deal in capitalist core
countries over the last hundred years – one of the few senses in which
this really has turned out to be, as Ellen Key predicted, ‘the century
of the child’. Yet even here the decline has been very selective. In a
Sydney survey of 1969, over 70 per cent of adolescent boys aged eleven
to fourteen reported being caned or strapped at school in the current
year. Observation in any supermarket will indicate that hitting young
children is still a commonplace of daily life.

The imbalance of power makes it possible for adults to put very heavy
pressure on children if they set out to. Adults too respond to
contradiction in the ‘socialization’ process, and their response may
take the form of attempting to impose order and direction on it,
creating vehement regimes of character formation and indoctrination. A
classic description of such a regime in an Irish Jesuit school was
provided by James Joyce in Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. In
many cases vehement regimes do work as intended: the novitiate produces
the nun, the school produces scholars, the boy grows up to be the image
of his father. Suddenly the socialization paradigm seems apt. Yet
notions of ‘role learning’ are all too mild for the fierce pressures
generated in such settings. And even here the response may be rather
different from what was intended; then we get not a good Catholic Civil
Servant but a James Joyce.

An adequate account of gender formation must be able to understand such
events as something more than random exceptions or social deviance. That
is only possible if the analysis of the successful case of
‘socialization’ is in terms that also allow us to understand the
unsuccessful.

Several criteria for a theory of gender formation are implicit in what
has just been said. It must be able to reckon with social contradiction
and contradiction within personality. It must be able to reckon with
power and its effects without turning people into automata (for instance
recognizing motives for compliance like the child’s need for love). It
must be able to recognize different levels in personality without
depending on the notion that one level simply expresses the
characteristics of another. Most important – and in a sense subsuming
the others – it must be historical, both in the sense of seeing the
person in terms of a trajectory through time and situations, and in
recognizing the constant historical reconfiguration of the social forces
impinging on personal growth.

Those are reasonably strong criteria. There are, I think, only two
approaches that come close to meeting them, classical psychoanalysis and
existential psychoanalysis. Their accounts of gender formation are the
subject of the rest of this chapter. For different reasons, neither
fully meets the criteria just outlined. Considering these reasons points
towards a reformation of personality concepts, which is attempted in the
following chapter.

Classical Psychoanalysis: The Dynamic Unconscious

Freud wrote voluminously on sexuality and gender. My purpose here is not
to give a summary or a history of his ideas and those of his followers,
but to explore the contribution they make to a social theory of gender.
Accordingly I will start not with the Oedipus complex and Freud’s
discussions of femininity and masculinity but with his general
theorizing about the relationship between the psychic and the social.

On this theme Freud developed two main lines of thought. One made
sweeping and mostly fanciful analogies between the psychic life of
children and neurotics on the one hand, and ‘savages’, crowds and groups
on the other. The other, much more profound, was concerned with the
social repression of sexuality in European culture. This led him in 1908
to a remarkable psychological critique of marriage and the double
standard as institutions that hinge on the suppression of women’s
sexuality. The social pressure that denied women sexual happiness was
the major force behind the growth of neurosis. In later writing,
culminating in Civilization and its Discontents (1930), Freud
generalized this argument about repression and laid more stress on its
historical dynamic.

A conflict between civilization and nature is of course a traditional
theme of Western thought. But Freud is not merely doing the rounds of
antique philosophy. The clinical tools of psychoanalysis, especially the
concept of repression, enable him to formulate the issue in a much more
precise and complex way and move it in a new direction. In ‘Civilization
and its Discontents’ he argues a similarity ‘between the process of
civilization and the libidinal development of the individual’, which is
not just an analogy but a relation: ‘civilization is built upon a
renunciation of instinct’. The ‘renunciation’ is not projected into a
mythical past or a philosophical heaven, as in Rousseau’s Social
Contract (and indeed Freud’s Totem and Taboo). It is something that
operates in every person’s life in the process of psychosexual
development, and takes effect at the level of the individual unconscious
through the mechanism of repression. Neurosis is a material, not a
metaphorical, consequence of the social pressures on the person required
by the advance of civilization. The structure of the adult personality
is formed by this pressure, principally by the way it is experienced by
the young child in the family. The formation of the super-ego as part of
the person’s psychic equipment is itself a social mechanism. In Freud’s
striking simile: ‘Civilization, therefore, obtains mastery over the
individual’s dangerous desire for aggression by weakening and disarming
it and by setting up an agency within him to watch over it, like a
garrison in a conquered city.’

But if ‘nature’ is thereby rendered partly social, so, conversely, the
social is brought within the sphere of nature. Civilization is not seen
as something external to the events and processes of psychic life: it is
seen as a product and extension of them. Its achievements represent a
sublimation of the impulses that would, but for repression, find
expression in a more raw and bloody fashion. In these later and more
complex formulations Freud has shifted from a position that makes
civilization the cause of neurosis, to one – admittedly not clearly
stated but certainly implied – that sees civilization as continuous with
neurosis, as part of the same structure. At this point he expounds the
important concept of a historical dynamic in repression:

  This conflict [of Eros and Thanatos] is set going as soon as men are
  faced with the task of living together. So long as the community
  assumes no other form than that of the family, the conflict is bound
  to express itself in the Oedipus complex, to establish the conscience
  and to create the first sense of guilt. When an attempt is made to
  widen the community, the same conflict is continued in forms which are
  dependent on the past; and it is strengthened and results in a further
  intensification of the sense of guilt … If civilization is a necessary
  course of development from the family to humanity as a whole, then …
  there is inextricably bound up with it an increase of the sense of
  guilt, which will perhaps reach heights that the individual finds hard
  to tolerate.

Which brings back the problem of unhappiness and closes the circle, for
him – but is precisely the point of departure for others.

With the technical concepts of psychoanalysis Freud thus dismantled the
traditional antinomy of nature and culture. He replaced it, most
unexpectedly – it is certain that he did not himself see the theoretical
significance of this – by the concept of a historical process. This
process operates simultaneously at the macro-social and the individual
levels. In it both human personalities and their troubles, and
collective social achievements, are integrally produced.

As Marcuse saw, this conception makes it possible to sociologize
psychoanalytic concepts. The Oedipus complex can be seen as a product of
a definite historical type of the family. Repression itself is no
abstract consequence of human relation in general, but takes definite
form and intensity in specifiable historical contexts. This does not
reduce psychoanalysis to sociology, any more than it can be reduced to
biology. But the concept of a historical process allows a much more
powerful connection between the social and the unconscious and those
theories which, for instance, have simply tacked psychodynamic notions
such as ‘identification’ onto a sociology of social control. It makes
possible a socially critical use of psychoanalysis, which is no longer
the theory of an eternal contest between instinct and reality.

In the early years of Freudian theory its potential for social criticism
was developed mainly by Alfred Adler, a socialist whose original and
fertile psychoanalytic writings on power, masculinity, war and
motivation are now mostly forgotten. (Adler later became the
father-figure of a small cult based on a bland ‘individual psychology’
which had no use for his early radicalism. The parallel with the fate of
Wilhelm Reich’s socialist writings is close.) Adler emphasized the
social shaping of motives and criticized Freud’s persistent attempts to
derive them from biology. He had a clear view of the importance of power
relations in social structure, and attempted to develop a ‘psychology of
power’, a psychoanalytic account of responses to powerlessness in
childhood and social insecurity in adulthood. Most notably he focused
part of this argument on the power relations of gender.

Perhaps influenced by the socialist feminism of the day, Adler noted
that femininity was devalued in European culture, and argued that this
devaluation shaped the psychological patterns of childhood. Children’s
weakness vis-à-vis adults was interpreted by them as femininity,
‘childish value-judgements’ crystallizing around the cultural polarity
of masculine and feminine. Submission and striving for independence
coexisted in the child’s life, setting up a contradiction between
masculine and feminine tendencies. Usually this led to some kind of
compromise, the tendencies balancing, if under tension, in the adult
personality. But the compromise was not always reached. Anxiety about
weakness could lead to overcompensation in the direction of aggression
and compulsiveness, which Adler dubbed, in a famous phrase, ‘the
masculine protest’ (applicable to both sexes). He saw this as the key
structure in neurosis, but also generalized it as a forcible critique of
hegemonic masculinity: ‘To this [children’s uncertainties about
sexuality] is added the arch evil of our culture, the excessive
preeminence of manliness. All children who have been in doubt about
their sexual role exaggerate the traits which they consider masculine,
above all defiance.’

Adler’s sketch of a critical psychology of gender, unfortunately, bore
little fruit. After the break between Adler and Freud in 1911, and
another radical wave in the 1920s which included a debate on Freud’s
theories of femininity, psychoanalysis evolved in much more conservative
directions. A continuing interest in the psychology of women by a few
analysts such as Karen Horney moved away from the social grounds on
which Adler had attempted to locate gender issues. By the 1940s and
1950s, in the writings of John Bowlby, Theodor Reik, Erik Erikson and
their contemporaries, mainstream psychoanalysis had become a powerful
ideological support of the patriarchal family and conventional
definitions of gender. The subsequent feminist criticisms of
psychoanalysis were thus well warranted, though much of the fire was
misdirected at Freud rather than his interpreters. A striking indication
of the political shift is the attitude to homosexuality. Freud had
scrupulously refused to define this as an illness, and had cautioned
against attempts to ‘cure’ a homosexual orientation. By the 1950s
psychoanalysts freely defined homosexuality as pathological in itself,
and proposed and undertook psychoanalytic treatment. They had a singular
lack of success.

It was theoreticians outside the clinical world of official
psychoanalysis who pushed on with the social dimension of Freud’s
thought. For various reasons, including the fact that most were men and
few had practised analysis, the question of gender dropped gradually out
of focus. The interest rather was in the psychological underpinnings of
capitalism.

In the 1930s and 1940s the focus was on the emergence of fascism out of
liberal capitalism. Karl Mannheim, trying to understand the popular
success of fascist movements, brought psychoanalytic arguments into
sociology in his Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction. Wilhelm
Reich did something similar from further left in The Mass Psychology of
Fascism. A whole programme of research attempting to weld psychoanalysis
to a reconstructed Marxism came from the Frankfurt school: the
Horkheimer collection Studien über Autorität und Familie, Erich Fromm’s
Fear of Freedom, and most famous of all, Adorno et al.’s The
Authoritarian Personality. This work moved in the direction of
characterology, and inadvertently began producing a typology of
masculinity. ‘Mack’ and ‘Larry’, the celebrated case studies of high and
low authoritarianism, can equally well be read as studies in the
formation of contrasting masculinities.

In another line of development Herbert Marcuse took up Freud’s argument
about the rising level of repression with the advance of civilization.
Eros and Civilization argued that some of this was the ‘surplus
repression’ required to sustain an exploitative class society, and that
this bore down mainly on non-genital sexuality, narrowing spontaneous
eroticism. In One Dimensional Man Marcuse turned back on his own tracks
and argued that advanced capitalism now allowed a controlled release of
repressions. This was, however, in forms that stabilized the social
order rather than disrupted it. The result was a socially repressive
‘desublimation’ of instinctual urges.

Both these lines of argument have the same goal, which I will call a
theory of embedding. Their purpose is to explain how a social movement
like fascism or a social system like advanced capitalism can establish
links with unconscious mental processes and thus gain mass support
regardless of its irrationality and destructiveness.

The two psychoanalytic concepts central to theories of embedding were
the displacement of cathexis and the constitutive role of repression.
Most social applications of psychoanalysis postulate a displacement of
emotions originally formed in childhood and attached to family members,
onto objects or relations in the larger social world in adulthood. The
energy of the displaced emotions is largely due to the blocking of
original impulses in the process of repression, the pattern of which is
decisive in the formation of adult character. The same formative
encounters thus shape personality and generate macro-social effects, by
dividing conscious from unconscious and determining a particular content
for each level.

When in the 1970s a new generation of feminist theorists roped in
psychoanalysis to supply part of a critical theory of gender, it was
largely as a theory of embedding. The social structure whose stability
was at issue here was patriarchy, especially the sexual division of
labour. What was felt surprising or in need of explanation was women’s
acceptance, even active endorsement, of social arrangements that oppress
them. The search for explanation was partly a matter of finding the
psychic gain in the social loss, and partly a matter of tracing out
through psychoanalysis the forms of adaptation to necessity in the shape
of men’s social power.

Nancy Chodorow’s argument in The Reproduction of Mothering, though its
details derive from the object-relations school of psychoanalysis,
follows the basic logic of Fromm and Adorno. What comes out of the
analysis is a character typology, in this case a fundamental distinction
between femininity and masculinity. The typology is used to provide a
psychodynamic explanation of the acceptance of a social structure, in
this case the sexual division of labour in childcare. Because of the
different patterns of attachment to the mother, girls grow up with less
sharply defined boundaries of the self and a greater need for emotional
completion in relationships, boys with more clear-cut ego boundaries and
a greater need for separateness. Women both want to mother, and are
psychologically adapted for mothering, more than men.

Juliet Mitchell’s Psychoanalysis and Feminism is also concerned with
character structure, though in her case the focus is a reconstruction
and correction of Freud’s account of femininity. The scope of Mitchell’s
social theory is considerably wider than Chodorow’s, as she construes
Lacanian psychoanalysis in terms of an Althusserian theory of ideology,
and patriarchy in terms of Lévi-Strauss’s theory of kinship and culture.
It is, however, less dynamic.

Like most of the structuralist theorists on whom she draws, the tendency
of Mitchell’s argument is ahistorical. Embedding is construed as the
insertion of people into places already laid out for them in a structure
whose characteristics are predetermined. This is a common feature of
feminist arguments based on Lacan’s reworking of psychoanalysis, for
instance by Luce Irigaray. In Irigaray’s work, for all its psychological
subtlety, there is a thoroughly categorical social analysis of gender.
This is partly because of the structuralist style, partly because the
focus is not on the division of labour but on the symbolic aspect of
social process. ‘Patriarchy’, or the ‘law of the father’, in these
writings is less the structure of social relations than the structure of
how the world is imagined.

History is more fundamental in the most complex and original work of
feminist psychoanalysis, Dorothy Dinnerstein’s The Mermaid and the
Minotaur. This is to an extent in spite of her own theory, as she takes
the sexual division of labour to be an evolutionary constant in human
society before the present. Dinnerstein focuses on women’s work as
mothers – ‘the female monopoly of early childcare’ – as the main
determinant of the adult emotional patterns that sustain patriarchy. In
explaining this she depends much of the time on a normative standard
case.

She departs from the formula, however, in a series of brilliant sketches
of emotional interactions. Here she catches, as no other social analysts
and only a few novelists (Nadine Gordimer, Patrick White) have done, the
ambivalences of women and men towards each other, and the ways childhood
resonances in their interactions lock the participants into patterns
they would not rationally choose. Dinnerstein teases out the tendrils of
the pre-Oedipal emotional relationship to the mother in explanations of
adult women’s sexuality, men’s hatred for women, women’s acceptance of
exclusion from ‘world-making’ in the public sphere, and, ultimately, the
ecological crisis of contemporary civilization. Unlike structuralist
appropriations of psychoanalysis, Dinnerstein’s does lead to a
conception of a historical dynamic and a historical appreciation of the
present moment. The book ends, in fact, with a remarkable psychodynamic
account of the emergence of the New Left and the new feminism in the
United States.

The crucial difference from structuralism is Dinnerstein’s focus on
routine practice: the practice of childrearing on the one hand, the
practices of interaction among adults on the other. This allows her to
see the emotional patterns as structurally based but not structurally
fixed, and to give a central place to emotional contradiction (in the
Freudian tradition called ‘ambivalence’). The approach allows a
recognition of the development of practice, of its historical
cumulativeness. Habermas, in a moment of optimism, spoke of this
capacity to form new structures as the ‘evolutionary learning process’
of societies. In Dinnerstein’s view the cumulation is rather in the
direction of global disaster: ‘the prevailing symbiosis between women
and men has something deadly wrong with it … It supports a growingly
perilous societal posture; it helps lock us, as a species, into a
suicidal stance toward the realities on which our collective survival
hinges.’

Here we reach the limits of ‘embedding’ arguments, where the
consequences of embedding bid fair to destroy the social order being
embedded. We are also left with two theoretical difficulties. First,
Dinnerstein’s argument is built around a normative standard case, though
it carries conviction mainly when it complicates or departs from it. Can
those complications and departures be made more systematic? Second,
Dinnerstein’s argument, like Chodorow’s and Mitchell’s, assumes a fairly
straightforward displacement of affect from individual family figures in
childhood to whole categories of people in adulthood, most notably by
undifferentiated use of ‘woman’ for both. But this displacement is not
straightforward, as psychoanalytic studies abundantly show. A classic
example is the enormous difficulty and complexity of a young boy’s
attempts to construct a stable pattern of attachment documented in
Freud’s ‘Wolf Man’ case history. As in Freud’s theoretical writings
about femininity and masculinity, Dinnerstein leaves us unclear why the
displacement must happen, and what agency or choice the growing
child/adult has in the matter.

Theories of embedding state the effects of gender formation;
psychoanalysis also offers maps of the route towards those effects. They
centre on the Oedipus complex, ‘the fateful combination of love for one
parent and simultaneous hatred for the other as a rival’ as Freud
summarized it, that emerges with the maturing of the child’s erotic life
around four to six years old. This appeared in Freud’s psychiatric
casework as the nucleus of the neuroses, and mainly on this evidence
became the key moment in psychoanalytic theories of human development.
It was, Freud assumed, structured differently for girls and boys. The
basis of this assumption was the different places of the mother and the
father in family dynamics. Some feminist reworkings of the Oedipal
theory have stressed the power dimension of this relation (Firestone),
others the division of labour (Chodorow, Dinnerstein); they are not
clearly distinguished in Freud.

The outcomes of the differently structured Oedipal crises are the bases
of Freudian accounts of femininity and masculinity. With girls the
process involved a messy and incomplete abandonment of the desire for a
penis, eventually transformed into desire for a baby and the man who
could give one. With boys the mother was retained as erotic object, a
cathexis eventually displaced onto other women; but this desire was
repressed by fear of the castrating father, itself provoking
identification with him, the internalization of prohibitions, and
formation of a strong super-ego. No such process stimulated super-ego
formation in women. These were, so to speak, standard resolutions. They
could and often did go wrong. Further, closer analysis would show
underneath these patterns traces of contradictory ones. The ‘complete’
Oedipus complex, Freud insisted, involved ambivalent feelings of desire
and hatred towards both parents.

The main modification of this argument within the psychoanalytic
tradition has been a greater attention to the pre-Oedipal period. Freud
himself began it. In the ‘Wolf Man’ case history, his most extensive
study of the problem of masculinity, Freud noted that in the crisis of
the boy’s relation to his father, the feminine aim in relation to the
father was repressed because of the fear of castration: ‘In short, a
clear protest on the part of his masculinity!’ This argument clearly
presumes a pre-Oedipal masculinity, which was important enough to the
little boy to force the repression of the strongest attachment in his
sexual life. Freud never spelt out the nature of this early
‘narcissistic masculinity’, but it is clear that it cannot be identified
with the ‘activity’ end of the activity/passivity polarity that plagues
psychoanalytic discussion of gender, including Freud’s earlier writings.
It probably does not have much to do with sex of object-choice either;
‘narcissistic’ is an apt adjective. It is difficult to escape the
conclusion that it is the cultural value placed on maleness in a
patriarchal society that is at issue here, and is a decisive
presupposition of the classic Oedipus complex. In this context the
emphasis in the French analytic tradition on the symbolic valorization
of the phallus seems justified.

The pre-Oedipal years also emerge as crucial in Chodorow’s and
Dinnerstein’s arguments. What Chodorow calls mothers’ ‘Oedipally toned’
responses to little boys push them along the path to the Oedipus
complex, while the closer identification of mothers with their young
girls leads to more permeable boundaries of the self. Chodorow and
Dinnerstein both emphasize the sexual division of labour as the crucial
condition of these pre-Oedipal effects. This suggests that the
psychoanalytic sequence might be interpreted in terms of the structures
defined in chapter 5. The structures interact in different ways as the
child grows older. The dominant interaction affecting the emotional life
of the child changes.

  ------------- -------------------------------
  Period        Major structural interaction
  Pre-Oedipal   Cathexis x division of labour
  Oedipal       Cathexis x power
  ------------- -------------------------------

If this is correct, we may conclude that the emotional dilemmas of the
encounter with power in the Oedipal stage depend on the outcome of the
earlier interaction of cathexis and the division of labour.

The psychoanalytic theory of the normative standard case can be revised
sociologically along these lines. But this still leaves unclear what
Freud left unclear, just how ‘standard’ this case is supposed to be. The
long controversy about the supposed ‘universality of the Oedipus
complex’ across cultures has not been particularly helpful. Those
combatants who were sympathetic to Freud usually took for granted that
Oedipus was standard equipment in European families and debated whether
he could be found in ‘primitive’ cultures. Nor are we helped by
Dinnerstein’s honest confession that none of the five people to whom she
is closest matches at all well ‘the composite portraits of “normal”
masculinity and femininity’ presented in her book.

The roots of this difficulty are connected to the unitary conceptions of
gender discussed at the start of chapter 8. It is assumed that the
systematic character of gender and sexual relations requires one central
pattern of personality, plus deviations. The argument of the later part
of chapter 8 may help sort out the place of the Oedipus complex as well.
More than one major pattern of childhood emotional development is
produced; and they are produced in relation to each other.

Freud succeeded in isolating and analysing one important pattern of
psychosexual development in European families. For masculinity this was
quite probably, in the social context of upper-middle-class Vienna, the
hegemonic pattern. Some of his descriptions of femininity imply the
‘emphasized’ pattern sketched in chapter 8, though his confusions and
hesitations about femininity show he found this harder to pin down. That
too is consistent with the argument about the absence of a ‘hegemonic’
femininity in patriarchal society.

The crucial point is that no one pattern of development can be taken as
universal even within the specifical social context Freud studied.
Researches like Anne Parsons’s work on southern Italy have documented
alternative ‘nuclear complexes’, and this point has to be applied within
cultures as well as between them. The Oedipal drama is constructed in
quite specific situations. Not only are there multiple pathways through
childhood, the routes can and do change as gender relations change in
history. Erikson’s suggestion that the focus of neurotic conflict has
changed during the twentieth century – formerly about sexuality, now
about identity – is a useful warning, though greatly overgeneralized.
The now familiar research by Philippe Ariès and others on the history of
the family implies longer-term changes in the psychodynamics of child
development.

In this light, the formulations of femininity and masculinity by
dissident psychoanalysts like Adler and Jung acquire a new interest.
Instead of seeing them as displacing Freud’s theory of the Oedipus
complex (which Adler and Jung certainly intended), we can see them as
accounts of other paths of psychosexual development that were available
to be discovered through the research method that all schools of
psychoanalysis share, the reconstructed clinical case history. The
alternatives include Adler’s notion of the compulsive ‘masculine
protest’, already described; Jung’s somewhat similar notion of a strong,
authoritative masculine ‘persona’ based on the repression of weakness
and dependency which then coexists as the unconscious ‘anima’; the
Frankfurt school’s models of ‘authoritarian character’. These can be
brought together as elements of the psychoanalysis of a historically
constructed range of masculinities. The Authoritarian Personality,
sketching the ‘democratic personality’ and the social and political
conditions for resistance to fascism, even made a beginning on the
immensely difficult problem of the relations between these different
dynamics.

This is as far as I can take this problem at the moment. The next step,
clearly enough, is the empirical investigation of the range of
developmental paths and psychodynamic patterns in a given milieu, and
their interconnections. The methods of such a study cannot be formulated
without a closer examination of the idea of life histories, which I will
attempt later in this chapter and in the next. Before doing so it is
necessary to take a closer look at the concepts shared by all schools of
classical psychoanalysis, repression and the unconscious.

In Freud’s original and most influential version, repression is applied
to libido, to erotic impulses, and the whole theory of the formation of
personality thus rests on an account of libidinal development. As
Mitchell points out this is what revisers of Freud have found hardest to
handle, and have most commonly dropped, in particular the theory of
children’s sexuality. With a few exceptions, the libido theory was
preserved only by the most orthodox school of psychoanalysts, whose
increasing social and political conservatism blanked out its
subversiveness.

The attempt to recover the erotic dimension, and to bring out the social
criticism implicit in the theory of repression, has been central to
radical reworkings of psychoanalysis which have seen Freud as a theorist
of liberation more than a theorist of embedding. Norman Brown in Life
Against Death, Marcuse in Eros and Civilization and An Essay on
Liberation, and Reimut Reiche in Sexuality and Class Struggle present
versions that largely ignore gender. But the same themes have been
applied to women’s liberation by Dorothy Dinnerstein, and to gay
liberation by Dennis Altman in Homosexual: Oppression and Liberation and
Mario Mieli in Homosexuality and Liberation.

The concept of repression, then, points to an erotic dimension of
liberation, though it does not fully specify it. All the works just
cited are forced to go outside the psychoanalytic framework to formulate
the process of liberation. A purely psychic liberation is rather hard to
sustain. Freud’s own therapeutic purposes were deliberately limited,
given his acceptance of the established social order and family
structure.

If patterns of femininity and masculinity are composed as patterns of
repression, the reconstruction of gender does involve a reworking of
erotic attachment and expression. Mieli sees this optimistically and
expansively, as early gay liberation generally did. Dinnerstein is
rather more sombre about the ‘project of sexual liberty’, though she
sees it as central to whatever chance humans have of surviving. An
important tendency in feminism sees the path forward as a withdrawal of
women’s emotional attachments and energies from men to focus them on
other women. Though there is a long way to go with any of these
strategies, the political experience of the last twenty years is already
consistent with psychoanalytic theory in at least two respects. Patterns
of erotic attachment have proved deep-seated and difficult to change.
The attempt to change them provokes strong and complex resistances at
the personal level as much as the political.

The concept of repression is central to the main complication that
psychoanalysis introduces to the concept of sexual character, since
repression constitutes the unconscious. The conceptions of sexual
character discussed in chapter 8, for all their differences, mostly
share the assumption that personality is homogeneous – expressed in
gender scaling by the requirement of statistical consistency, in
humanistic psychology by the notion of a core ‘gender identity’, and so
on.

Classical psychoanalysis violates this assumption comprehensively, and
this is one of its most important contributions to the analysis of
gender. The notion of ‘primary process’ thinking in the id and
‘secondary process’ in the ego; the idea of unconscious impulses which
cannot be directly expressed in consciousness; the notion of the dream
or symptom as a ‘condensation’; and the structural model of personality
(id, ego, super-ego) – all were ways in which Freud tried to formulate
the idea that repression marks out qualitatively different parts of the
human psyche. They not only can contradict each other, they normally are
in contradiction. Repression itself is a mechanism of contradiction.

We do not need to accept Freud’s particular formulations to appreciate
the importance of the idea. It implies that femininity and masculinity
are normally internally fissured and in tension. To use a rather static
model, they are normally layered. (To correct the image one must bear in
mind that the relationships between the layers are as important as their
content, and the layers themselves writhe around, so to speak, as the
person moves on a life trajectory.)

This can be accepted without the libido theory on which Freud based it.
Indeed its most clear-cut application to gender is not by Freud but by
Jung in his essay ‘Anima and Animus’. Here Jung suggests that sexual
character is systematically layered in the sense that the public face of
femininity and masculinity, compatible with the conventional social
role, is always constructed by a repression of their opposites. A kind
of unconscious personality (the ‘anima’ for men, ‘animus’ for women)
develops as a negative of the socially acceptable one, and their
incompatible demands underlie many of the tortured emotional dynamics of
marriages.

Freud’s case histories present more complex layerings again. The ‘Wolf
Man’ is the classic example, Freud peeling off in turn an inhibited
adult heterosexuality, a promiscuous but emotionally shallow adolescent
heterosexuality, a passive and highly ambivalent homosexual attachment
to the father, arriving at last at the pre-Oedipal narcissistic
masculinity that has already been mentioned. Dinnerstein’s argument
likewise revolves around the idea of layering, with the pre-Oedipal
attachments as hidden determinants in the most complex adult emotional
relationships.

Jung’s argument dramatizes the most problematic aspect of this: that
femininity and masculinity can coexist in the same personality. Freud
wrestled with this idea endlessly, talking variously of bisexuality, of
activity/passivity, and so on; he was never very satisfied with his
answers and we need not be either. Jung’s analysis is better since not
reductionist – the starting-point is social role rather than biology –
but is too schematic to carry us far.

The evidence for layering is convincing, and requires us to see the
tension between different layers or tendencies in personality as a
constitutive force in gender relations. Yet its theorizing seems
fragile, vulnerable to any criticism of the concepts of repression and
the unconscious.

Two critiques are of particular importance. The one formulated by Sartre
depends on an account of consciousness and motivation which will be
discussed in the next section. The other mounts an essentially political
critique of the concept of the unconscious. Its clearest statement is in
The Politics of Sexuality in Capitalism by a London radical group of the
early 1970s. The ‘Red Collective’ argue that what Freud took to be
effects of the unconscious are in fact effects of power, both class
power and patriarchal power, their causes being invisible only so long
as these structures are not brought into question by political practice.
Psychoanalysis is an emanation of the establishment, and the concept of
the unconscious is a mystification justifying dominance of the
therapeutic situation by the therapist.

The Red Collective is right to point to the social practices in which
psychological concepts are formulated. The book is theoretically
interesting, as well as moving, in reporting the group’s own attempts to
work through the personal politics of sexual relationships. Its
criticism of the notion of the unconscious is apt as far as the
unconscious is thought of as a place where certain mysterious things
happen, comprehensible only to the expert. Freud has to bear some
responsibility for this, as much of the time he used spatial metaphors
in talking of the unconscious.

But fundamentally Freud’s concept was processual, based on the dialectic
of impulse, repression and symbolization. Even more, it was strategic, a
concept arising in connection with practices of transformation. As Freud
insisted at boring length, he did not discover the unconscious mind;
that had been known to poets and philosophers for centuries. He was
simply one of the first to try to do something about it, in the sense of
working out therapies for people who had got it badly snarled. All
Freudian theory developed in relation to a practice of attempting to
transform lives. The concepts of repression and the unconscious mark
both obstacles and potentials encountered in this practice. And that is,
I think, the fundamental sense in which they are important to other
practices of sexual politics.

Structuralist and poststructuralist ‘readings’ of Freud have been
misreadings exactly so far as they separate the concepts from their
context in practice. That separation is central to the pessimism these
readings have led to. To bear a different fruit, analytic concepts have
to be reconnected to practice. The Red Collective rightly argues that
this will have to be based on different social foundations from the
doctor/patient format. The medical model of psychoanalysis proved easy
to absorb into conventional medicine, and to turn into a politics of
‘adjustment’ and non-violent social control.

Existential Psychoanalysis: The Project

It has long been objected that Freud’s theory results in too mechanical
a view of personality and too limited a view of human possibility. Adler
was one of the first to raise these points, though he did not take them
far. Much more radical was the critique developed by Jean-Paul Sartre in
Being and Nothingness and applied to the theory of gender by Simone de
Beauvoir in The Second Sex. The argument started with the theory of
libido and moved on to the concept of the unconscious.

The problem with ‘empirical psychoanalysis’, as Sartre called Freudian
thought, is that it takes as a necessary structure of the person what
should be regarded as the product of choice. For one’s psychic life to
be determined by libido is certainly a possible form of human existence,
but it is not the only one. It is a way of being that a person may take
up, may choose. What is human is precisely the process of constructing
oneself by choices that transcend given circumstances. This is far from
the easy-going voluntarism of 1970s ‘growth movement’ psychology. To
Sartre, being in a position to choose also means having to take
responsibility – in a famous phrase, ‘we are condemned to be free’. The
act of choice also means the fact of commitment. We are stuck with what
we do; what’s done cannot be undone. To make a choice is to walk into a
future defined by the consequences of that choice.

Humans project themselves into their future by their choices, by the way
they negate and transcend the circumstances that are given to them to
start with. The person is constructed as a ‘project’ of realizing
oneself in a particular way. This is certainly intentional, but it
involves more than the concept of purposive behaviour. The project is,
to use a term coined later by the Czech philosopher Karel Kosík,
‘onto-formative’, constitutive of social reality. The process itself
appears as a complex unification, a constant bringing-into-relation, of
actions that are uncaused (because always choices) but intelligible in
relation to each other. Looking back, the process can be decoded by a
reconstruction of the life history that relates later parts of the
trajectory to the original, constitutive choices. This decoding is
‘existential psychoanalysis’. Sartre himself did this job only in the
form of literary biographies, notably of Genet and Flaubert. There is
now also a body of case histories by two British psychiatrists
influenced by Sartre, R. D. Laing and Aaron Esterson, which show what
the approach looks like in a clinical setting.

One of the most impressive parts of Sartre’s argument, given his lack of
clinical experience, was his intuitive acceptance of Freud’s insistence
on the difficulty of self-knowledge. The concept of the unconscious was
built around the practical difficulty that some important facts about
the person were not accessible to conscious inspection. Sartre
vehemently rejects the metaphor of regions in the mind, and the concept
of a system of mental processes that we do not know about. To him the
process of choice and transcendence, i.e., what is specifically human in
human life, is necessarily conscious. But this does not imply that
everything about a person is immediately accessible. There is mystery: a
‘mystery in broad daylight’. Human self-consciousness can have different
structures. The unreflective structure of being-for-itself is very
different from self-knowledge with the structure of being-for-others.
The latter can be very difficult to produce, as the practice of
psychoanalysis shows. But its production is, in a sense, the
psychoanalytic cure itself, the famous ‘talking cure’. Psychoanalysis is
not a process of ‘bringing to consciousness’ material that always was an
aspect of consciousness. Rather it is a question of attaining knowledge
of what one is, instead of just being what one is.

This argument yields a rather different image of cathexis. Freud’s
hydraulic model of the libido suggests a stream of affect flowing here,
being blocked up there, bursting through somewhere else. Sartre’s
treatment suggests cathexis is a kind of commitment, a
throwing-oneself-into a particular emotional involvement. The
intractability of attachment, the stickiness of cathexes dramatized by
hopeless love, is a fact of our emotional lives not because we cannot
choose other attachments but because we cannot walk away from the
consequences of past ones. An emotional commitment of any force comes to
structure not only our social interactions but also our fantasy life,
our self-concepts, our hopes and aspirations. One can only switch them
off at a cost that for many people is intolerable, the cost of making a
great void in every aspect of our life. We know what this feels like for
people who have suffered it involuntarily – the abandoned lover, the
bereaved. Few people would choose to be in that position.

There are various ways of denying freedom and refusing responsibility,
which give existential psychoanalysis an armoury of concepts for
analysing the rigidities of social interaction. De Beauvoir, for
instance, connects the valorization of the penis in masculinity with the
near-universal tendency towards alienation:

  The anxiety that his liberty induces in the subject leads him to
  search for himself in things, which is a kind of flight from himself …
  Here is to be found the primary temptation to inauthenticity, to fail
  to be genuinely oneself. The penis is singularly adapted for playing
  this role of ‘double’ for the little boy.

From the ‘incarnation of transcendence in the phallus’ flows, naturally
enough, the fear of castration in the Oedipus complex. Here the
psychoanalytic theory of gender appears as a special case. It
presupposes, as de Beauvoir forcibly argues, a specific set of social
and historical circumstances which it cannot itself explain.

Sartre’s treatment of ‘bad faith’, situations where people refuse
responsibility for what they do and claim that their decisions are made
for them by external forces, suggests a different kind of connection
with Freudian theory. The concepts of libidinal determination and the
unconscious offer psychoanalytic patients a tremendous temptation to
assign their actions to uncontrollable mental forces. From another
starting-point Thomas Szasz in The Myth of Mental Illness convincingly
argues that the concept of ‘mental illness’ invites collusion among
patient, family and doctor. The hysterical ‘symptom’ is a claim for the
sympathy and care due to the sick, made by someone who will not speak
out about what is intolerable in their lives or personal relations. The
‘layering’ of sexual character appears as a form of bad faith, of
refusal of responsibility for one’s own conduct in sexual politics.

The existentialist argument does not imply that the world described by
classical psychoanalysis is non-existent. It is real, but real as a
world of alienation. Its obscurity is the darkness of escape and
refusal. It is always capable of being transcended; as de Beauvoir
argues:

  The psychoanalyst describes the female child, the young girl, as
  incited to identification with the mother and the father, torn between
  ‘viriloid’ and ‘feminine’ tendencies; whereas I conceive her as
  hesitating between the role of object, Other which is offered her, and
  the assertion of her liberty.

The concept of sexual liberation, if it can be formulated at all, is not
a matter of unshackling native eroticism but of dismantling alienations
(including erotic ones) and realizing native freedom.

Sartre presents existential psychoanalysis as the decoding of a way of
being in search of original, constitutive choices. In his study of
Genet, for instance, he traces a great deal back to Genet’s childhood
choice to be what his foster parents regarded him as, a thief. This
procedure runs a considerable risk of homogenizing the person, as do de
Beauvoir’s pictures of ‘the avenues of inauthentic flight open to
women’, the basis of her character typology discussed in chapter 8. The
risk is that the intelligibility of a life will be found only in its
consistency, in the bits that hang together. The Freudian idea that the
intelligibility of a life might lie in its contradictions is too
valuable to lose.

The problem can, however, be corrected. There is nothing in Being and
Nothingness, nor in Sartre’s later reworking of existential
psychoanalysis as ‘the progressive-regressive method’ in The Question of
Method, that requires constitutive choices to be always singular, or
always consistent with each other. The practical applications by Laing
and Esterson have not found this assumption necessary. For instance
Laing’s case study of the flamboyant student ‘David’ in The Divided Self
shows contradiction developing between the boy’s choice to be his dead
mother and his choice to be a man.

‘David’ was driven towards psychosis by the fact that these two choices
or commitments had incompatible consequences. The choice to be a man
involved fear and hatred of femininity, and thus of ‘the woman who was
inside him, and always seemed to be coming out of him’ – that is, the
consequences of his choice to be the mother. It might have been possible
not to fear that femininity, had the masculinity in question been
differently organized. Laing’s case history gives a few hints of a
father whose masculinity was highly conventional, at least in relation
to issues like the household division of labour, but does not give
enough detail to be sure.

This case study suggests a distinction between hegemonic masculinity and
forms of masculinity that are heterosexual without being directly
organized around domination – conventional masculinities, loosely. Both
are founded on a claim to power, which the one carries through in all
its consequences and the other does not. Conventional masculinity is, to
an extent, hegemonic masculinity in bad faith. Men can enjoy patriarchal
power, but accept it as if it were given to them by an external force,
by nature or convention or even by women themselves, rather than by an
active social subordination of women going on here and now. They do not
care to take responsibility for the actions that given them their power.
Hence their often slightly shamefaced admiration for the heroes of
hegemonic masculinity, the footballers, jet pilots, wife-beaters and
poofter-bashers, who do.

The claim to masculinity here embeds social structure in sexual
character in a sense almost exactly the reverse of ‘embedding’ in
psychoanalytic sociology. The power relations of the society become a
constitutive principle of personality dynamics through being adopted as
personal project, whether acknowledged or not. At the social level, what
this produces is not the stabilization of a social order, but what could
be called a collective project of oppression. The subordination of women
and the marginalization of homosexual and effeminate men are sustained
neither by chance nor by the mechanical reproduction of a social system,
but by the commitments implicit in conventional and hegemonic
masculinity and the strategies pursued in the attempt to realize them.

The notion of a collective project is not easy to get clear, except in
the all-too-easy form of a conspiracy. There certainly are conspiracies
among men, for instance to exclude women from most positions of power in
business and the state. There are conscious individual actions to
protect men’s privileges, such as a senior bureaucrat blocking the
appointment of a feminist to a particular government job. Such things
not only do occur, they occur quite commonly, and are well known to
insiders. But as the argument of Part II has shown, this cannot be taken
as the fundamental structure of patriarchal power, for this also rests
on institutionalization. The collective project of oppression is
materialized not only in individual actions but in the building up,
sustaining and defence of an institutional order that generates
inequalities impersonally.

Sartre’s own attempt to do this analysis for the case of class dynamics
shows the enormous complexity of the problem and I don’t propose to
match his effort here. I do want to register, first, the conceptual
importance of the question and second, the fact that practical
beginnings have been made with it. Aaron Esterson’s case study and
theoretical formulations in The Leaves of Spring illustrate the
dialectical intelligibility of collective practice in the family.
Cynthia Cockburn’s Brothers, though not conceived on a psychoanalytic
paradigm, still documents very clearly some of the structures of a
collective project of sexual politics in the workplace.

The notion of a collective project, like that of an individual project,
implies both freedom and responsibility. At the minimum it implies
freedom to participate or not, and responsibility for the choice made.
This has proved difficult for men influenced by feminism to get
straight. Accepting the feminist critique of patriarchy has often led to
overwhelming guilt and desire for redemption. Hence the ‘effeminist’
tendency that repeatedly emerges in counter-sexist politics among men.
In its own appealing way, this is just as inauthentic as any
‘masculinist’ denial of the facts of inequality. It makes no sense for
me to take responsibility for what other grown-up people do, or have
done in the past. I take responsibility for what I do and for its
consequences. A clear view of what I do – as the whole argument of this
book goes to show – includes the way my actions interact with those of
other people and either sustain or subvert the collective project of
oppression. But to take responsibility for, and hence feel guilt about,
that collective project as a whole is at one level paranoid, at another
paralyzing. It has certainly not led to any practically effective form
of politics over the last dozen years.

More hopefully, relations between men and women also include the project
of love. This is a project in the strict sense, a commitment of selves,
a relation around which practice becomes organized. It is a formative
commitment, whose consequences ramify and develop through a life
history, often changing the complexion of the original relationship very
deeply.

It is commonly assumed that love is incompatible with hatred or
oppression. This is one reason why women may reject feminism, because
they have experienced love from men (and towards them) and take feminism
to be a doctrine that denies or rejects that fact – despite the
passionate writings of heterosexual feminists like Sheila Rowbotham,
Dorothy Dinnerstein and Barbara Sichtermann. In reality love is a
project that can be interwoven with the project of oppression.
Psychoanalysis has shown the importance of ambivalence, the coexistence
of strong but opposed feelings towards the same object. Shulamith
Firestone analysed ‘romantic love’ as the corrupted version of love that
develops when the parties are unequal. This is debatable, but there are
other ways heterosexual attachment and subordination can be connected.
De Beauvoir and Dinnerstein both analyse in some detail the
incorporation of a loving woman into the loved man’s projects as an
important mechanism sustaining the exclusion of women from
‘world-making’ in public life.

Yet love is also, notoriously, a destroyer of conventions, a force
difficult to channel and control. Héloïse and Abélard, Guinevere and
Lancelot, Paolo and Francesca, Romeo and Juliet, Tristan and Isolde, are
not exactly marginal figures in the European imagination. The myths
generally kill them off before they get to old age, but the images live
on with compelling emotional force. The contradiction between the
project of erotic love and the requirements of patriarchal institutions
– marriage, property and kinship relations – also has to be recognized
as a permanent tension in patriarchal society.

To transform tension into structural change, actually to start
dismantling structures of domination, is the collective project of
liberation. It has proved no easier to get its personal and structural
dimensions together in practice than it is in theory. The New Left of
the 1960s criticized mainstream Stalinists and labourites for trying to
change society without changing themselves. The New Left was criticized
by feminists and gay liberationists for macho public politics and
domestic sexism. The growing visibility of ‘communities’ of gay men has
sparked criticism from feminists, especially since the reassertion of
masculine styles in the late 1970s. Feminism in turn has been criticized
for dogmatism, power plays, elitism and jobs-for-the-girls since it won
a thin slice of power in education, welfare and the bureaucracy.

There is some truth in each of these criticisms. We are living in the
real world and not on a drawing-board. But none of them invalidates the
premiss of the project, that social and personal change are essentially
connected. The next task is to take a closer look at the object of the
politics of everyday life, and consider how personality can be
understood in terms consistent both with the psychodynamic arguments
just traversed and the structural analysis of Part II.

NOTES

Socialization

(pp. 191–6). Debate in the ‘sex role socialization’ literature has
mainly concerned the different mechanisms or paradigms of acquisition:
useful reviews are by Constantinople (1979) and Cahill (1983). Though
Cahill’s ‘social interactionist’ paradigm is helpful in stressing the
child’s agency more than usual, this whole literature is contained
within the framework criticized in the text. For Ellen Key’s phrase and
its context see W. F. Connell (1980), pp. 92 ff., and for the corporal
punishment figures quoted, W. F. Connell et al. (1975).

Classical Psychoanalysis

(pp. 196–211). Quotations from Freud (1930), pp. 123–4, 132–3; Adler
(1956), p. 55; Dinnerstein (1976), pp. 230–1; Freud (1918), p. 47. For
the debate on the universality of the Oedipus complex see Parsons
(1964), whose solution is incomplete but certainly along the right
lines, and unfortunately neglected in the feminist psychoanalytic
literature. The problem of the politics of psychoanalytic treatment
raised by the Red Collective has recently been explored in great detail
by Kovel (1981) who is more committed to therapy but also rather
insensitive to gender.

Existential Psychoanalysis

(pp. 211–17). For the ‘mystery in broad daylight’ see Sartre (1958), p.
571. Other quotations: de Beauvoir (1972), pp. 79, 83. The notion of a
‘collective project’ is all too simple for the intricate analyses in
Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason but is perhaps an allowable
condensation for present purposes. Its full development would embrace
the subject-matter of Part II of this book.

10

Personality as Practice

Personality, Society and Life History

Chapters 8 and 9 have described how structures of gender relations enter
into personal life and shape personalities. The fact is clear, but how
to understand it is more difficult. ‘Enter into’ is a metaphor, and we
might ask just what is being ‘entered’. Has personality some distinctive
substance, as implied by the other familiar metaphor for these
relationships, that personality is ‘moulded’ or ‘shaped’ by social
pressure, like clay under a potter’s hands?

The critique of socialization theory and the discussion of the ‘project’
in chapter 9 both imply that the answer is no. The components of
personality traditionally discussed in psychology – attitudes,
abilities, drives, repressions, fantasies and so on – are not separate
from social interactions. On the one hand practices have a ‘personality’
dimension. It makes good sense, for instance, to talk of the
characteristic emotional problems of particular social practices, such
as teaching. (Indeed this is a theme in recent research on teachers.) On
the other hand personality needs a social field for its realization.
People can, of course, hide some aspect of themselves. (Teenage girls
have often been advised to make sure they do not seem more clever than
the boys they want to date.) But personality in general is not hidden;
nor is deliberate hiding usually very successful. As Freud remarked
about sexual motives in ‘symptomatic acts’, ‘He that has eyes to see and
ears to hear may convince himself that no mortal can keep a secret. If
his lips are silent, he chatters with his finger-tips; betrayal oozes
out of him at every pore.’

Here the argument on gender converges with the current rethinking of
social psychology in texts like Rom Harré’s Social Being and Personal
Being, Paul Secord and co-workers’ Explaining Human Behavior, Edmund
Sullivan’s A Critical Psychology and the joint work by Julian Henriques
and others, Changing the Subject. These theorists have tried to move
beyond the approach that founds psychology on the category of the
‘individual’, beyond the belief that laboratory experiment is the
paragon of methods, and beyond the conceptualization of social context
as a Variable’ to be correlated with ‘behaviour’. Instead this work
implies a historical conception of the person. As Harré observes, the
very idea of individual character and the self is the product of
collectives, of particular societies. The approach emphasizes the
situational meanings of action and explores how personal life is
constructed through the play of social relations. In Sullivan’s phrase,
‘the person is person only as I-and-you’; the personal world is
relational.

In the terms used in this book, personality has to be seen as social
practice and not as an entity distinct from ‘society’ Personality is
what people do, just as social relations are what people do, and the
doings are the same. Yet there is a difference which makes personality a
coherent object of study. Personality is practice seen from a particular
angle, which I will call the perspective of the life history.
Psychologies of personality that have stressed the case study as the
basic form of understanding are thus an important resource for social
analysis. John Dollard’s nearly forgotten Criteria for the Life History
is a brilliant summary of early versions that demonstrates this point.

There is a strain of individualism in much case-history research, where
dynamics are treated as wholly internal to the case. This amounts to
seeing the life history as the only form in which practice can be
understood. The structural and institutional analyses in Part II above
show this is untenable for the analysis of gender The most penetrating
case-study research, including Dollard’s own Caste and Class in a
Southern Town, combines the logic of the life history with the logic of
institutional analysis.

At least in our society, people experience themselves and their practice
most readily in terms of a life trajectory, a personal past and a
personal future. Personal time can also be conceived in terms of a ‘life
cycle’, and a good deal of academic research on the family, growth and
ageing is done in that framework. But history is not cyclical, and a
personal history is not an unfolding. It is a construction, something
made.

What is ‘made’, specifically, is the coherence, intelligibility, and
liveability of one’s social relationships through time. Sartre’s notion
of personal life as a ‘unification’, a making-into-a-unity, is important
here. Without it, social analysis reduces a life to a collection of
roles learnt, expectations enacted or structural locations occupied:
Ralf Dahrendorf’s Homo Sociologicus, the man-who-is-his-roles. Some of
the recent work on the construction of subjects by discourses,
influenced by Althusser and Foucault, comes very close to this
conception.

In Being and Nothingness Sartre treated the life history as a
unification with a single principle, the ramifying consequences of some
initial, constitutive choice. I argued in chapter 9 that such a view
over-simplifies the person and misses the importance of contradiction.
Even on Sartre’s model, initial choices may be multiple. More
importantly, complexities of personal life arise from structural
contradictions that go far beyond the particular person.

However much detail is known about a given life, personal life becomes
unintelligible if the structural bases of practice are not kept in view.
A striking demonstration is the attempt to document ‘total personality’
in a study already referred to, Robert White’s Lives in Progress. In a
monumental exercise in longitudinal method White followed three ‘normal’
upper-class Americans from their student days well into adulthood,
applying a battery of psychological tests and collecting data from
interviews and essays. The detail is remarkable; the insight resulting
is remarkably small. Lacking organizing questions about structure, the
study runs out into the sands of eclecticism and blandness, flavoured
with a faint life-cycle ideology of ‘natural growth’.

The contrast with Freud’s study of an upper-class Russian, the ‘Wolf
Man’, is notable. Not that Freud had a theory of social structure worth
twopence, but as a therapist he was highly sensitive to structural
effects in the dynamics of personal life. The ‘Wolf Man’ is a howling
mass of contradictions, and his personality is contradictory because the
elements of an emotional life offered him were impossible to work into a
smooth and consistent whole. Obviously enough the class relations
between peasants and landowners in pre-revolutionary Russia were in
tension. The case history shows how these relations intersected with
gender dynamics – ambivalences between husband and wife, divisions of
labour among servants in childcare and housework, rivalries between
girls and boys – to construct a household that was an emotional
minefield for the small boy.

My experience of life-history interviews suggests that the conclusion
about the contradictory bases of personal life might hold very
generally. The materials offered a growing person are lumpy and
indigestible; ‘unification’ is often hard and may be impossible. The
evolving pattern of a person’s life often involves disjunction,
incoherence or schism. Sartre does not consider that the practice of
unification, like all other practices, may fail. Some theorists even
suggest that participation in contemporary society requires schism in
the person. Laing in The Politics of Experience argues this way about
‘normality’ in a mad society, as do some feminist critiques of the front
that has to be put up by conventional femininity.

Lives are not monads closed off from others. People experience
themselves as having shared pasts and sharing the present; ‘for we are
members one of another’, as the Apostle Paul wrote. (The metaphor is
stronger in seventeenth-century English: the phrase means roughly ‘we
are each others’ limbs’.) This sharing may be as intimate as the story
of a marriage or a love affair never spoken of beyond the two concerned,
or as public as the proceedings of parliament.

Collective practice is not reducible to a sum of individual practices.
In a strict sense there is no such thing as ‘individual practice’ at
all; the phrase is an abstraction from a tissue of relational conduct.
Even masturbation involves socially constructed fantasies, techniques of
arousal and a kind of minimal society in which you are the object of
your own cathexis.

So a personal life is a path through a field of practices which are
following a range of collective logics, and are responding to a range of
structural conditions which routinely intersect and often contradict
each other. It is no wonder that theories of personal life which reify
‘the individual’ and his or her features – such as trait theories of
personality and the scalar conceptions of gender discussed in chapter 8
– give very little grip on reality. The structure of personality is not
the structure of an object. It is a particular unification of diverse
and often contradictory practices.

Thus the concept of personality is logically co-ordinate with the
concept of an ‘institution’, being another empirical unification of
practices. The gender analysis of personality will explore the same menu
of structures as the gender analysis of institutions in chapter 6. To
some extent it already does. Analyses in relation to the structure of
cathexis are very familiar in classical psychoanalysis. An analysis in
relation to the structure of power has been sketched by Shulamith
Firestone, and in another context by the psychoanalysts of colonialism,
Octave Mannoni and Frantz Fanon. Personality analysis in terms of the
structure of labour is the least common, though it exists in embryo in
the work of the German psychologist Frigga Haug and the theoretical work
of Edmund Sullivan in Canada.

A pattern of practice is likely to appear frail when formulated in terms
of its constitutive contradictions and dialectics, tensions and
layerings and historical transformations. If it keeps one shape over a
long period that is because a lot of energy has been invested in keeping
it that way. The Prince family in chapter 1 shows one version of this.
Another is shown by the business and professional families found in our
study, and by J. M. and R. E. Pahl in Managers and their Wives. These
are families whose personal lives are kept in order by the immense
labours of a wife, who appears to have no career but whose work is the
absolute condition of her husband’s apparently ‘individual’ success.

But it is also important to register the potential resilience of a given
organization of practice. Where it constitutes dominant social
interests, it constructs motives to expend a great deal of energy in
defence of the status quo. The depth of anti-feminism among men,
discussed by William J. Goode, is a case in point. Personality does not
constitute social interests, but it embodies personal relations to
social interests which may act powerfully as motives: defences,
identifications, commitments and fears. Where these interlock in related
lives, a pattern may result that is proof against severe stresses.
Stable marriages are perhaps the most familiar example.

Personality dynamics are not the secret key to society, as the first
generation of Freudians like Ernest Jones supposed. Nor are they
irrelevant, as sociological structuralism supposes. In the context of a
theory of practice, personality appears as one of the major sites of
history and politics. It is connected with other sites like
institutions, but has its own configurations. The rest of this chapter
will explore some of these configurations and try to map the sexual
politics that happen on this site.

The Historical Dynamic in Personality

The historicity of personality has been recognized in social theory
mainly by constructing historical typologies of character. A particular
character type is supposed to be dominant at one period of history and
then is swept aside in favour of a new type in a new epoch. The classic
sequence is David Riesman’s ‘tradition-directed’, ‘inner-directed’ and
‘other-directed’ character types in The Lonely Crowd. Other typologies
are Charles Reich’s ‘Consciousness I, II and III’; John Carroll’s
‘puritan’, ‘paranoid’ and ‘remissive’; and countless renditions of the
‘traditional’ versus ‘modern’ theme. Paul Hoch’s typology of masculinity
in White Hero, Black Beast has an alternation instead of a sequence. His
masculine character-types, ‘puritan’ and ‘playboy’, chase each other
through some 3,000 years of history.

A subtler approach can be found in the work of the Frankfurt school on
the psychological bases of fascism. Erich Fromm in Fear of Freedom
argued that the authoritarian character structure was a psychological
solution to problems of alienation created by the economic and cultural
development of capitalism – but not the only one. In The Authoritarian
Personality, as already noticed, the rigid and prejudiced character is
contrasted with others produced in the same historical setting. The
general argument in chapter 9 for the existence of multiple paths of
gender formation suggests a multiple pattern of personality at the end.

The historicity of personality can be understood as the reconfiguring,
by the dynamic of social relations, of the points of tension in
personality development and the politics of personal life. It is not
necessary to suppose a succession of dominant character types to analyze
changes in motivation and personality organization. This can be done by
recognizing emergent sets of pressures and possibilities within which
the actual diversity of personality is composed.

The application of this approach to the analysis of sexual character is
clear in principle, complicated in practice. I would like to illustrate
both the complexities and possibilities with a line of thought about the
recent history of femininity.

Bim Andrews, whose autobiography was quoted in chapter 8, posed the
question ‘which was the right way to live?’. Though the alternative
femininities she perceived are interesting in themselves, the most
notable fact of all was that she saw them as a choice. Bim’s world did
not present her with one pattern as her natural character or inevitable
fate. As the daughter of a domestic servant and coming to adulthood in
Cambridge in the 1920s, she did not grow up in a hotbed of feminism.
Nevertheless the taken-for-grantedness of gender relations and
femininity had been disrupted in southern Britain during the previous
generation. Agitation by the women’s suffrage movement was only its most
visible expression. Others were the literary debates over the ‘new
woman’, the reemployment of working-class women in heavy industry during
World War I and the mobilization of some groups of women workers in
unions and in the co-operative movement. Perhaps most important, there
was now a mass education system which working-class girls had to attend
at the elementary levels, and through which a few had access to
secondary schooling. One was Bim Andrews, who ‘endured the acute
embarrassment of always being top of the class’ and who stayed at school
till she was fourteen and a half. This experience seems to have combined
with her mother’s ‘firm intention to keep me out of domestic service’ to
distance Bim from the conventions of the ‘embryo wives and mothers’ who
were her schoolmates.

Her experience was exceptional but it was not isolated. It was part of a
historic shift in the construction of femininity in the richer parts of
the capitalist world. The same shift can be traced in some detail in
Australia as a result of recent work by sociologists and social
historians including Kerreen Reiger, Jill Matthews, Michael Gilding, Ann
Game and Rosemary Pringle. This research documents a complex of
institutional changes over the first half of the twentieth century
affecting gender relations in the family, state, labour market and
professions. Among them are exactly the changes that affected Bim
Andrews: the expansion of girls’ education and the redefinition of its
content; changes in the composition of households and the domestic
division of labour which soon obliterated ‘service’ as a mass
occupation; and the increasing availability of office work for women.

In combination, these institutional changes redefined the issues in
young women’s lives that needed to be resolved in the construction of
femininity in adolescence and early adulthood. Two issues appear
particularly important. The first was the choice of vocation, which now
replaced the issue of resignation to women’s lot versus protest against
it. ‘The new woman’ was essentially a woman with a vocation outside the
home. But the main issue was not a choice between jobs, rather about
them. The key development was the construction in the early decades of
the twentieth century of the ‘housewife’ as a vocation. Among other
things this involved the growth of ‘domestic science’ as a segregated
curriculum for girls in schools. Whether married women worked for wages
or not had previously been an issue of respectability (to the nineteenth
century labour aristocracy and small-business owners, withdrawing a wife
from earning was a mark of the husband’s success), or of simple need. It
now became a question of rejecting the vocation of housewife.

The second issue was one of competition with men. In a sense this had
been around much longer, as shown by the expulsion of women workers from
mining and heavy manufacturing during the nineteenth century.
Nevertheless the doctrine of ‘separate spheres’, which as Susan Magarey
suggests had gone some way to rationalizing such moves, was under
pressure at the turn of the century. Girls, for instance, were
conspicuously successful in schooling. In Australia their participation
rates in secondary schooling were higher than boys’ at all ages from
fourteen to seventeen, in the first decade of the twentieth century.

These developments did not automatically construct a new femininity. But
they certainly redefined the field within which sexual character was
constructed and relations between different kinds of femininity worked
out. The extraordinary celebration of the normative nuclear family in
mid-century, the apotheosis of the housewife described by Game and
Pringle in their essay ‘The Making of the Australian Family’, was an
attempt to resolve these issues in a new model of emphasized femininity.
The issue of vocation would be resolved by conscious choice of
home-making as a path in life, even as a ‘career’, a concept stressed by
magazines like Readers Digest targeted on the more affluent housewives.
The issue of competition could be resolved by women withdrawing from
men’s sphere, compensated by capital investment and cultural boosting in
their own, especially in the form of new technology like electric
refrigerators. Hence the media emphasized the modern housewife as
something new. At the same time a new sphere of life was defined that
was very deliberately shared, from which competition was consciously
drained. The 1950s popular literature on marriage laid heavy emphasis on
‘companionate’ marriage, ‘togetherness’ and doing things ‘as a family’.

At one level this was a model pushed on women by social interests which
stood to gain from such a resolution, not least the domestic appliance
industry, using new techniques of mass communication and persuasion. At
another level it was a genuine resolution of the issues of vocation and
competition which many women made their own in good faith.

It was a resolution that proved historically unstable. By the 1970s
women who had grown up in the 1950s were the main force in the new
feminism. In The Mermaid and the Minotaur Dorothy Dinnerstein offers a
wonderful account of the psychodynamics of this development in the
United States. She stresses the ambivalences of liberal parenting that
produced the men of the 1960s New Left, able to break with the state and
establishment but not with their masculine prerogatives; and the women
who, once radicalized in the campus and anti-war movements, would carry
the challenge through to their own exclusion from political power.

A somewhat more jaundiced view of the dialectic producing feminism is
offered by Faye Taylor, an Australian teacher interviewed during our
research in schools. At one point she cast her mind back over her own
family history:

  My grandmother was the controlling factor in her household. She
  decided everything that would be done, and I think this was because
  she was the more intelligent of the two. Her husband worked very hard
  but she directed him. Which meant that she was in control. My mother
  from the time she married was, I suppose, controlled in that her
  finances were limited by what her husband gave her. But she had
  complete independence in what she wanted to do, how she wanted to use
  her time, what she could do within that. So that she always did what
  she wanted to, remembering that her responsibilities came first. So I
  wouldn’t say that she was ever a second-class citizen. But from my own
  generation, we could do whatever we wanted to do, remembering that
  when we left school and got a job, there were certain jobs that were
  not open to girls. The ones which were open to girls were very limited
  in pay and promotion, simply because it was expected that when girls
  married they would stop work. That has opened up. But with opening it
  up, there’s been more of a definition of roles. Instead of being
  individual in your own right, you are now pushed into a stereotype
  inferior model, instead of being a different model. And in fighting
  for equality, some of the so-called double standards have been
  accepted where they never really existed before.

This very suggestive passage implies that feminism (liberal feminism
strictly, the only kind most teachers are familiar with) is a kind of
‘regulation’ of femininity in the Donzelot–Foucault sense. Breaking down
separate spheres has meant a bringing-under-control, as women are
subjected to direct comparison with men, while being disadvantaged in
the comparison from the start.

Whether Faye is correct or not on this point, her family history does
illustrate the emergence of competition with men as an issue in the
formation of femininity. Though there is no ‘feminist personality’, it
seems likely that the femininities formed in the historical dynamic that
created contemporary feminism share a position on this issue, rejecting
‘withdrawal from competition’ as a formative personal strategy. It is
also clear that other femininities which do accept this strategy are
still produced. Gabrielle Carey and Kathy Lette’s autobiographical novel
Puberty Blues nicely captures this polarity. The book ends with the two
heroines, who like other girls have spent their time on the beach
looking decorative and waiting for the board-riding boyfriends to come
back out of the surf, buying a cheap surfboard and heading into the
waves themselves. The other girls stay on the beach.

Politics of Personality

To speak of personality as an object of politics is to tread on
dangerous ground; the issue of totalitarianism is very close.
Authoritarian regimes of all persuasions in the twentieth century have
made sustained attempts to mould the upbringing and outlooks of their
citizens. Liberal critics of ‘totalitarianism’ such as Hannah Arendt
have their most effective moments when documenting and rejecting the
invasion of personal life by the party-state.

Yet liberal regimes have done the same kind of job. In One Dimensional
Man Marcuse described the general process of cultural and psychological
manipulation in the United States. The argument can be pinned down to
particular institutions, such as schools. Mass schooling in the United
States, from the late twentieth century to the present, has been
characterized by relentless propaganda in favour of the regime and
against its opponents. As a small example I cite some chapter headings
from a history textbook used in my (relatively liberal) high-school
class in New York in 1959:

  UNIT NINE (1920–1945): AMERICANS DEFEND DEMOCRACY IN A TROUBLED WORLD

  28 The nation faces the threat of world depression

  29 The United States becomes a friendly neighbor

  30 Americans fight round the globe in World War II

  UNIT TEN (1945-now): AMERICAN DEMOCRACY MEETS THE COMMUNIST THREAT

  31 Modern Russia arises to threaten the free world

  32 The United States leads the free world in the West

  33 The United States leads the free world in Asia

  34 Americans practise and protect democracy at home YOU ARE AMERICA

It doesn’t leave much to the imagination – nor much room for
unauthorized attitudes. Beyond the obvious propaganda content, mass
schooling in the United States over a long period has attempted to shape
attitudes and work habits, and to sort, classify and specialize its
pupils, in response to the policies of the central state and business
leadership.

So a politics of personality exists in the Tree world’ as well. On the
argument of this chapter, it must. Personality being a field of the
dynamics of social relations, its construction must be affected by the
formation of social interests, the functioning of institutions and the
mobilization of power. The early women’s liberation slogan ‘the personal
is political’, intended mainly to validate political discussion of
sexuality and domestic work, expressed a general truth.

To make this connection is not to welcome state intervention. There are
good reasons for resisting the state as we now find it, and many of its
policies and mechanisms for influencing people. Along with several
millions of other children I was taught a pack of lies about American
history. Such a practice should be rejected as noxious to growing minds
and dangerous for the future – as it has proved to be, with the
terrifying growth of American chauvinism in the 1980s. The point is that
criticisms of such practices have to be conducted on the merits of the
case. The idea that we should, or can, draw a general line between
politics and personal life is logically misconceived.

The New Right doctrine of ‘small government’ and ‘rolling back the
state’ does not end or seriously reduce state influence on personal
life. It simply changes its direction. As Elizabeth Wilson, Lois Bryson
and Martin Mowbray argue, cutting back on welfare and ‘returning’ care
of the sick, elderly or troubled to the ‘community’ or ‘the family’, in
reality means loading extra unpaid work onto women. The sexual division
of labour and inequalities of gender are intensified. Cutting the
‘burden’ of taxation does not increase freedom for citizens in general.
It increases the advantages of groups who benefit from income being
distributed through the market (capitalists as against workers, employed
as against unemployed, men as against women) at the expense of those
whose welfare depends on distribution of income through the state.

The real question is not whether politics can be removed from personal
life, but what kind of politics invests personal life and how far it can
be democratic or egalitarian. Most important is the political question
as to whether personality can be formed and reconstructed ‘from below’.

Radical movements have, by and large, been much less interested in these
questions than authoritarian movements, the state and business. But in
the last twenty years the problem has come into focus in radical
politics, especially in sexual politics. The methods available for
working on them are complex and not well defined. They have mostly been
evolved by trial and error. Still, a good deal of experience has now
accumulated, which needs examination if we are to judge the prospects of
a radical sexual politics.

The most widespread has been the ‘consciousness-raising group’ (CR
group) developed in the early years of women’s liberation. It was not a
completely new invention; aspects can be found in the ‘affinity groups’
of anarchism, in sewing-circles and other traditions of women’s informal
organization and in American group-therapy techniques. But the
combination was new, the needs it met were general and the technique
spread rapidly. In the early 1970s the women’s liberation movement in
countries like the United States, Canada, Britain and Australia could
well be regarded as a network of CR groups which coalesced in partial
and often fleeting ways for public politics.

The CR group aimed at the reconstruction of femininity in two main ways.
First was discussion and re-evaluation of the past and present
experiences of the women in them. Doing this in a group meant that
everyday relationships, with men, children and other women had to be
thought through as ‘being-for-others’, their everyday logic no longer
presupposed. It also meant that there was support for ‘speaking
bitterness’ (to use the Chinese phrase) about men, saying and thinking
hostile things that were censored or suppressed in everyday life. A CR
group might set an agenda of working systematically through oppressions
in different areas of life. This would call attention to the political
dimension of practices and symbols that normally go without comment,
such as housework, dress and habits of speech. The overall result was to
disrupt the taken-for-grantedness of many of the practices that
constitute conventional femininities.

The second step was to support new practices that might displace the
ones thus disrupted. The CR group became a forum for talking about what
to do in households, in sexual relationships, in bringing up children
and in public politics. In many cases the group itself became a new
friendship network, with the members going to entertainments,
travelling, sometimes working together. In this way the CR group merged
into the construction of feminist communities as the 1970s wore on.

As a technique for the reconstruction of femininity this had several
important strengths. It was flexible, easy to start, inexpensive and
easy to manage in an egalitarian way. It contrasted sharply with both
traditional party politics and traditional psychotherapy. It could deal
with work as well as domestic life and sexual relations. It was easy to
disband if things went wrong.

It also had some significant drawbacks, which were slower to emerge. It
was good at dealing with what was common in women’s experiences, less
good with what divided them. If serious conflicts arose there was little
to prevent the CR group simply splitting up. Like the ‘talking cure’ of
psychoanalysis, it suited the highly educated and affluent and never
spread far among working-class women. The exclusion of men, which was a
condition of much that the CR groups did, meant that heterosexual
relationships were likely to be worked at from only one end. CR
technique had little power to reach unconscious processes or
constitutive commitments, and might therefore work on emotional issues
only at a surface level or within narrow limits. One such limit, pointed
out by lesbian feminists, was a widespread failure in CR groups to
question heterosexuality.

The process of ‘coming out’ as gay is a form of reconstruction that
contrasts sharply with CR work. In the collective coming-out at the end
of the 1960s, the low-key, even covert, strategy of seeking tolerance
and law reform that had characterized earlier homosexual politics was
replaced by a highly visible celebration of gayness. The public
demonstration of ‘gay pride’ went along with a playfulness about gender,
a subversion and recombination of elements – radical drag, gay weddings,
pink boiler suits and so on – which gave an air of carnival to many gay
liberation activities. Public celebration, for instance in the Mardi
Gras in Sydney, has remained an essential part of homosexual politics.

Coming out individually is less spectacular but still involves a visible
break. It means repudiation of a whole history of interactions – in
families, workplaces, the street – that were predicated on an assumption
of heterosexuality. Nothing as drastic is implied in CR work. Two things
moderate the drama of the act. First, ‘coming out’ is not done once and
for all, like a wedding; there is no Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Comings-Out. As autobiographies make clear, coming out to friends is
different from coming out to workmates, and both are different from
coming out to one’s parents and other relations. They may be done at
different times and with very different results. Second, declaring
oneself gay, in whatever setting, can be only one moment in a process.
It may result in major shifts in relationships, but even so has to be
followed by making the new situation work. Friendship networks,
political practices and sexual relationships have to be constructed on
new foundations.

In this sense ‘coming out’ inverts the order of things in CR groups; a
personal reconstruction has to occur, or at least be well advanced,
before social support can be generated. The social support is variable
in the extreme. Coming out in a supportive workplace may be easy and
enriching. In a hostile one it probably means losing the job. In some
families the result is easy acceptance, in others appalling emotional
trauma, depending on the interaction with parents’ masculinity and
femininity.

In another respect the process is closer to CR: the extension of
reconstructed personal networks into a gay ‘community’. There were of
course networks of homosexual people before gay liberation, whose
stories are gradually being retrieved by gay historians. The 1970s saw a
qualitative change in their conditions of existence and those of the
discreet businesses based on them. Gay communities developed on a
considerable scale in cities like San Francisco and Sydney, with a rapid
growth in the number, size and visibility of the businesses servicing
them. ‘Gay capitalism’ emerged and gay businessmen became a force in
homosexual politics, with an influence comparable to that of the
radicals who had launched the gay liberation movement.

This development sharpened the question implicit in ‘coming out’ from
the start, what exactly one was claiming to be. Dilemmas about the
nature of homosexual identity have been mentioned in chapter 7. For both
sexes coming out as gay meant repudiating central features of one
conventional sexual character. Did this mean claiming the other?
Attempting to mix masculine and feminine characteristics risked
dissolving the category of homosexuality itself. Where then was gay
pride, and the basis of movement and community? Though theorists like
David Fernbach insisted on gay men’s effeminacy and Mario Mieli argued
for the transsexual basis of gayness, the drift among homosexual men
during the 1970s was increasingly to resolve these tensions by defining
a gay masculinity. The ‘clone’ style of the late 1970s and early 1980s
was its most visible crystallization, the moustache, T-shirt and tight
jeans proclaiming a male body. This in turn produced tensions with
lesbian women, some of whom have found this uncomfortably like a claim
to the privileges of conventional masculinity.

In one dimension the deconstructionist argument does continue the logic
of ‘coming out’. To come out is to repudiate the business of keeping up
a front of heterosexuality. This front is not likely to be a trivial
part of personality, and may involve an elaborate ‘false-self’ system
like those described by Laing (see the case of ‘David’ discussed in
chapter 9). One cannot simply obliterate such a structure of
personality. Nor will it be replaced by some natural gayness that wells
up from the inner self. The deconstructionist argument extends the
critique of the false self to the constructed selves that replace it,
which equally may freeze the person in outmoded and repressive postures.

But ‘coming out’ was not just a gesture of personal reconstruction. It
was also an attempt to reach out, to create solidarity. A thorough
deconstruction of gay identity would undermine this, and risk
dismantling the personal and collective resources for dealing with
shared problems and combating the hostility that gay people still meet.
The spread of AIDS, creating a need to support those with the disease,
to work out strategies to halt its spread, and to deal with
scaremongering media, shows how important these resources are. As long
as the definition of homosexuality is sustained in the larger structure
of gender relations, gay people are not exactly free to adopt or deny it
as they please.

In the face of this the reconstruction of personal life is always done
under pressure and at risk. CR groups were vulnerable to criticism that
they did not go deep enough. The personality politics of ‘coming out’
likewise include strong motives to limit the amount and visibility of
change.

The emergence of women’s liberation and gay liberation challenged not
only the power of heterosexual men but also the worth of their
masculinity. While most ignored or dismissed the challenge, some were
affected strongly, an experience particularly well described by Vic
Seidler in his essay ‘Men and Feminism’. A historic moment was reached
on the American Left when one of the authors of Unbecoming Men saw his
girlfriend head off for one of the early feminist conferences and
realized he was no longer where the action was. The resulting essay,
‘Women Together and Me Alone’, is a classic of mixed emotions. After
some early experiments with mixed CR groups, feminism more or less told
the men to get their own house in order. The tangled public politics of
the resulting ‘men’s movement’ will be discussed in chapter 12; the
point of interest here is the two practices it developed for the
reconstruction of masculinity at a personal level.

The first was very simple in conception. The idea of a CR group was
borrowed from feminism and applied to men. A group of men would meet
regularly over a period of months to discuss their lives and emotions.
Such ‘men’s groups’ were central to the anti-sexist men’s movement
through the 1970s and some are running now. Documents such as Unbecoming
Men and the narrative of a men’s group in Warren Farrell’s The Liberated
Man show that even in the early days their focus was divided. In these
and later accounts by Paul Morrison and others, three main themes
emerge: recognizing and working on participants’ sexist attitudes and
behaviour towards women; discussing their own masculinity, how it was
formed in growing up, and how it constricts the expression of their
emotions and limits the depth of their relationships; and providing
emotional support to each other.

This contained both a political project intended to support feminism and
a therapeutic project intended to repair the damage bad gender relations
did to men. They were not necessarily consistent, and may even have been
contradictory. Certainly the political project of rooting out the sexism
in masculinity has proved intensely difficult. Work in men’s groups on
how one oppressed women was very different from work in women’s groups
on how one was oppressed. It provoked guilt rather than anger, a
reaction intensified by the accusatory tone of radical feminism’s
interactions with men. A massive sense of guilt runs through mid-1970s
literature such as Jon Snodgrass’s collection For Men Against Sexism. It
seems likely that guilt and frustration between them destroyed many of
the groups set up.

Frustration was a likely outcome and is obvious in Andrew Tolson’s
discussion of mid-1970s men’s groups in Britain. While women’s CR groups
fed into the construction of wider networks, counter-sexist men’s groups
made it more difficult to work in men’s networks outside. On the one
hand the routine and often vicious sexism in masculine milieux became
hard to handle at a personal level. On the other hand, sticking to the
task of raising issues about sexism and challenging patriarchal
practices was likely to result in a drastic loss of credibility. A man
pursuing issues about women’s interests was easily defined as a fool,
slightly mad, or a pervert.

An easier answer to the sense of guilt was to deny the oppression of
women; better still, to claim that men are equally oppressed. This path
was taken in the United States by authors such as Farrell and Jack
Nichols, whose Men’s Liberation presents the reform of masculinity as a
simple parallel to the feminist reconstruction of femininity. The
sex-role interpretation of gender relations made this very easy: if a
woman’s sex role was oppressive for the person in it, a man’s sex role
was also likely to be. The appropriate response was to try to break out
of the stereotypes and repair the psychic damage they caused.

The result was a practice that might be called ‘masculinity therapy’,
which rapidly outgrew the anti-sexist men’s movement. Some was
undertaken in self-directed men’s groups, but more occurred in settings
like encounter groups, retreats, courses, clinics and centres, and
one-to-one counselling and psychotherapy. The defining feature of these
settings was the presence of therapists with a message about
masculinity. Their writings, such as Herb Goldberg’s The Hazards of
Being Male and Albert Ellis’s Sex and the Liberated Man, make clear that
the message is one that depoliticizes gender. Guilt is treated as
irrational or obsolete. The oppression of women is treated as an
illusion or an excess of role rigidity. Homosexuality is, as far as
humanly possible, ignored. The main thing to be overcome is men’s
inhibitions and inexpressiveness which leads them into emotional binds.

I have seen no evidence whatever about the success or failure of this
therapeutic program. But it is clear what its point is: not contesting
inequality but modernizing heterosexual masculinity. The discontent many
men feel as holders of power under challenge is to be relieved by a
change of personal style – a change of tactics in dealings with women,
perhaps a changed self-concept – without any challenge to the
institutional arrangements that produce their power. Perhaps the most
interesting thing about this business is that it often requires a
therapist’s assistance.

It is easy to conclude from the difficulties in these attempts at
reconstructing sexual character that the politics of personality would
be best left alone. The trouble is that it will not be left alone by
others. The New Right, for instance, is actively constructing
aggressive, dominant and violent models of masculinity for adolescents
and children. Rocky has led to Rambo and Rambo to Rocky IV, nicely keyed
in with Reagan’s ‘Star Wars’ campaign. A large marketing program is
currently pushing exceptionally violent toys into young boys’ hands,
like the ‘Masters of the Universe’ whose he-man models seem to be based
on images from the Nazi cartoonist Mjölnir. It is difficult to justify
abandoning the field of personality politics to influences like these.

More positively, the experiences sketched in this section show that
there are several ways in which a self-help reconstruction of
personality can at least be started. Whether it goes very far depends on
other people; for this experience also suggests a strong connection
between personal change and social movements in sexual politics. Chapter
12 will come back to the issue in the collective context.

NOTES

Personality, Society and Life History

(pp. 219–23). Quotations from Freud (1905), pp. 77–8; Sullivan (1984),
p. 55; Paul in Ephesians 4:25. On the emotional dimension of teaching
see among others Otto (1982). The approach to the life history suggested
here was worked out in the research for Making the Difference and
especially Teachers’ Work. A recent revival of interest in the life
history as social science method – see Bertaux (1981) and Plummer (1983)
– looks promising. But it stops short of the most important body of
life-history research, psychoanalysis. And it has learnt nothing from
the most profound theorist of the method, Sartre.

Historical Dynamic in Personality

(pp. 224–8). Girls’ participation rates in schooling from Schools
Commission (1975). Faye Taylor quoted from Teachers’ Work, p. 188.

Politics of Personality

(p. 228–36). Textbook chapter headings from Casner and Gabriel (1955).
For the ‘hidden curriculum’ and business pressures see Bowles and Gintis
(1976). Accounts of CR groups can be found in Allen (1970) and Pogrebin
(1973). Discussions of coming out in Wolfe and Stanley (1980),
Silverstein (1982) and Clark (1983).

