Historical Dynamic

Historicity and ‘Origins’

In 1984 the British government’s program of coal-pit closures provoked a
national strike by mine workers, one of the bitterest industrial
confrontations in recent times. As the struggle got under way with
miners’ leaders and National Coal Board shaping up in best macho style,
the media ran stories about how the miners’ wives were opposed to the
strike. Since industrial disputes in mining are very much a community
affair, these claims provoked a good deal of anger. Some miners’ wives
organized a demonstration to show their support for the strike, and to
the surprise of the mineworkers’ union as well as the government a
solidarity movement among women developed quite rapidly on a national
scale.

One of the initiating groups, from the town of Barnsley, brought out a
booklet about their experience called Women Against Pit Closures. Its
main theme is how the women of the district are part of the class
solidarity of the miners. But the booklet also criticizes the union for
excluding or ignoring women. It conveys a strong sense that now the
women have taken public action, gained a political voice and among other
things have been harassed by police and some arrested, things can never
be the same in the mining towns again: relations between the women and
the men have changed decisively.

This sense that things ‘can never be the same again’, that new
possibilities have opened and old patterns closed off, is exactly what
the historicity of gender relations is about. The concept of historicity
is stronger than the concept of ‘social change’, which may be mechanical
and external, something that happens to people, like a comet, a fire or
a plague. The idea of historicity is about change produced by human
practice, about people being inside the process.

The idea that gender relations have a history is more than a century
old. As noted in chapter 2 it was a basic element in the creation of a
social science of gender. Its early formulations, in best
nineteenth-century style, revolved around the problem of ‘origins’. This
is at best a half-way house to the concept of historicity. The concept
of ‘origins’ implies that something is already formed, though not fully
developed, in its earliest appearance, and that what follows is the
unfolding of a nature already settled.

Of the origin theories that dot the landscape, by far the most
influential has been Friedrich Engels’s Origin of the Family, Private
Property and the State, which appeared in 1884. Engels’s view of
primitive social structure was, in its day, a reasonable piece of
armchair research. It was based mainly on Greek and Roman literary
sources enlivened by a little early ethnography. But it was not
state-of-the-art prehistory even then. The Assyrian civilization had
been revealed a generation before; the Egyptian hieroglyphs had been
deciphered in the 1820s; and while Engels wrote, major excavations were
showing the outlines of a yet more ancient civilization in Sumer. In the
decades that followed, Engels’s limited sources were overwhelmed by an
explosion of archaeological information. In the Mediterranean region,
which his main sources dealt with, archaeology brought to light the
Minoan, Mycenaean, Hittite and Etruscan cultures, to mention only the
most spectacular. By the 1920s prehistory had become a sophisticated
science with well-developed field methods. Technically detailed regional
syntheses like Gordon Childe’s Dawn of European Civilization were
appearing; and speculative library essays like Engels’ Origin were
simply obsolete.

One reason it has remained the focus of argument is that the
prehistorians have not done their job. There is no literature that
debates and synthesizes the field evidence, now vast, that bears on the
early history of gender relations. The secondary literature on
prehistory, with very few exceptions, takes the sexual division of
labour and the subordination of women for granted.

Here, for instance, are two famous prehistorians discussing the early
family:

  Since hunting put a premium on masculine qualities, this activity
  became a special province of males, and a sexual division of labour
  was instituted under which women continued to gather plant, insect and
  comparable foods while men developed the skills required for tracking
  down and killing game. This heightened the need for a partnership of
  the sexes.

No evidence is offered for this; the sexual division of labour from
later societies is simply read back. It is difficult to think of any
other topic on which such a colossal anachronism would get past a
professional historian’s self-censorship. This example is from two
decades ago, but little has changed in the archaeological literature
since. With modern historiography sunk in patriarchal ideology, even an
obsolete essay that asks some of the right questions looks good.

Of course Engels is more than the author of an obsolete essay. With the
founding fathers’ texts canonical (or nearly so) for orthodox Marxists,
his Origin has inevitably become the focus of argument over Marxist
explanations of women’s oppression now. Opponents of Marxism have found
it easy to carry on the combat by inventing an alternative prehistory.
As Homeric warriors battled for possession of a hero’s corpse wherever
the hero fell, struggle has raged over the true origin of patriarchy
without much thought about the choice of battlefield. The most bizarre
results were a completely speculative debate about whether there was a
primitive matriarchy, a prehistoric world ruled by women, and if so how
it was overthrown by men; and a completely speculative theory of
evolution that found the origins of patriarchy in palaeolithic hunting,
the ‘master pattern’ of the human species according to Lionel Tiger.

Christine Delphy, whose splendid demolition of Origin myths deserves to
be better known, observes the drift of this debate away from the insight
that began it. ‘In fact, under cover of putting an historical question,
an ahistorical one has actually been posed: “What are the natural
reasons which caused male supremacy?”’ Since there are no natural
reasons for a social relationship, this debate cannot ever be resolved.
It is basically symbolic, a way of making declarations about the
present; one of those really satisfying arguments that exclude all
evidence that might tend to settle them.

The ultimate weakness of the Origin debate is that to have any force,
either strategically or symbolically, it must assume that nothing much
changes after the Origin. Like the Elephant’s Child in the Just So
Stories having its nose stretched, once you get it you are stuck with
it. In all essentials, the argument assumes, ‘male bonding’ is the same
now as it was among the mammoth-hunters, patriarchy as it was when Moses
came down from the mountain.

Alongside the mythography of the Origin there is a hybrid literature
that presents itself as a scientific search for origins; the
participants include Kathleen Gough, Rayna Reiter and Maurice Godelier.
Its basis is an attempt to synthesize data from archaeology with
contemporary studies of the behaviour of apes and monkeys and the
ethnography of small-scale societies, preferably hunter-gatherers. The
latter two are supposed to cast light by analogy on what things were
like in early human evolution. Clare Burton’s critique of this
literature is apt. The analogical evidence fails to establish anything
significant about the remote past, and the origins argument establishes
absolutely nothing about the present. Reiter’s paper ‘The Search for
Origins’, perhaps the most interesting in this literature, shows the
stress by falling apart into two quite incompatible arguments. One is a
sketch of major transitions in the world history of gender relations – a
novel and important exercise. But this is framed by the quite spurious
claim that knowing the origins of gender hierarchy gives the strategic
clue to how it may be abolished now.

The origin literature’s assumption of the homogeneity of history, to put
it formally, is important as a mechanism of ideology. As a basis of
theory it is less compelling. It either denies historical change, or
allows just one model of change, the natural unfolding of a fixed logic.
This is incompatible with the view that social structures are
constituted by practice. It is inconsistent with any conception of
internal contradictions in gender relations, since they must give rise
to historical discontinuities. It is also inconsistent with the
subdivision of structures proposed in chapter 5, since a consequence of
recognizing different logics of relationship is recognizing
contradictions that emerge between them. If the arguments and evidence
assembled in chapters 3, 5 and 6 have any weight, the notions of a
homogeneous history and a formative origin are ruled out absolutely.

We must also reject the conventional ‘history of sex’ and the more
recent history of ‘sex roles’, both of which are based on a similar
premiss of homogeneity. Such familiar texts as Rattray Taylor’s Sex in
History conceive their subject-matter as the varying expressions of an
underlying essence. The history is the story of how these expressions
modulate under different circumstances: changing religious ideas,
heavier or lighter censorship and so forth. But sexuality itself is not
understood as formed in history, indeed as changing at all. Vern
Bullough, a historian of homosexuality in this vein, puts it succinctly:
‘In sum, homosexuality has always been with us; it has been a constant
in history’. As R. A. Padgug argues in an essay on conceptualizing
sexuality in history, the idea of an unchanging essence misses the
connection of sexuality with practice, the historical formation of the
categories and relations that I have called the structure of cathexis.

The same is true of the history of ‘sex roles’ that emerged in the late
1970s. Patricia Branca’s Women in Europe Since 1750, Peter Stearns’s Be
a Man! and Elizabeth and Joseph Pleck’s The American Man may serve as
respectable examples. The ‘role’ framework declares a concern with
social definitions. Stearns’s book, for example, opens with an essay on
‘manhood as a social construct’. But as the analysis in chapter 3
showed, ‘sex role’ theory is only notionally social. It actually rests
on a pre-social sex dichotomy, which supplies the missing structure to
the analyses of attitudes and interactions. Exactly the same is true of
sex-role history. These texts rest on the fixed dichotomy of sex –
women’s history plus men’s history – and concern themselves mainly with
mapping changes in attitudes and expectations about the dichotomy.

A much more profound grasp of the historicity of gender is shown in the
new gay history that has superseded work like Bullough’s. Homosexuality
is a historically specific thing, and the fact that it is socially
organized becomes clear once we distinguish between homosexual behaviour
and a homosexual identity. While homosexual behaviour of some kind may
be universal, this does not automatically entail the existence of
self-identified or publicly labelled ‘homosexuals’. In fact, the latter
are unusual enough to require a historical explanation. Jeffrey Weeks
argues in Coming Out that in Western Europe, male homosexuality did not
gain its characteristically modern meaning and social organization until
the late nineteenth century. That period witnessed the advent of new
medical categorizations, homosexuality being defined as a pathology by
the German psychiatrist Westphal in 1870. There were also new legal
proscriptions. All male homosexual behaviour was subject to legal
sanctions in Britain by the end of the century.

Such medical and legal discourses underlined a new conception of the
homosexual as a specific type of person. Alan Bray in Homosexuality in
Renaissance England shows that while homosexual encounters certainly
occurred in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, the
participants did not have a clear social definition. They were therefore
not persecuted systematically, though treated with extreme brutality on
occasion. Homosexual behaviour was seen as a potential in the lustful
nature of all men, or indeed a potential for disorder in the cosmos.
When men with same-sex preferences began to be defined as a group, in
the milieu associated with the ‘Molly houses’ of London in the early
eighteenth century, they were characterized by a high degree of
effeminacy and what is now known as transvestism.

Thus the emergence of both the medical discourse on homosexuality, and
the corresponding self-conception of homosexuals, need to be related to
particular social conceptions of femininity and masculinity and to the
social reorganization of gender. Just as ‘the housewife’, ‘the
prostitute’ and ‘the child’ are historically specific social types that
must be understood in the context of gender relations of the time, so
‘the homosexual’ represents the modern definition of a new type of adult
male. It was a man who was classified as an invert, and who, frequently
at least, understood himself to possess a ‘woman’s soul in a man’s
body’.

These developments in gay history move decisively beyond the concept of
modulations to a radical view of sexuality and gender identity as
constructed within the history of a changing social structure, by
processes of social struggle.

There are some connections with the work of Jacques Donzelot and Michel
Foucault. Foucault’s History of Sexuality argues forcefully that an
emphasis on sexuality as a motivating force in life is not only
distinctively modern but is part of a process of social control. He is
very clear about the social construction of sexual ideology and gender
identities. As he observes in an essay on the transsexual Herculine
Barbin, the demand that everyone should have a clear-cut and fixed
identity as a member of one sex is historically recent.

But the focus of this work on the apparatuses of power – the professions
and the state – and the forms of knowledge they generate, gives no grip
on the grass-roots reality that was the object of the strategies of
control. This theoretical problem has become a strategic dilemma in gay
liberation. When identity as a homosexual is seen as an effect of
‘regulation’, of the discourses and strategies used by the powerful to
fix, study and label the dissident, the logical response is to
deregulate or deconstruct. But deconstructing homosexual identity means
dismantling the political power that has been gained by a mobilization
stressing that identity, proclaiming gay pride. So the theoretical
advances generated by gay liberation seem to require the end of gay
liberation.

The roots of this paradox are in a lopsided conception of social process
endemic in theories of discourse and regulation. The practical side of
the problem will be discussed in chapter 10 below. At the level of
theory it can be corrected from feminist history. The approach pioneered
by Sheila Rowbotham in Hidden from History and Women, Resistance and
Revolution holds the focus on social relations, especially structures of
power. But it gives a central place to the practice of the oppressed.
The uses of power meet strategies of resistance, with varying results.
Such an approach acknowledges the reality of power without presenting
woman as eternal victim; and insists on the agency of the oppressed
without denying the reality of oppression.

Thus the historicity of gender defined at the beginning of this section
is not a completely abstract concept. Change is produced by human
agency; conversely all practice occurs in specific settings and has a
particular place in the sequence of events. The idea of historicity
implies a concrete history, some of whose features are now clear. Its
subject matter is a structure of social relations and the form of life
constituted in them, including sexual and political life. This history
is not homogeneous. As Juliet Mitchell emphasized, the different
structures of relationship may develop in different rhythms and come
into contradiction. Real social struggles do not have predictable or
standard outcomes, and sometimes change the conditions that gave rise to
them. There is a long-term historical dynamic of practice and structural
transformation.

The study of the historical dynamic of gender relations is still in its
early days, but it is clear that its shape is nothing like the smooth
unfolding of a predetermined logic. Gender history is lumpy. There are
moments of transition, when the conditions of practice alter fast; there
are periods of more or less steady shift in a given direction; and there
are periods when a particular balance of forces is stabilized.

The concrete focus of this history (as distinct from the abstract
definition of its subject-matter and scope) is the composition of the
gender order of a given time and place, and the collective projects that
compose it. To make sense of these projects requires a history of the
formation of groups and categories, and of the types of personalities,
motives and capacities drawn upon in sexual politics.

In those terms, the following section is not even the sketch of a
history. But it is important at least to move the argument as far as
posing concrete historical problems. What follows is an attempt to state
some of the questions that need answering about the dynamics of gender
on the scale of world history.

The Course of History

The early development of gender relations is a matter of deep interest,
regardless of the origins debate. In fact it hardly matters whether we
can define an origin or not. The history begins when the archaeological
evidence becomes full enough to throw some real light on the structure
of gender relations.

There is no evidence of any weight before the upper palaeolithic, nor is
it likely to appear. The earliest stages of human tool-making and food
production have left material traces like tools, bone deposits and
hearths, but there is nothing in such objects to indicate the gender
relations in which they were produced. There is no basis of evidence for
the conventional assumption, made alike by archaeologists,
sociobiologists and many feminists, that there was a sharp sexual
division of labour with men making tools and going hunting while women
gathered or stayed at home. That is simply guesswork.

By the upper palaeolithic some evidence is accumulating in the form of
paintings, bone carvings and burials. While these are as uncertain a
representation of social reality as a single page of Playboy would be,
they are at least pointers. For instance a sexual division of labour is
suggested by rock paintings in eastern Spain, where genitals and breasts
are distinguishable and women and men are associated with different
forest scenes. A burial and other objects at a settlement of
mammoth-hunters at Dolní Věstonice in Czechoslovakia imply some
association of a woman with ritual power.

To assemble such fragments into a historical argument will require a lot
of work; isolated examples like these may be quite misleading. I mention
them simply to show that this is the stage in the story where a
reconstruction becomes just possible. The evidence becomes very much
richer with the development of the first agricultural societies in
south-western Asia – the lands around Mesopotamia – around 10,000 years
ago.

Some speculation about the history of gender identifies a matriarchal,
or at least egalitarian, stage in neolithic village society based on
domestication of plants and animals and the invention of cloth and
pottery. This is followed at a considerable interval by a patriarchal
stage associated with cities or nomadic herders, warfare and kingship.
Unfortunately for this scheme the results of post-war excavation have
broken down the once clear distinction between an ‘agricultural
revolution’ and an ‘urban revolution’. It now appears that towns like
Jericho in Palestine, Çatal Hüyük in Anatolia and Abu Hureyra on the
middle Euphrates developed long before the plains civilizations of
Mesopotamia and Egypt, close to the time when agriculture and animal
husbandry emerged. If city walls are an indication of warfare, then at
Jericho war came before pottery. There is no evidence whether it was a
male monopoly or not.

Two conclusions about this era seem clear, nevertheless. One is that the
cultural elaboration of gender had begun. At Çatal Hüyük for instance
women’s graves included jewellery more often than men’s, and there were
differences in the types of tools and features of clothing. In some
respects women and men were being treated differently in ritual and
religion. The second is the absence of a sharp sex difference in access
to social goods. Women’s graves and ritual objects are not reported as
poorer than men’s. Argument from a negative is notoriously weak, but so
far as this goes it suggests that the cultural marking of gender
differences in early settlements did not require an economic
subordination of women. The excavator of Çatal Hüyük, James Mellaart,
cautiously remarks that ‘the position of women was obviously an
important one’.

With the invention of writing in Sumer around 5,000 years ago the
history of gender relations takes on new detail and immediacy, and a
history of the structure of cathexis becomes possible. The surviving
records include myths that show patterns of emotion, commercial and
legal documents that evidence divisions of labour and household
arrangements, and state archives that cast light on the organization of
power. Some of this is stunningly familiar. Stories of jealousy,
disputes about paternity, idylls of love and loyalty, are found in the
earliest surviving literatures. Yet it is also very alien. Early epics
from the Gilgamesh tablets to the Iliad show structures of emotion very
different from ours. A good part of the dynastic history of Egypt
revolves around planned incest on a scale that should have turned
Freud’s beard prematurely white. There is no clearer case of the need to
treat gender history rigorously as history, not as a reading-back. The
reconstructed patterns are likely to be unfamiliar, perhaps shockingly
so.

Writing is not only a source of evidence, it was itself a major social
technique, closely bound up with the centralized states and commercial
networks that were knitting whole regions into the provinces of an urban
culture. By perhaps 5,000 years ago in south-west Asia and the eastern
Mediterranean, 3,000 years ago in India and China, 1,500 years ago in
Central America, a new social order was entrenched beyond the power of
wars or famines to destroy. It was characterized by state structures
that linked cities to agricultural hinterlands, with large populations
integrated by exchange of services and goods as well as religion and
power. Its history has been continuous from then until the advent of
industrial capitalism.

Historians’ accounts of this transition, in so far as they have
addressed social dynamics, have focused on the class issues by which
Gordon Childe originally characterized the ‘urban revolution’. We can
now pose the question of a gender dynamic at a more fundamental level
than the traditional question of the effects of this transition on the
status of women. If the argument of chapter 6 is broadly correct, the
creation of the state is itself a reorganization of gender relations,
particularly the structure of gender power. The sexual division of
labour is implicated in the production processes that generate the
surplus of goods and services which makes urban populations possible. It
is important to know to what extent the surplus is appropriated through
sexual politics and on gender lines, and to what extent the increased
specialization of workers is a gendered one. It seems likely that the
changed population densities, opportunities and demographic structure of
urban populations were accompanied by changes in the structure of
cathexis.

The construction of the state is a particularly interesting and
important aspect of these issues. One of its key features was the
invention of armies. As far as the written and visual record goes, the
armies of Sumer, Egypt and their successors were composed wholly (or
nearly so) of men. David Fernbach proposes that the ‘masculine
specialization in violence’ is a key both to the development of the
state as an instrument of class and patriarchal power, and to the
history of masculinity. The point is important, but this overstates it.
Ancient armies were small, so it is likely that organized violence could
determine the character only of a minority of men. Nor did the masculine
personnel of the machinery of violence immediately determine a
subordination of women in other spheres of life. Both in Sumer and in
Egypt there is a good deal of evidence of women’s prestige and
authority. In Sumer for instance women owned property, engaged in trade
and so on, while the myths have goddesses active and powerful, notably
the cycle of legends around the goddess Inanna (Ishtar). In Egypt much
the same is true, with women’s prestige perhaps rising in the period of
the Empire, when Egyptian military power was at its height.

Yet the control of the means of violence by some men rather than by any
women remains a central fact. So does the concentration of supreme
political authority in the hands of a man or group of men. The
implication is that early states were a vehicle of the differentiation
of masculinities and a site of contestation between them. The conflict
between the priests of Amon and the reforming Pharaoh Akh-en-Aton at the
height of the Egyptian Empire is a striking example. The stake of these
struggles was still limited because the exclusion of women from supreme
power did not mean their overall subordination in other spheres.

There seems to be some confirmation of this in the structure of emotion
in the world’s first (surviving) literary masterpiece, the
Sumero-Akkadian Epic of Gilgamesh. The story centres on the conflict and
passionate attachment of Gilgamesh, King of Uruk, and Enkidu, a hero
from the wild; the two men turn out to be mirror images of each other.
The sexuality in the epic seems to involve ritual more than emotional
relationships. The strongest feelings and personal attachments are
connected with war and rulership rather than sex.

These bits of evidence suggest societies that were controlled by men but
not ‘patriarchal’ in the sense usually understood today. That is to say,
the patterns of emotional relationship, production and consumption were
not closely integrated with the relations of gender subordination and
exclusion that had developed in the state. The culture was not
completely ‘gendered’. If that is true, the subsequent history of
agricultural/commercial civilization in western Asia and the
Mediterranean involves a deepening institutionalization of patriarchy to
the point we are familiar with in classical Greece (for example the
exclusion of women from the public sphere in Athens) and the Roman
Empire. There is a major transition in gender relations here which does
not obviously correspond to a major change in technology, demography or
class relations.

However it is important not to presume a single sequence of events, for
two strong reasons. One is the diversification of urban civilizations,
including their gender orders. The connection of hegemonic masculinity
with militarism and violence that developed in the Mediterranean world
and Europe seems not to have developed in China, at least to the same
degree. In Confucian culture soldiers had much less prestige, scholars
and administrators more. It seems likely that the social surplus
produced in agricultural/commercial society allowed new options, more
potential diversity of social structure. With no global dynamic to
constrain them, the result was likely to be divergent gender histories
in the major world provinces of urban culture.

The other reason is that in the five millennia of its ascendancy,
agricultural/commercial civilization never controlled, let alone
covered, the greater part of the inhabited world. Because of their
density urban cultures probably included the majority of the world’s
human population, but left vast tracts where settlement was organized on
different bases. Lower-density economies were pastoral (central Asia),
hunter-gatherer (northern North America, Amazonia, Australia),
agricultural but not urban (Mississippi–Great Lakes, western Africa) and
an infinite range of combinations. It is a gross historical error to
treat these societies as primitive survivals (much of the literature on
‘origins’ does), as static, or as just peripheral to the real human
story. Synthetic works like Basil Davidson’s Africa in History show
dramatically how active and intricate was the history of societies
beyond the pale of the major empires.

It is difficult to get bearings on the gender orders of such a range of
situations, and I will make only a few suggestions. The most promising
sources are written decriptions of these societies by travellers from
literate cultures. Roman and Chinese descriptions of the barbarians
across the frontier have an understandable emphasis on what was
perceived as the main threat, the hypermasculinity of undisciplined
warriors. The account of gender relations from such sources, then, is
likely to be systematically biased; the reality may be very different.
The mutual dependence of women and men in subsistence agriculture is
likely to give considerable power resources to women. High rates of
fertility plus high rates of infant mortality mean that close
mother-child relations are unlikely, as Philippe Ariès has argued for
mediaeval Europe, and femininity cannot be constructed around dependence
and nurturance. It is a cliche that peasant women are ‘hard’ in terms of
urban sensibilities; there are hard reasons for it. Finally it is
notable that the heroic literatures of societies on the fringes of urban
culture, while stressing masculine violence, do not picture women as
simply subordinate. In the pre-Christian mythology of the Anglo-Saxons,
for instance, when Beowulf had triumphed over the monster Grendel he
faced an even fiercer struggle with Grendel’s Mum. Meanwhile the Vikings
imagined the Valkyries, war goddesses more bloody and terrifying in the
original than in the sanitized modern versions.

Over the last 500 years the world order just sketched has been replaced
by something very different. This era sees the first global empires,
controlled from western Europe; the first global economy, centered on
the North Atlantic; a new system of production and exchange, with
rationalized agriculture, industrial manufacturing and capitalist
control; a revolutionary development of transport, medical technique and
nutrition resulting in a spectacular increase of world population;
bureaucratized and powerful state structures, which have developed not
only an unprecedented capacity to educate and control, but also an
unprecedented capacity for mass killing. As with the ‘urban revolution’,
the node of this transition has long been taken to be the class dynamic.
As in that case, we can now pose questions not only about the effects on
gender relations but about the gender dynamic of the transition itself.
Three issues emerge most clearly, centering on the three main
structures.

The first has to do with the reconstruction of the state and of
masculinity. On the argument of chapter 6, the bureaucratized state is
in fundamental respects a pattern of gender relations. The previous
exclusion of women from the state apparatus cannot be sustained. More
and more women are now drawn into employment in the state; exclusion is
replaced by various forms of segregation and direct subordination. The
rationalization of administration is incompatible with forms of
masculinity that were hegemonic in the aristocratic ruling classes of
the old regime. Even in the military branch of the state, heroic
personal leadership is steadily displaced by the calculating masculinity
of General Staffs and logistics experts. Napoleon appealed to ‘la
gloire’; Admiral Nimitz, the architect of the American defeat of Japan
in World War II, hung a sign in his office that read: ‘IS IT IN THE
REALM OF PRACTICABILITY OF MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES?’ Commercial
capitalism calls on a calculative masculinity and the class struggles of
industrialization call on a combative one. Their combination,
competitiveness, is institutionalized in ‘business’ and becomes a
central theme in the new form of hegemonic masculinity.

The second issue has to do with the wedge that is driven between money
economy and domestic economy, between wage work and house work. As
Elizabeth Janeway remarks, the notion of ‘the home’ as a distinct sphere
of life, the stronghold of family and leisure, did not exist before the
eighteenth century in Europe. The notion that women were or ought to be
dependent on men would have seemed absurd in the context of the
reciprocities of village agriculture and commercial towns. In fact
women’s extensive involvement in production, and in earning cash,
continued through the period of industrialization. As Joan Scott and
Louise Tilly have shown, the percentage of European women in paid jobs
remained impressively stable in the nineteenth century. It was the
location and social meaning of the work that changed. A combination of
technology and industrial politics gradually levered women out of the
core industries of the Industrial Revolution, creating the segregated
occupations and low wage structures now familiar. The ‘family wage’
model of male breadwinner and dependent wife, never a reality for much
of the working class, nevertheless became a criterion both of union
activity and state policy. The construction of the gender division
between ‘breadwinner’ and ‘housewife’ was formative not only for modern
definitions of masculinity and femininity but also for the character and
direction of working-class politics.

The third issue has to do with a new structure of cathexis centering on
what might be called hegemonic heterosexuality. The shift here is
complex and subtle. Heterosexual relationships had been predominant in
the previous European agricultural/commercial civilization, but were not
exactly hegemonic, given the importance of asceticism in the Christian
tradition before Protestantism. The married heterosexual couple now came
to be defined as a cultural ideal, and this involved a splitting-off of
kinds of sexuality that came to be seen as deviant. More, they come to
be identified with types of people: the homosexual, the pederast, the
whore-master, the Don Juan, appear as social types. It seems that this
typification is reflected in the internal organization of emotions.
There is a marked growth in the tendency to form fixations, both on
people and objects, a tendency essential to the construction of the
family as a tightly knit emotional unit but which ultimately breaks its
bounds. One result is the cult of sexual fetishes – high heels, corsets
and so on – which is in full swing by Krafft-Ebing’s day. The partial
reification of emotional relationships here is surpassed by the
development of a completely externalized sexuality in twentieth-century
mass media, starting with the cult of movie sex goddesses and moving on
to the pinup and the eroticization of advertising. The reorganization of
emotions that allows this externalization of cathexis is perhaps the
truth behind Foucault’s claim of an increasing incitement rather than
repression of sexuality.

These are issues about the nature of the transformation in the core
countries of the new world order. Another set of issues arises about the
global spread of these relations. There is now considerable research on
the effects of imperialism on the position of women in the colonized
world. The impact is plainly uneven. We can nevertheless say that for
the first time in history since early urbanization there is a strong
dynamic tending to standardize gender relations in different parts of
the world. The spread of wage relationships is one part of this; the
labour market segmentation strategies of international businesses
another; the cultural prestige of the ‘Western’ family, especially among
urban people, a third.

At the same time the creation of the imperialist world order involves a
global differentiation of gender patterns, or inserts a global dimension
into their definition. The frontier of trade, conquest or settlement
exalted forms of masculinity different from those becoming dominant in
the core countries. The formula of the Davy Crockett story – the
frontiersman elected to Congress at odds with the urban elite – is
classic. So is the formula of normalization: the white women arrive to
raise families. An Australian history of women’s work in the colonies is
called Gentle Invaders, and the point is well made. The expansion of
white settlement involves a dialectic of masculinities and femininities
as well as race and class; the women were invading white men’s realms as
well as the lands of the blacks.

More broadly than the process of settlement, imperialism involves
reconstruction of the sexual division of labour on a global scale.
Agricultural communities are systematically disrupted. New industries
commonly involve a stark sexual division of labour: men in mines and
copra plantations, women picking cotton, etc. More recently a strong
sexual division of labour has been created in Third World manufacturing,
in industries such as garment-making and microprocessor assembly. Yet
women have also gained access to education on an unprecedented scale,
and with it entry to expanding occupations like clerical work and some
semi-professions such as teaching.

Though the evidence is much more difficult to come by, it seems that
there might also be differentiation in the structure of cathexis. The
psychoanalytic arguments of Octave Mannoni in Prospero and Caliban and
Frantz Fanon in The Wretched of the Earth and Black Skin, White Masks,
suggest that colonialism disrupts existing forms of masculinity and
femininity and produces on both sides a distinctive organization of the
unconscious. Episodes like the Port Moresby (Papua) race/rape panic of
1925, documented by Amirah Inglis in Not a White Woman Safe, suggest
that this dynamic can have drastic effects in colonial politics.

Crisis Tendencies

The ‘crisis of the family’ has not ushered in Armageddon, despite the
confident predictions made a decade ago. Indeed with the current
conservative ascendancy in Western politics it is easy to feel that the
cultural and sexual radicalism of the 1960s and 1970s has gone for
nothing. Yet rhetoric about threats to the family and the decline of
family values is not to be dismissed as a tactical ploy. It is a pointer
to real changes, real tensions and fears. Nor have the sexual liberation
movements been dispersed, however far short their accomplishments have
fallen of the hopes of 1968–75. A political force was created then which
is still active and in some situations effective. If the idea of a
full-blown crisis of the gender order is exaggerated, it is undeniable
that we are in the presence of powerful tendencies towards crisis. The
political conflict over issues of gender and sexuality is structured
around those tendencies and the historical possibilities they open up.

In Legitimation Crisis Jürgen Habermas analyses the concept of ‘crisis
tendencies’ in relation to the class dynamics of late capitalist
societies. The details of his analysis assume a generative nucleus (or
‘principle of organization’), which I have argued in chapter 3 and 5 is
not applicable to gender relations, and may be misleading for class
relations too. Yet the concept of crisis need not depend on a postulate
of systematicity. It can be applied to a historically composed gender
order, or to the gender regime of a particular institution, provided it
is possible to distinguish historical developments that call into
question the properties of the gender order as a whole from those that
can be contained locally. For instance the political processes that
allow an Indira Gandhi or a Margaret Thatcher entry to power are not
crisis tendencies in terms of the overall structure of men’s dominance.
They do not imply an improvement in the conditions of practice for women
generally; in fact with Thatcher it has been the reverse.

The following discussion explores possible crisis tendencies in the
gender order of the rich capitalist countries. I take the major
structural features of this gender order, produced by the history
sketched in the last section, to be (a) the gendered separation of
domestic life from the money economy and the political world; (b)
heavily masculinized core institutions and a more open-textured
periphery; (c) institutionalized heterosexuality and the invalidation or
repression of homosexuality. These patterns sustain (d) the major
pattern of sexual politics, the overall subordination of women by men.
If this is broadly correct, the analysis of crisis tendencies is a
question of identifying dynamics which have the potential to transform
these four features, and thus change in fundamental ways the conditions
of future social practice.

The debate on the ‘crisis of the family’ provides a useful
starting-point on the assumption that it provides evidence of real
crisis tendencies, though misunderstood because conservative sexual
ideology reifies the family as the basis of society. The discussion in
chapter 6 of the dynamics constructing the family raised two points
highly relevant here: the dependence of the family form on other
institutional structures, notably the state; and the weakening of
legitimate patriarchy as the form of authority within the family. There
is an obvious parallel between the latter and developments within the
state connected with women’s gaining citizenship rights.

On these bases we may define a tendency towards a crisis of
institutionalization, a weakening in the ability of the institutional
order of family-plus-state to sustain the legitimacy of men’s power. The
long-term political source is the importance of generalizable claims to
equality as the basis of legitimacy of the state. This claim has
operated in class relations (as argued by T. H. Marshall), race
relations (the civil rights campaign for American blacks being an
immediate source of the New Left and the new feminism) and global
politics (decolonization). Nothing has prevented it having an impact on
gender relations. Responding to challenges to the legitimacy of the
political order, or even to the government of the day, involves the
state in strategies that inevitably disrupt the legitimacy of domestic
patriarchy.

Some are quite direct: funding women’s education on a scale comparable
with men’s, providing machinery for no-fault divorce, funding women’s
refuges and training police for intervention in domestic violence, and
so on. Others are more indirect, such as the changing provisions about
property, taxation and pensions that treat a married woman as a person
in her own right. There need be no intention to undermine domestic
patriarchy. The machinery of these policies – divorce courts, the
police, etc. – become the sites of a political struggle in which
masculine prerogatives are defended, often successfully. An example is
divorce proceedings involving lesbian mothers, in some of which attacks
on lesbianism are made and influence decisions on the custody of the
children. Nevertheless the whole process destroys the
taken-for-grantedness of patriarchal authority on which the simple
reproduction of power inequalities rests.

The result is not an automatic disruption of the institutional order of
power, but must be an increasing vulnerability to challenge. Whether and
how challenges develop is a further question. Conditions for the
challenge that did develop in rich capitalist countries in the 1960s and
1970s include, at a minimum, the fact that women had easier and more
reliable contraception (the Pill, intra-uterine devices, etc.); the
growth of women’s higher education to a mass scale; and the sharpening
contradiction, for groups of younger women radicalized in the anti-war,
civil rights and campus struggles of the 1960s, between the rhetoric of
equality and the practice of sexual oppression in the radical movement
itself.

The advent of the Pill in the late 1950s was denounced as a giant step
towards a general breakdown of morality, a theme still pursued by the
Pope. Once again the rhetoric of the Right is a useful guide to
underlying tensions. We may define a complex but powerful tendency
towards a crisis of sexuality, in which hegemonic heterosexuality comes
unstuck as a stable resolution of the issues of cathexis and motivation.

In the previous section and in chapter 6 I argued that heterosexual
masculinity was historically constructed by the exclusion of particular
forms of desire and relationship, which were split off into marginalized
masculinities, most significantly homosexual. It can be argued that a
comparable process has operated in the construction of modern
femininity, though the resulting patterns are not symmetrical because of
the structure of power (see chapter 8).

In the ideal couple relationship defined by hegemonic heterosexuality,
and theorized as ‘the family’ by Talcott Parsons, a stable reciprocity
of cathexis is achieved. But it is achieved only by a process of
repression, both internal and external, which creates resistances and
oppositions. Externally these include the ‘wild’ masculinities discussed
above, and the bonds among women theorized by Adrienne Rich as the
‘lesbian continuum’. Internally the opposition includes a range of
forbidden impulses and attachments, evidence on which has emerged mainly
in psychoanalytic research (see chapter 9 on the ‘layering’ of gender in
personality).

Hegemonic heterosexuality, then, is not a natural fact but a state of
play in a field of power and cathexis; at best an ongoing
accomplishment. The accomplishment may cease, the state of play alter.
The resistances and oppositions amount to a crisis tendency if the
social supports of the process of repression prove inadequate, are
weakened or altered in ways that allow the emergence of alternative
patterns of sexuality on a significant scale.

Several arguments point to this possibility being realized. As suggested
in the previous section, the logic of fixation involved in the creation
of hegemonic heterosexuality is not obliged to stop within the
relationships making up the family. It can and does go on to create an
increasingly externalized and alienated sexuality which, while admirably
suited to commercial exploitation, corrodes reciprocity at a personal
level. Barbara Ehrenreich picks up an important dimension of this in her
argument about the ‘flight from commitment’ among heterosexual men in
the United States.

There are also arguments that suggest a dismantling of heterosexuality
itself. Herbert Marcuse’s well-known thesis that genital primacy in
sexuality was a product of a level of repression now superseded in
advanced capitalism suggests the emergence of a polymorphous sexuality.
Theorists such as Mario Mieli have argued that gay relationships are the
key to emergent forms of liberated sexuality. One current of feminist
theory from Jill Johnston on has seen the centre of feminism as
coinciding with the development of lesbian sexuality.

The economic trend most often seen as evidence of a crisis of the family
is the rising proportion of married women who are in ‘the workforce’: 42
per cent at the beginning of the 1980s in Australia. This need not
represent a breakdown at all. Much of it is produced by the need for a
second income to sustain conventional family patterns. The very high
proportion of employed women who are part-time workers underlines the
point.

Yet the effects of large-scale and long-term employment of married women
are more subversive than the statistic itself. On the one hand a wife’s
wage – even if firmly defined as a ‘second income’ – is a power resource
in domestic politics and feeds into the crisis of domestic patriarchy
noted above. On the other hand the fact that large numbers of women are
now employed for long periods of their lives in the largely segregated
labour market documented in chapter 5, creates a new political situation
in the workplace.

It is often remarked that domestic labour in suburban houses separates
women from each other physically. It is also remarked that
heterosexuality separates women from each other emotionally. The
concentration of large numbers of women at the point of production in
industry is one of the strongest tendencies working in the opposite
direction. A parallel development in relation to consumption has been
important in gay men’s politics, with the growth of commercial venues.
The gay liberation movement in New York sprang directly from a
mobilization in defence of such venues against the police, the
‘Stonewall riots’.

What these points imply is a tendency towards a crisis of interest
formation, the emergence of bases for the social constitution of
interests that cut across patterns of interests compatible with the
existing gender order. The definition of a married woman’s interests as
being essentially those of her husband and children is the hegemonic
pattern; the definition of her interests as those of a group of
exploited women in a factory is subversive. As with
institutionalization, it is a further question whether these
possibilities are realized, whether new interest groupings are formed.
Ruth Cavendish’s Women on the Line provides a fascinating case where
this did happen. The general issue of working-class feminism will be
taken up in chapter 12.

The three tendencies defined here are certainly not a complete map of
the structural tensions of the current gender order. A fuller account
would address the interactions of structures, such as the contradictions
surrounding childcare, women’s employment and fathering; and the
problems of the hegemonic definition of sexual character, femininity and
masculinity. This may, however, be enough to establish how an account of
crisis tendencies can provide the rational link between structural
analysis and liberation politics that is missing from sex-role theory
and categoricalism. The emergence of women’s liberation and gay
liberation movements did reflect crisis tendencies of a general kind,
though not a general crisis. Crisis tendencies are uneven in their
impact; while acting generally, they are likely to come to a head in
quite specific milieux. In this case the milieu most affected was the
younger intelligentsia of large Western cities. Some of the reasons and
consequences will be discussed in Part IV after the constitution of
sexual character has been considered.

NOTES

Historicity and ‘Origins’

(pp. 141–50). Discussions of Engels almost always ignore the historical
context of his own research. For Mesopotamian archaeology in the
nineteenth century see Lloyd (1955). Quotation on prehistoric hunting
from Clark and Piggott (1965), p. 40; criticism of origin-hunting from
Delphy (1977) pp. 53–60, at p. 59. Homosexuality always with us,
Bullough (1979), p. 62. My argument on homosexual history is taken from
Carrigan et al. (1985). For the transformation of homosexuality in
England see, besides work noted in the text, the pioneering work of
Mcintosh (1968). For the paradox of gay liberation theory see Johnston
(1982) and Sargent (1983).

        My argument on historicity has some parallels with Touraine
(1981). His understanding of structural change however is basically
confined to class dynamics and it is difficult to extend his rather
specific definition of historicity to gender relations. My approach is
derived from Collingwood (1946) and Carr (1961). I depart sharply from
Collingwood’s argument that feelings and emotions are incapable of
rational reconstruction from evidence, which draws a thick line between
history and psychology. I would argue that both the practice of
psychotherapy and modern social history refute Collingwood, and that
psychology is a branch of history. The historicity of the structure of
cathexis depends on this.

        The treatment of patriarchy as a transhistorical fact or
‘cultural universal’ in much feminist writing is incompatible with the
historicity of gender relations as formulated here. This is not to say
that a historical approach portrays gender as always in flux. Rather,
what does not change is as much in need of historical evidence, analysis
and explanation as what does.

The Course of History

(pp. 150–8). On gender in palaeolithic art see Pericot (1962) and
Cucchiari (1981); on the Dolní Věstonice burial see Klíma (1962). My
sketch of prehistoric western Asia draws on Burney (1977). For Jericho
see Kenyon (1960–83); for Çatal Hüyük see Mellaart (1967), quotation at
p. 225. On the position of women in Sumer and Egypt see Kramer (1963),
pp. 153–63; Wilson (1951), pp. 202–3; 206–35 on Akh-en-Aton; and Trigger
et al. (1983), pp. 79, 312. The Gilgamesh epic is translated in
Pritchard (1950), pp. 72–99 with other relevant myths. Admiral Nimitz’s
wall quoted from Costello (1985), pp. 366. Gentle Invaders is by Ryan
and Conlon (1978).

Crisis Tendencies

(pp. 158–63). For social meanings of New Right sexual ideology see Poole
(1982). The varying significance of antihomosexual prejudice in divorce
proceedings is carefully analysed by the Anti-Discrimination Board of
NSW (1982), pp. 252–87. Statistics on married women in the work-force
from Edgar and Ochiltree (1982).

Part III

Femininity and Masculinity

8

Sexual Character

Unitary Models and Sex Difference Research

The most common conception of the psychology of gender is that women and
men as groups have different traits: different temperaments, characters,
outlooks and opinions, abilities, even whole structures of personality.
There is no accepted term for this concept; I will call it ‘sexual
character’. The analogy is with David Riesman’s term ‘social character’;
‘sexual’ is more apt than ‘gender’ since in most usages the idea is
specifically linked with sex.

Often it is assumed that there is just one set of traits that
characterizes men in general and thus defines masculinity. Likewise
there is one set of traits for women, which defines femininity. This
unitary model of sexual character is a familiar part of sexual ideology.
It can be quite explicit: ‘just like a woman’, ‘just like a man’. More
often it is implicit. Jokes against ‘women drivers’, or the ‘Mere Male’
column in the women’s magazine New Idea, work by calling into play
shared assumptions of this kind: that women are hopeless with cars, that
men are hopeless around the house.

More sophisticated, but logically similar, ideas appear in academic
writing. In Talcott Parson’s classic work ‘instrumental’ versus
‘expressive’ traits are supposed to mark the two sexual characters that
correspond to the male and female roles. A unitary model of sexual
character underlies Nancy Chodorow’s feminist reworking of the same
themes. Here the focus is on how women’s sexual character prepares them
for mothering and men’s does not. Notions of unitary sexual character
have also emerged in cultural feminism in the last ten years. The
antipornography campaigns, for instance, have often presented a lust for
domination as the core of male sexuality, and as being more or less
undifferentiated among men.

Freud’s writings implied rather different conceptions of femininity and
masculinity, but most of Freud’s followers returned to convention.
Prominent in the psychoanalytic shift towards conservatism was the
Austrian/American Theodor Reik. His long essay ‘The Emotional
Differences of the Sexes’ is a classic statement of the unitary model.
It takes for granted that women and men have sharply different emotional
characteristics, and postulates that these are based on their different
functions in biological reproduction. Reik draws from this, mainly by
speculation, complacent explanations of an extraordinary range of
matters, from the double standard to cooking, cattiness, premenstrual
tension, and why women are concerned about furniture.

In more recent psychoanalytic literature such conceptions of gender
remain active. The American Robert May, for instance, makes the
difference between ‘the male and the female fantasy patterns’ the
central theme of his book Sex and Fantasy. He pursues a general
distinction between ‘pride’ and ‘caring’ – compare Parson’s
‘instrumental’ and ‘expressive’ – through ancient myths and modern
personality tests and clinical case histories.

It is clear that unitary conceptions of sexual character have a wide
appeal and can give comfort to people of very different political
persuasions. This is partly because having a unitary conception of
feminine or masculine character does not in itself settle what the
content of the two opposed characters might be. Speculation, assertion
and inference from biology are the order of the day.

Yet there is a large research literature closely related to this
problem: the psychological ‘sex difference’ research mentioned in
chapter 2, which as Viola Klein and Rosalind Rosenberg show has been
flowing since the turn of the century.

The facts at issue in this research are what might be called the block
differences between women and men – for instance, differences between
the average reaction times or tactile sensitivity of women and men; or
between average scores on tests of verbal ability, anxiety, or
extraversion. There are well-established conventions of method.
Comparable samples of women and men are needed, together with a reliable
measure of some sort. A test is always made for the statistical
significance of whatever difference turns up between average scores, or
between the proportions of women and men who meet a given criterion.

‘Significance testing’ itself presses the research towards a focus on
block differences, since what is tested is not its size or psychological
importance, but simply the probability that there exists some difference
which is not the result of chance. The kind of conclusion that passes
from the journal articles into the textbooks and popular-psychology best
sellers is that ‘women have higher verbal ability’ or ‘men are more
aggressive’. If a statistically significant block difference does not
emerge, the researcher is likely to be disappointed and the research may
not get published, since it seems to have nothing to say. I have written
this kind of data-dredging paper, about adolescents in Sydney, and, as
usual in this genre, paid a lot of attention to items where sex
differences did appear and much less attention to the larger number of
items where they did not.

When block differences do appear they are conventionally explained by
appeal to some underlying traits which distinguish women from men – in
other words by a unitary conception of sexual character. Often sex role
notions are brought in to provide a common-sense explanation of how
sexual character is formed. Thus women are said to be less
achievement-oriented than men because they have been socialized to
dependency, and so on. Often sex differences are hardly distinguished
from sex roles at all; the two blur together in a single concept.

A vast compendium of this kind of research was made in the mid-1970s by
Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin. The Psychology of Sex Differences
reported that block differences between women and men (generally white,
affluent, North American college students) did appear fairly
consistently in studies of some traits: verbal ability, visual/spatial
ability, mathematical ability, aggressiveness. A finding of no block
difference fairly consistently appeared in studies of rather more
traits: sociability, suggestibility, self-esteem, types of learning,
cognitive styles, achievement motivation, sensory modality. The authors
entered an ‘open finding’ – i.e., no consistent pattern – on another
range of traits: tactile sensitivity, timidity, activity level,
competitiveness, dominance, compliance, nurturance. The research has
flowed on since Maccoby and Jacklin wrote. Its results have been mixed,
but if it has had any trend it has been to close some of the gaps
between women and men that they left open. Robert Plomin and Terry Foch,
for instance, find sex differences accounting for only 1 per cent of the
variance in a study of children’s verbal and quantitative abilities.
Olive Johnson and Carolyn Harley report that being right- or left-handed
is a better predictor of cognitive abilities than is sex. Of course
these are only two examples from a mass of studies, and there are others
which suggest stronger sex differences. Nevertheless one can be very
confident of a negative point. Recent research has not shown that
Maccoby and Jacklin systematically underestimated sex differences.

A striking conclusion emerges. The logic of the genre focuses on
‘difference’ and its explanation. In fact the main finding, from about
eighty years of research, is a massive psychological similarity between
women and men in the populations studied by psychologists. Clear-cut
block differences are few, and confined to restricted topics. Small
differences-on-average, in the context of a very large overlapping of
the distributions of men and women, are usual even with traits where
differences appear fairly consistently. If it were not for the cultural
bias of both writers and readers, we might long ago have been talking
about this as ‘sex similarity’ research.

In so far as these scales and measures can be trusted, the notion of
distinct unitary sexual characters for women and men has been decisively
refuted. With it, much of the common-sense understanding of sex and
gender, together with most functionalist sex role theorizing, should
collapse.

This has not happened. There is too much invested in the notion of
sexual character for a simple factual refutation to destroy it. Yet
there has been serious pressure to modify it. The simplest modification
is to abandon the idea of categorical differences and interpret the
results of data-dredging sex difference research through the formula of
variation about a norm.

Overlapping distributions now matter less. Differences between means
suffice to establish difference between a male and a female norm. Role
theory provides a gloss. Variation about each norm reflects role
distance, vagueness or conflict in the expectations, or even deviance.
Those studies which fail to find mean differences are interpreted as
evidence of overlapping expectations or the convergence of traditional
sex roles.

As argued in chapter 3, role theory is infinitely plastic. There is no
great interest in its exercises in retrieval. But there is something of
more note here: the shift to a focus on variation. Concern with
variation in the traits for which feminine and masculine sexual
character are explanations is only a step from concern with variation in
femininity or masculinity themselves. This path leads to non-unitary
conceptions of sexual character.

The need to take this path is now clear in the research literature; all
interesting conceptions of sexual character from here on are
non-unitary. Both femininity and masculinity vary, and understanding
their variety is central to the psychology of gender. How is that
variety to be understood? There are several possible approaches.

Masculinity/Femininity Scales

The most popular way of grasping diversity in sexual character is to
think of people as being arrayed along a dimension that represents
differences in some gender-related trait. This is the basis of most
paper-and-pencil tests of masculinity/femininity (hereafter M/F). The
problem is how to specify where, on the imaginary line representing the
dimension, any given person’s shadow falls. This is called ‘measuring’
the trait, and M/F scales differ in the solutions they offer.

Some tests have used projective methods, such as the TT’ scale which
shows children a sexually ambiguous figure and invites them to make up a
story about it. But since the 1940s, when the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory (MMPI) came into use, a different form has been
usual. This most famous of all psychiatric screening tests contained a
masculinity-femininity subscale, and set the pattern of a self-report
inventory with many short items. The respondents describe themselves on
each item separately, and a count is made of how often a certain kind of
response is made. This count, sometimes transformed statistically,
becomes the respondent’s femininity or masculinity score.

The form of the self-description varies a little. Janet Spence and
Robert Helmreich in Masculinity and Femininity use a questionnaire which
invites people to rate themselves on where they fall between two
specified extremes, for example:

very rough …… very gentle
goes to pieces under pressure … stands up well under pressure

Sandra Bern, author of the famous ‘androgyny’ scale, dispenses with the
polar opposites. Each item simply names a trait and asks respondents to
rate how often it is true of them:

  ambitious …

  forceful …

  affectionate …

  child-like …

How is it known that these scales measure femininity and masculinity?
The usual test has been that each item discriminates statistically
between women and men. As Anne Constantinople points out in her
excellent review of M/F scales, this results in a systematic confusion
between ‘sex difference’ and ‘masculinity/femininity’. In principle any
item that shows a sex difference can figure in M/F scales. In practice
almost anything does. Items range from generalized self-descriptions
like those quoted above, to job preferences, word associations, neurotic
symptoms, information and aesthetic interests. Constantinople remarks
that while some items reflect an intuitive notion of what ‘masculinity’
and ‘femininity’ mean, in many cases the content seems ‘irrelevant to
any identifiable definition of the concept’.

Once a point of departure has been established another psychometric
criterion takes over, the scale’s internal consistency. Candidate items
are kept in the scale, or dropped, according to their correlation with
other items. Spence and Helmreich’s scales illustrate this. The
correlation of each item with the total (i.e., the sum of scores on all
items) is presented as justification of the coherence of each trait and
scale; and those items which have high item-total correlations are
chosen for the ‘short form’ of the scale.

This criterion is likely to whittle down the heterogeneity of content,
as it is familiar in questionnaire research that the highest
correlations are between items which ask the same kind of question in
slightly different language. More important, it eliminates any
possibility of recognizing tension or incoherence within the trait being
measured.

The reason for using a scale score is that individual items are not very
reliable, and can only be presumed to carry a small drop of the trait
being measured, mixed up with various impurities. By combining the
answers to a number of questions, the impurities tend to cancel each
other out. The way this combining is done is the key to the kind of
psychology that quantitative personality research produces. In adding
together the item scores, the specific meaning of each question is
ignored. In old-fashioned hand-scoring of questionnaires it was usual to
lay a cardboard sheet which masked the questions over the page, with the
ticks or crosses of answers appearing through small windows cut in the
cardboard. In modern machine-scoring only the number of the question is
needed – its wording does not enter the machine or the processing at
all. Semantics, in short, is abandoned.

Gutting answers of their particular meaning in order to treat them as
partial measures of a dimensional whole is taken for granted in the
psychometric literature. What a person thinks she is saying to the
researcher is set aside. The tick or cross is treated not as an answer
to a question but as a ‘response’ providing a clue to an underlying
entity. The researcher knows about this entity but the ‘subject’ does
not.

Nearly thirty years ago, in The Person in Psychology, Paul Lafitte
mounted a sustained critique of what he called ‘substantive abstraction’
in psychological measurement. Other criticisms of the dubious
assumptions and attenuation of reality in paper-and-pencil surveys have
come from quarters as diverse as psychoanalysis, anthropology and
ethnomethodology. The problem is not that the technique was rough in its
early days. Recent research commonly takes less account of such problems
than the pioneering studies did. The problem is about the bases of the
method. Gender scaling, like other forms of personality and attitude
scaling, involves a radical desemanticization of human practice. It is a
case of what R. D. Laing in another context called ‘transpersonal
invalidation’. The chances of a sound understanding of human beings
coming out of such research are infinitesimal.

But the approach does have important ideological effects.
Desemanticization allows research to recognize variation without having
to deal with contradiction. If a person’s answers to related items
conflict, this does not register as a problem, for instance a question
of ambivalence. It simply lowers the total score. If some items do not
fit with the others, there is no requirement to investigate why. They
are simply dropped from the item pool as a normal step in producing the
final instrument.

Femininity and masculinity are thus implicitly theorized as homogeneous
dimensions of temperament, which can be measured in all people. In a
roundabout way this allows scalar research to recognize a point that
unitary conceptions of sexual character could not, the coexistence of
masculinity and femininity in the same person. Not in the way Freud saw
them, as desires and identifications in conflict with each other, but
through the notion of multiple dimensions of variation. Femininity and
masculinity need not be treated as polar opposites, i.e., as ends of the
same dimension. Each might be treated as a separate scale, and the same
person might get high scores on both. This idea occurred to a number of
American psychologists in the early 1970s, with Bern’s version,
‘androgyny’, gaining most attention. Spence and Helmreich performed a
kind of reductio ad absurdum by constructing a femininity scale, a
masculinity scale and a M/F scale and showing they were all
statistically unconnected when administered to the same people.

The muddle in interpretation that follows from the desemanticization of
human communications is obvious enough. Constantinople’s summing-up on
masculinity and femininity scales a decade ago is still sound: ‘both
theoretically and empirically they seem to be among the muddiest
concepts in the psychologist’s vocabulary.’ The scalar approach has
produced very little new understanding of the psychosocial processes
involved.

The reasons for its popularity perhaps have more to do with the politics
of academic psychology. Scalar M/F research offers a way of treating an
important social question in terms acceptable to a psychological
establishment very much concerned with scientificity, formal measurement
and statistical proof. It is quick and straightforward, since the
conventions of scaling are well established; the professional journals
like it, and no one is threatened by it. At this level scalar research
is part of the domestication of sexual politics in the name of science.
It is an important political fact that a great deal of it has been done
by women.

At a deeper level this kind of psychology participates in the process of
reification. Turning a process, an action, or a relationship into an
object, or treating it as if it were an object, is one of the
fundamental dynamics of modern culture. Gender scaling involves a
drastic reification of the process of self-expression or accounting for
oneself. Even the stylized self-description called for by the scale
items is converted, by the operations that produce ‘scores’ and then
statistically manipulate them, into location in the abstract space of a
personality dimension.

If this research has been popular, and people feel they recognize
themselves in dimensional accounts (or in the unitary accounts of sexual
character discussed previously), it is not because people are dots on a
computer-generated graph in, N dimensions. It is, perhaps, because the
process of reification is so far advanced as to make recognition of
qualitative diversity threatening. Fear, not of ‘otherness’ so much as
of the riotous exuberance of motive and imagination that is a
possibility in sexual life, can be a powerful motive in a world partly
reified already.

Multiple Models: From Typology to Relationship

Scalar models of personality have often stemmed from theories of
personality ‘types’. Extraversion-introversion scales and the famous ‘F
scale’ of authoritarianism both derive from such typologies, devised by
Jung and the Frankfurt school respectively. M/F scales similarly derive
from unitary models of sexual character, in effect ‘dimensionalizing’
them by adding a range of possibilities in between. But this is not the
only way diversity can be recognized in a theory of types. One may hold
to the conception of a whole personality rather than a dimension, and
subdivide or multiply the types.

In the case of sexual character the classic of this approach is Simone
de Beauvoir’s account of femininity in Book Two of The Second Sex.
Starting with a general difference in the social situation and
ontological status of women and men, she goes on to develop a subtle
account of half-a-dozen types of femininity in literature and French
social life: the lesbian, the married woman, the prostitute, the
independent woman, etc. Her types are partly based on social
circumstances, partly on the patterns of inner dynamics that will be
discussed in the following chapter.

In principle the same kind of thing can be done for types of
masculinity, though no Simon de Beauvoir has appeared to do it. Andrew
Tolson’s The Limits of Masculinity makes a beginning. Going through the
(mostly British) research in community studies and industrial sociology,
Tolson draws out connections between economic circumstance, life cycle
and sexual identity in a broad distinction between a working-class type
and a middle-class type of masculinity.

Both de Beauvoir and Tolson assume a one-to-one correspondence between
character type and milieu. This is a step forward from unitary models of
sexual character, but not a long one. Character is still treated as
unitary within a given setting. The logic is the same as in ‘national
character’ or culture-and-personality research that described the ‘modal
personalities’ supposed to characterize Germany, Japan, Samoa. The same
treatment of sexual character is found in the cross-cultural contrasts
made by Margaret Mead in Male and Female.

The next step is to recognize that qualitatively different types are
produced within the same social setting. Evidence for this is not
difficult to find. Here is an example taken from the collection of
working-class autobiographies already quoted. The author, Bim Andrews,
is talking about growing up and going to work at Cambridge in the 1920s:

  In the mid-twenties, I learned how to become a clerk at the Coop, and
  after evening classes in shorthand and typing, a higher grade office
  worker. A dutiful, heads-down-all-day, worker, with no ideas at all
  about my rights. Not even my basic rights as a human being, never mind
  my rights as part of a deal involving my work and their money. True,
  there was some talk of a Trades Union, but no girl or woman ever
  thought it applied to her. Some of my work kept me standing up all
  day, and when I had bad menstrual cramps, as I often did, I would
  slink off to the lavatory to sit down for as long as I dared. No rest
  room, not even a chair in our crowded cloakroom.

  Some new ideas did take root – the Co-op was quite an evangelical
  movement then, and it was their evening classes which I joined. But my
  emotions and understanding were still at sixes and sevens. Which was
  the right way to live? Like Nellie, with her placid face and her
  engagement ring, and her pieces of linen and underclothes in tissue
  paper, brought for display to the girls before settling in her bottom
  drawer? Or like Jessie, coy and nudging – what we would now call sexy
  – surrounded by men, single and married? Or like Miss Marshall, the
  General Manager’s secretary and our immediate boss. Composed, and
  sharp with us, the owner of a little car, involved in a sly
  relationship with the Manager of the Grocery Dept?

Nellie, Jessie, Miss Marshall and indeed the earnest Bim herself, are
present in her mind as types – real types, not ideal or abstracted types
– standing for different ‘ways to live’. Yet they do not float free from
each other. Bim experiences a relationship between them. It is a kind of
rivalry between alternatives, confronting her with an existential and to
some extent moral choice. She can become a certain kind of woman, enter
a certain kind of femininity, by throwing herself forward along one path
in life.

I will return to the idea of a life path in chapters 9 and 10; here the
important point is that the types exist in a relationship with each
other. In the research which first raised this question for me, in an
Australian ruling-class boys’ school, the connections take the definite
form of a hierarchy. A teacher whom we call Angus Barr described to us
an episode, some details of which we could confirm from other sources,
of what he thought of as ‘bullying’ between two groups of boys:

  There are a group [‘the Bloods’] which I suppose you can say is a
  traditional one, the sporting group, they are more active physically …
  And sometimes they ride a bit rough over another group who have been
  called, and now call themselves, ‘the Cyrils’, the conshies. [From
  ‘conscientious’.] Who are the ones who don’t play any games. Who have
  this year [had] a particularly bad time from the Blood group … And
  about the middle of the year I had to – it hasn’t arisen in past
  years, I’ve taken the form for a number of years so I think I know –
  had to intervene. And say, Well now, what is being done by some of you
  to some others has reached limits where it has got to stop, it is
  going too far … [The Cyrils] were these quite clever little boys who
  are socially totally inadequate, and yet who have got very good
  brains. They’ve all got glasses, short, very fat and that sort of
  thing … I think I was reasonably successful in stopping it. I tried to
  ask discreetly some of the Cyrils how things had been getting on, and
  they said, Well it had been better. And I spoke to one or two of the
  Bloods, said that it’s got to stop.

In contrast to Bim Andrews’s perceptions, the difference between these
masculinities is not a matter of free choice by the boys: an unathletic
way of life may for instance be imposed by a boy’s understanding of his
physique. Larger cultural dynamics can be detected here. But the crucial
point is that entering one group does not make the other irrelevant. Far
from it: an active relationship is constructed. The Bloods persecute the
Cyrils, because being a Blood involves an active rejection of what they
see as effeminacy.

This particular pattern of conflict does not arise by chance. The school
in question is noted for its attachment to a fiercely competitive
body-contact sport, football. Both official school policy, and the ethos
among staff, parents and Old Boys, encourage activities in which the
kind of aggressive, physically dominant masculinity represented by the
Bloods is at a premium. The boys are obliged to define their attitude to
this demand, either for or against. Hence they polarize along the axis
described by Mr Barr. Yet those boys who react against the model
embraced by the Bloods are not simply pushed into limbo. For the school
not only wants football glory, it also must have academic success. A
high rate of performance in matriculation examinations is necessary if
the school is to hold its position in the now strongly competitive
secondary-education market. In short, the school needs the Cyrils too.
Within their own sphere it gives them honour: acknowledging examination
success by means of prizes, giving awards to the chess club as well as
the football team. And it protects their interests, as Mr Barr’s
intervention to stop the ‘bullying’ neatly shows.

The production of multiple masculinities and femininities can be seen in
studies of other schools. In one of the earlier school ethnographies,
Social Relations in a Secondary School, David Hargreaves portrayed the
production of a semi-delinquent ‘subculture’ in the lower streams of a
British secondary modern school. One of its components was a rough,
aggressive masculinity, strongly and no doubt deliberately contrasted
with the more compliant behaviour of boys in the upper streams. A
similar pattern in a similar school a decade later is traced by Paul
Willis in Learning to Labour, a contrast between ‘the lads’ and ‘the
ear’oles’. Willis is more explicit about the construction of masculinity
and its connection with class fate, as the two groups of boys head for
factory jobs on the one hand and white-collar jobs on the other.

In the Australian girls’ private school we call Auburn College, there is
not only a differentiation between several kinds of femininity, but also
a recent change in the pattern of hegemony among them. An academic
renovation of the school, undertaken by a new headmistress and new
staff, has altered the context of the girls’ peer-group life. The
prestige formerly enjoyed by a ‘social’ set of girls has been broken and
their place in the sun taken by academically successful girls headed for
university and professional careers.

The pattern of differentiation and relation appears in other
institutions besides schools. The fashion industry is an important case,
given the significance of clothes and cosmetics as markers of gender.
Here there is a constant interplay between the economic need for a
turnover of styles – the basis of ‘fashion’ itself – and the need to
sustain the structures of motive that constitute their markets.

In the aftermath of the new feminism, the promotion of a ‘liberated’
femininity became the basis of many marketing strategies. ‘Charlie’
perfumes and cosmetics (introduced by Revlon in 1973) and ‘Virginia
Slims’ cigarettes were among the most heavily promoted examples. Yet a
femininity that gets ‘liberated’ too completely loses the need to
present itself through cosmetics and fashionable clothes. Thus an
oscillation: on one poster ‘Charlie’ strides out boldly in trousers; on
another, ‘Pretty Polly’ advertises its fragile pantihose with the
caption ‘For girls who don’t want to wear the trousers’. Some marketers
take the contradiction inside the one promotion: thus ‘natural look’
cosmetics; or a magazine that uses a feminist name, Ms London, as a
vehicle for wholly stereotyped advertising.

The fashion industry works through competition of images, but also on
the assumption that the competition is always being resolved. A leading
designer emerges; a ‘look’ is settled on; a particular presentation of
femininity made normative. In cases such as Dior and the ‘New Look’ of
1947, a trend lasting over a number of seasons may be set. Moreover, the
brilliantly lit centre stage of high fashion is only a small part of the
clothing industry’s sales. The bulk of the business concerns cheap,
drab, and poorly made clothing for the mass market in styles that change
slowly. Two centuries ago this was called bluntly ‘slop cloathing’; it
is now called in the rag trade ‘dumb fashion’. So the currently exalted
style does not eliminate all other styles. Rather it subordinates them.

There need not be any psychological traits which all femininities have
in common and which distinguish them from all masculinities, or vice
versa. The character structure of the academic high-flyers at Auburn
College is probably closer to that of Milton’s ‘Cyrils’ than to
socialite femininities. What unites the femininities of a given social
milieu is the double context in which they are formed: on the one hand
in relation to the image and experience of a female body, on the other
to the social definitions of a woman’s place and the cultural
oppositions of masculinity and femininity. Femininity and masculinity
are not essences: they are ways of living certain relationships. It
follows that static typologies of sexual character have to be replaced
by histories, analyses of the joint production of sets of psychological
forms.

The Effect of Structures

To this point I have discussed the production of sexual character as if
each milieu were independent of all others. It is time to bring into the
analysis the structures that interrelate milieux (chapter 6) and their
historical composition into a gender order for the society as a whole
(chapter 7).

To start with the structure of power, workplace studies like those
discussed in chapter 5 show that face-to-face relations are strongly
conditioned by the general power situation between employers and
employees and its materialization in particular labour processes. A
notable case is the job of personal ‘secretary’ in business. An
apparently very individualized relationship of mutual dependence and
trust between the executive (generally a man) and the personal secretary
(almost always a woman) in fact rests on sharp differences of income,
the industrial vulnerability of the employee, and the overall social
power and authority of men. A specific version of femininity is called
for, in which technical competence and the social presentation of
attractiveness, social skill and interpersonal compliance are fused.
This kind of femininity has to be produced, and is by the informal
training documented in Chris Griffin’s study of British girls moving
from school into office work.

The power hierarchy among men in the industrial enterprise is clear
enough, from managers and professionals at the top to unqualified manual
workers at the bottom. In sharp contrast to the situation of personal
secretaries, the men in manual industrial work are often in situations
that allow a countervailing solidarity (one of the bases of unionism)
and with it a rejection of the masculinity of the dominant group. John
Lippert provides a striking description of the aggressive, sometimes
violent, heterosexual masculinity produced among motor manufacturing
workers in Detroit. The description can be matched in other countries:
Meredith Burgmann’s account of ‘machismo’ among radical builders’
labourers in Sydney and Paul Willis’s account of masculine ‘shop-floor
culture’ among metal workers in Birmingham. The common elements are a
cult of masculinity centring on physical prowess, and sexual contempt
directed at managers, and men in office work generally, as being effete.

These examples also point to the gender structuring of production.
Elements of sexual character are embedded in the distinctive sets of
practices sometimes called ‘occupational cultures’. Professionalism is a
case in point. The combination of theoretical knowledge with technical
expertise is central to a profession’s claim to competence and to a
monopoly of practice. This has been constructed historically as a form
of masculinity: emotionally flat, centred on a specialized skill,
insistent on professional esteem and technically based dominance over
other workers, and requiring for its highest (specialist) development
the complete freedom from childcare and domestic work provided by having
wives and maids to do it. The masculine character of professionalism has
been supported by the simplest possible mechanism, the exclusion of
women. Women have had a long struggle even to get the basic training,
and are still effectively excluded from professions like accountancy and
engineering.

In manual trades, and manual work more broadly, the claim to competence
is rather different. Here the most competent are not the most
specialized but the most versatile – those with a range of skills, able
to tackle any job that offers. This too is often constructed as a form
of masculinity dependent on a domestic division of labour. Tradesmen
have often been prepared to move around from place to place, even from
country to country, to increase their range of experience, the wife’s
willingness to stay or go being assumed. Fathers have taken care to
provide their sons with a range of skills as insurance against economic
fluctuations. To quote another British working-class autobiography, from
a miner’s son called Fred Broughton who grew up in the years before
World War I, ‘Father used to say, “I shall not leave you much money, but
I will teach you every job, then you can always get work”. He showed us
every job in the garden and on the farm, including how to get stone in
the quarry and trim it and build stone walls.’

The construction of nursing as an element of the sexual division of
labour, an occupation blending a particular version of femininity with
the technical requirements of the job, has already been discussed.

Finally the structure of cathexis is involved. This is the most obvious
of structural determinations of sexual character because of the
prominence of heterosexual couple relationships in everyday life. It is
folklore that ‘opposites attract’. One of the most familiar features of
sexual display is behaviour and clothing that emphasizes stereotyped sex
differences. Studs display their biceps and pectorals, suave charmers
grow their pencil moustaches; ‘girls’ emphasize their vulnerability in
tight skirts and high-heeled shoes, sheer stockings and make-up that is
constantly in need of repair. So much emotion is adrift around these
marks of difference that they can get cathected in their own right, as
argued in chapter 5. These stereotypes are so familiar that it is
necessary to stress that they are not the whole story. Alongside the
Errol Flynns and John Waynes are figures like Cary Grant, whose appeal
is specially as a model of sympathetic (though not effeminate)
masculinity. In a study of images of masculinity in Australian
television, Glen Lewis has pointed to the prominence of ‘soft’ men as
presenters, especially in daytime programs directed at women.

Desire may be organized around identification and similarity rather than
around difference. Homosexual love is the obvious case. The attempt to
reduce this to attraction-of-opposites by assuming it is based on a
butch/femme pattern is now generally discredited. Gay liberation theory
lays emphasis instead on the solidarity created by love between women or
between men. The point is that there are many more possibilities than
the standard dichotomy or complete structurelessness. Works like Pat
Califia’s Sapphistry explore a variety of erotic constructions of
femininity (homosexuality still presupposes gender division) based on
identification and shared experience; the same can be done for
masculinity.

There is a related possibility among heterosexual people, for powerful
desire can exist between those whose character structure is similar. An
interplay between identification and reciprocity, and a literal playing
with similarity and difference, becomes possible as a basis of
eroticism. On such a basis heterosexual masculinity and femininity might
be recomposed as various kinds of psychological hermaphroditism, a
possibility I will return to in chapter 13.

To sum up: it is possible to see how each of the major structures
impinges on the way femininity and masculinity are formed in particular
milieux. Conversely, these structures must be seen as the vehicles for
the constitution of femininity and masculinity as collective patterns on
a scale far beyond that of an individual setting. In the terms proposed
in Part II, we have moved from particular gender regimes to the
society-wide gender order. The question now to be faced is how, at the
level of a whole society, the elements are composed, interrelated and
ordered.

Hegemonic Masculinity and Emphasized Femininity

The central argument can be put in a few paragraphs. There is an
ordering of versions of femininity and masculinity at the level of the
whole society, in some ways analogous to the patterns of face-to-face
relationship within institutions. The possibilities of variation, of
course, are vastly greater. The sheer complexity of relationships
involving millions of people guarantees that ethnic differences and
generational differences as well as class patterns come into play. But
in key respects the organization of gender on the very large scale must
be more skeletal and simplified than the human relationships in
face-to-face milieux. The forms of femininity and masculinity
constituted at this level are stylized and impoverished. Their
interrelation is centred on a single structural fact, the global
dominance of men over women.

This structural fact provides the main basis for relationships among men
that define a hegemonic form of masculinity in the society as a whole.
‘Hegemonic masculinity’ is always constructed in relation to various
subordinated masculinities as well as in relation to women. The
interplay between different forms of masculinity is an important part of
how a patriarchal social order works.

There is no femininity that is hegemonic in the sense that the dominant
form of masculinity is hegemonic among men. This is not a new
observation. Viola Klein’s historical study of conceptions of ‘the
feminine character’ noted wryly how little the leading theorists could
agree on what it was: ‘we find not only contradiction on particular
points but a bewildering variety of traits considered characteristic of
women by the various authorities’. More recently the French analyst Luce
Irigaray, in a celebrated essay ‘This Sex Which Is Not One’, has
emphasized the absence of any clear-cut definition for women’s eroticism
and imagination in a patriarchal society.

At the level of mass social relations, however, forms of femininity are
defined clearly enough. It is the global subordination of women to men
that provides an essential basis for differentiation. One form is
defined around compliance with this subordination and is oriented to
accommodating the interests and desires of men. I will call this
‘emphasized femininity’. Others are defined centrally by strategies of
resistance or forms of non-compliance. Others again are defined by
complex strategic combinations of compliance, resistance and
co-operation. The interplay among them is a major part of the dynamics
of change in the gender order as a whole.

The rest of this section will examine more closely the cases of
hegemonic masculinity and emphasized femininity, making brief comments
on subordinated and marginalized forms. The latter will come back into
focus in chapters 10 and 12.

In the concept of hegemonic masculinity, ‘hegemony’ means (as in
Gramsci’s analyses of class relations in Italy from which the term is
borrowed) a social ascendancy achieved in a play of social forces that
extends beyond contests of brute power into the organization of private
life and cultural processes. Ascendancy of one group of men over another
achieved at the point of a gun, or by the threat of unemployment, is not
hegemony. Ascendancy which is embedded in religious doctrine and
practice, mass media content, wage structures, the design of housing,
welfare/taxation policies and so forth, is.

Two common misunderstandings of the concept should be cleared up
immediately. First, though ‘hegemony’ does not refer to ascendancy based
on force, it is not incompatible with ascendancy based on force. Indeed
it is common for the two to go together. Physical or economic violence
backs up a dominant cultural pattern (for example beating up
‘perverts’), or ideologies justify the holders of physical power (‘law
and order’). The connection between hegemonic masculinity and
patriarchal violence is close, though not simple.

Second, ‘hegemony’ does not mean total cultural dominance, the
obliteration of alternatives. It means ascendancy achieved within a
balance of forces, that is, a state of play. Other patterns and groups
are subordinated rather than eliminated. If we do not recognize this it
would be impossible to account for the everyday contestation that
actually occurs in social life, let alone for historical changes in
definitions of gender patterns on the grand scale.

Hegemonic masculinity, then, is very different from the notion of a
general ‘male sex role’, though the concept allows us to formulate more
precisely some of the sound points made in the sex-role literature.
First, the cultural ideal (or ideals) of masculinity need not correspond
at all closely to the actual personalities of the majority of men.
Indeed the winning of hegemony often involves the creation of models of
masculinity which are quite specifically fantasy figures, such as the
film characters played by Humphrey Bogart, John Wayne and Sylvester
Stallone. Or real models may be publicized who are so remote from
everyday achievement that they have the effect of an unattainable ideal,
like the Australian Rules footballer Ron Barassi or the boxer Muhammed
Ali.

As we move from face-to-face settings to structures involving millions
of people, the easily symbolized aspects of interaction become more
prominent. Hegemonic masculinity is very public. In a society of mass
communications it is tempting to think that it exists only as publicity.
Hence the focus on media images and media discussions of masculinity in
the ‘Books About Men’ of the 1970s and 1980s, from Warren Farrell’s The
Liberated Man to Barbara Ehrenreich’s The Hearts of Men.

To focus on the media images alone would be a mistake. They need not
correspond to the actual characters of the men who hold most social
power – in contemporary societies the corporate and state elites. Indeed
a ruling class may allow a good deal of sexual dissent. A minor but
dramatic instance is the tolerance for homosexuality that the British
diplomat Guy Burgess could assume from other men of his class during his
career as a Soviet spy. The public face of hegemonic masculinity is not
necessarily what powerful men are, but what sustains their power and
what large numbers of men are motivated to support. The notion of
‘hegemony’ generally implies a large measure of consent. Few men are
Bogarts or Stallones, many collaborate in sustaining those images.

There are various reasons for complicity, and a thorough study of them
would go far to illuminate the whole system of sexual politics. Fantasy
gratification is one – nicely satirized in Woody Allen’s Bogart
take-off, Play it Again, Sam. Displaced aggression might be another –
and the popularity of very violent movies from Dirty Harry to Rambo
suggest that a great deal of this is floating around. But it seems
likely that the major reason is that most men benefit from the
subordination of women, and hegemonic masculinity is the cultural
expression of this ascendancy.

This needs careful formulation. It does not imply that hegemonic
masculinity means being particularly nasty to women. Women may feel as
oppressed by non-hegemonic masculinities, may even find the hegemonic
pattern more familiar and manageable. There is likely to be a kind of
‘fit’ between hegemonic masculinity and emphasized femininity. What it
does imply is the maintenance of practices that institutionalize men’s
dominance over women. In this sense hegemonic masculinity must embody a
successful collective strategy in relation to women. Given the
complexity of gender relations no simple or uniform strategy is
possible: a ‘mix’ is necessary. So hegemonic masculinity can contain at
the same time, quite consistently, openings towards domesticity and
openings towards violence, towards misogyny and towards heterosexual
attraction.

Hegemonic masculinity is constructed in relation to women and to
subordinated masculinities. These other masculinities need not be as
clearly defined – indeed, achieving hegemony may consist precisely in
preventing alternatives gaining cultural definition and recognition as
alternatives, confining them to ghettos, to privacy, to unconsciousness.

The most important feature of contemporary hegemonic masculinity is that
it is heterosexual, being closely connected to the institution of
marriage; and a key form of subordinated masculinity is homosexual. This
subordination involves both direct interactions and a kind of
ideological warfare. Some of the interactions were described in chapter
1: police and legal harassment, street violence, economic
discrimination. These transactions are tied together by the contempt for
homosexuality and homosexual men that is part of the ideological package
of hegemonic masculinity. The AIDS scare has been marked less by
sympathy for gays as its main victims than by hostility to them as the
bearers of a new threat. The key point of media concern is whether the
‘gay plague’ will spread to ‘innocent’, i.e., straight, victims.

In other cases of subordinated masculinity the condition is temporary.
Cynthia Cockburn’s splendid study of printing workers in London portrays
a version of hegemonic masculinity that involved ascendancy over young
men as well as over women. The workers recalled their apprenticeships in
terms of drudgery and humiliation, a ritual of induction into trade and
masculinity at the same time. But once they were in, they were
‘brothers’.

Several general points about masculinity also apply to the analysis of
femininity at the mass level. These patterns too are historical:
relationships change, new forms of femininity emerge and others
disappear. The ideological representations of femininity draw on, but do
not necessarily correspond to, actual femininities as they are lived.
What most women support is not necessarily what they are.

There is however a fundamental difference. All forms of femininity in
this society are constructed in the context of the overall subordination
of women to men. For this reason there is no femininity that holds among
women the position held by hegemonic masculinity among men.

This fundamental asymmetry has two main aspects. First, the
concentration of social power in the hands of men leaves limited scope
for women to construct institutionalized power relationships over other
women. It does happen on a face-to-face basis, notably in
mother–daughter relationships. Institutionalized power hierarchies have
also existed in contexts like the girls’ schools pictured in Mädchen in
Uniform and Frost in May. But the note of domination that is so
important in relations between kinds of masculinity is muted. The much
lower level of violence between women than violence between men is a
fair indication of this. Second, the organization of a hegemonic form
around dominance over the other sex is absent from the social
construction of femininity. Power, authority, aggression, technology are
not thematized in femininity at large as they are in masculinity.
Equally important, no pressure is set up to negate or subordinate other
forms of femininity in the way hegemonic masculinity must negate other
masculinities. It is likely therefore that actual femininities in our
society are more diverse than actual masculinities.

The dominance structure which the construction of femininity cannot
avoid is the global dominance of heterosexual men. The process is likely
to polarize around compliance or resistance to this dominance.

The option of compliance is central to the pattern of femininity which
is given most cultural and ideological support at present, called here
‘emphasized femininity’. This is the translation to the large scale of
patterns already discussed in particular institutions and milieux, such
as the display of sociability rather than technical competence,
fragility in mating scenes, compliance with men’s desire for titillation
and ego-stroking in office relationships, acceptance of marriage and
childcare as a response to labour-market discrimination against women.
At the mass level these are organized around themes of sexual
receptivity in relation to younger women and motherhood in relation to
older women.

Like hegemonic masculinity, emphasized femininity as a cultural
construction is very public, though its content is specifically linked
with the private realm of the home and the bedroom. Indeed it is
promoted in mass media and marketing with an insistence and on a scale
far beyond that found for any form of masculinity. The articles and
advertisements in mass-circulation women’s magazines, the ‘women’s
pages’ of mass-circulation newspapers and the soap operas and ‘games’ of
daytime television, are familiar cases. Most of this promotion, it might
be noted, is organized, financed and supervised by men.

To call this pattern ‘emphasized femininity’ is also to make a point
about how the cultural package is used in interpersonal relationships.
This kind of femininity is performed, and performed especially to men.
There is a great deal of folklore about how to sustain the performance.
It is a major concern of women’s magazines from Women’s Weekly to Vogue.
It is even taken up and turned into highly ambivalent comedy by
Hollywood (How to Marry a Millionaire; Tootsie). Marilyn Monroe was both
archetype and satirist of emphasized femininity. Marabel Morgan’s ‘total
woman’, an image that somehow mixes sexpot and Jesus Christ, uses the
same tactics and has the same ambivalences.

Femininity organized as an adaptation to men’s power, and emphasizing
compliance, nurturance and empathy as womanly virtues, is not in much of
a state to establish hegemony over other kinds of femininity. There is a
familiar paradox about antifeminist women’s groups like ‘Women Who Want
to be Women’ who exalt the Kinder, Kirche und Küche version of
femininity: they can only become politically active by subverting their
own prescriptions. They must rely heavily on religious ideology and on
political backing from conservative men. The relations they establish
with other kinds of femininity are not so much domination as attempted
marginalization.

Central to the maintenance of emphasized femininity is practice that
prevents other models of femininity gaining cultural articulation. When
feminist historiography describes women’s experience as ‘hidden from
history’, in Sheila Rowbotham’s phrase, it is responding partly to this
fact. Conventional historiography recognizes, indeed presupposes,
conventional femininity. What is hidden from it is the experience of
spinsters, lesbians, unionists, prostitutes, madwomen, rebels and maiden
aunts, manual workers, midwives and witches. And what is involved in
radical sexual politics, in one of its dimensions, is precisely a
reassertion and recovery of marginalized forms of femininity in the
experience of groups like these.

NOTES

Unitary Models and Sex-difference Research

(pp. 167–71). Research since Maccoby and Jacklin is large and life is
short; one example must do. The text cited two studies of cognition, an
area where Maccoby and Jacklin thought sex differences were well
established. Fairweather (1976) argued that these differences were
trivial. Hyde (1981) concluded they were consistent but small. Rosenthal
and Rubin (1982) concluded they were not so small, but probably
declining. Lest this seem like a trend, Fendrich-Salowey et al. (1982)
and Denno (1982) agree with Fairweather. An outside observer may
reasonably suspend judgement between these views, but all must agree
that if there are systematic sex differences here, they are not very
large in terms of overall variance on the measures.

Masculinity/Femininity Scales

(pp. 171–5). For classic critiques of reified measurement in attitude
and personality research see Goldhamer (1949), Williams (1959) and
Cicourel (1964). Lafitte’s critique (1957) remains the most penetrating
on technical grounds.

Multiple Models

(pp. 175–9). Bim Andrews’ quotation from Burnett (1982), pp. 130–1.
Angus Barr quoted from original interview transcript. For the story of
‘Auburn College’ see Connell et al. (1981). The argument at the end of
this section leaves open the sense in which we can speak of ‘femininity’
in a man and ‘masculinity’ in a woman. The psychoanalytic evidence to
come in chapter 9 implies that these are meaningful expressions, but
since they involve a psychological structure that works against bodily
experience it can hardly be the same kind of structure as women’s
femininity or men’s masculinity. The pressures set up can be ferocious
enough to change the body-image itself, as with those transsexuals who
experience their penises or their breasts as not being part of their
bodies.

The Effect of Structures

(pp. 180–2). Fred Broughton quotation from Burnett (1982), p. 299.

Hegemonic Masculinity and Emphasized Femininity

(p. 183–8). Quotation from Klein (1946) p. 164. On Burgess’s remarkable
immunity see Seale and McConville (1978). The concepts discussed in this
section are both important and underdeveloped; my argument is more
tentative than usual here. The mother–daughter relationship might modify
the argument about femininity significantly.

9

