Part II

The Structure of Gender Relations

5

Main Structures: Labour, Power, Cathexis

The argument so far has traced the domain of the social theory of gender
and its gradual emergence in Western social thought. I have argued that
this theory is autonomous: it cannot derive its logic from a source
outside itself, whether natural difference, biological reproduction, the
functional needs of society or the imperatives of social reproduction.
An adequate theory of gender requires a theory of social structure much
stronger than the implicit voluntarism of role theory. But it also needs
a concept of structure that can recognize the complexities bulldozed by
categoricalism, and give some grip on the historical dynamic of gender.

Chapter 3 proposed that such a theory has already begun to emerge.
Chapter 4 showed how it might deal with the lion in the path of social
theories of gender, the question of natural difference. The next three
chapters attempt to show what the heartland of such a theory, the
account of gender as a social structure, might look like.

There is no need to search for new a priori bases. The starting-points
are at hand in the intuitive notions of social structure found in role
theory and categoricalism. To develop them in a way that meets the
criteria just stated requires three steps. First, it is necessary to
modify the underlying concept of ‘structure’ in the light of recent
developments in the theory of practice. Second, the concept of a single
structure of gender relations must be broken down into component
structures or substructures. Third, it is necessary to distinguish
between the kind of structural analysis that produces concepts like the
‘sexual division of labour’ (which I will call structural models) and
the kind that produces concepts like the ‘gender order’ (which I will
call structural inventories).

The rest of this chapter explains these steps and sketches a three-part
structural model of gender relations. Chapter 6 discusses structural
inventories at two levels: the gender order of the whole society and the
gender regimes of particular institutions. Chapter 7 explores the
historical dynamic of gender relations and the crisis tendencies of the
contemporary gender order.

Structure and Structural Analysis

The concept of ‘social structure’, though fundamental to the social
sciences, is ambiguous. Its usages range from the tight and
sophisticated models of Piaget, Lévi-Strauss and Althusser to the much
more numerous cases where anything that shows a detectable pattern at
all is called a ‘structure’. Most writing about gender is well towards
the latter end of the spectrum. Authors commonly get by with a rough
idea that there is some large-scale order in gender relations, but
little clarity beyond that.

To short-circuit what could be a very long discussion about definitions,
I will assume that the concept of structure is more than another term
for ‘pattern’ and refers to the intractability of the social world. It
reflects the experience of being up against something, of limits on
freedom; and also the experience of being able to operate by proxy, to
produce results one’s own capacities would not allow. The concept of
social structure expresses the constraints that lie in a given form of
social organization (rather than, say, physical facts about the world).
‘Constraints’ may be as crude as the presence of an occupying army. But
in most cases the constraints on social practice operate through a more
complex interplay of powers and through an array of social institutions.
Accordingly, attempts to decode a social structure generally begin by
analyzing institutions.

The most sophisticated accounts of gender relations as a social
structure, those offered by Juliet Mitchell and Gayle Rubin, focus on
the institution of kinship as the cross-cultural basis of sex
inequality. Their account of the structure underlying kinship is derived
from Claude Lévi-Strauss’s classic The Elementary Structures of Kinship,
which boiled down the enormous variety collected by ethnographers and
historians into variants of a universal basic system of exchange.
Lévi-Strauss described this as the exchange of women among groups of men
and took it to be what constituted society itself. To Mitchell and Rubin
this exchange founded the subjection of women.

The notion of ‘structure’ as a fundamental relationship that is not
immediately present in social life but underlies the surface complexity
of interactions and institutions, is shared by all varieties of
structuralism in the social sciences. It is a major advance over simple
descriptive notions of structure. But it has considerable problems, in
forms like Lévi-Strauss’s theory of kinship. The central difficulty that
has emerged from two decades of criticism is that structuralism is based
on a logic that is incompatible with the concept of practice as the
substance of social process, and hence with a thoroughgoing historicity
in social analysis. (For this concept see chapter 7 below.) Without
historicity, a politics of transformation becomes irrational.

Mitchell tries to reintroduce practice and history and thus save the
rationality of feminist politics. She does this by arguing that the
underlying structure (the exchange of women), and the patriarchal social
order it gives rise to, have been cultural universals up to the era of
capitalism but no longer need be. Mitchell’s argument was important in
the mid-1970s in providing a theoretical rationale for an autonomous
women’s movement. But it also implies that struggle against patriarchy
was irrational in all previous periods of history. This seems arbitrary,
to put it mildly. To avoid drawing such a line across history, we need
to overcome structuralism’s sharp separation between underlying
structure and surface practice.

An illustration of how a more active connection can be made is found in
another classic on kinship. Michael Young and Peter Willmott’s Family
and Kinship in East London describes the matrifocal kinship structure of
the working-class community of Bethnal Green, with Mum as the core
figure and mother–daughter relations as the axis of the family. This
structure is shown in its process of constitution, constantly being made
and remade in a very active social practice. Daughters and mothers pop
in and out of each others’ houses up to twelve times a day; they
exchange services like care in sickness, and negotiate about other
family relationships – including the daughter’s marriage. The notion of
‘structure’ here is not abstracted from practice, though it is also not
given in experience. The Bethnal Greeners have no concept of
‘matrifocality’. Being present in everyday practice, structure is
vulnerable to major changes of practice. This is shown in Young and
Willmott’s famous description of the migration to an outer-suburban
housing estate, which produced an unwanted and unintended nuclear family
pattern. As one of the migrants remarked, ‘It’s like being in a box to
die out here’.

The idea of an active presence of structure in practice, and an active
constitution of structure by practice, has now been formalized
theoretically. It is particularly clear in the ‘dualist’ accounts of
structure developed by Pierre Bourdieu and Anthony Giddens. Bourdieu’s
Outline of a Theory of Practice ties structure and practice together
mainly by an ironic emphasis on the unintended consequences of the
strategies social actors pursue. The pursuit of individual or family
strategies results in the reproduction of the social order from which
those strategies took off. Bourdieu’s approach has the great merit of
recognizing the inventiveness and energy with which people pursue their
lives – an unusual feat in theoretical sociology. But his image of
social structure depends so heavily on the idea of social ‘reproduction’
that it is difficult to reconcile with any idea of a historical dynamic,
except something that happens behind the backs of the actors. History
does happen in Bourdieu’s world, but it is not produced.

Giddens’s ‘theory of structuration’ locks structure and practice even
more tightly together. Human practice always presupposes social
structure, in the sense that practice necessarily calls into play social
rules or resources. Structure is always emergent from practice and is
constituted by it. Neither is conceivable without the other.

The balance formulated by Giddens as the ‘duality of structure’ is, of
all current frameworks for social theory, the closest to the
requirements of a theory of gender. Yet it leaves two outstanding
problems. By making the link of structure and practice a logical matter,
a requirement of social analysis in general, Giddens closes off the
possibility that its form might change in history. This is the
possibility raised implicitly by Mitchell and explicitly by the
practical politics of liberation movements; its significance for the
analysis of gender is evident. And in attempting to convey the impact of
a structure as a whole, Giddens moves sharply back towards classical
structuralism. His paradigmatic example here is the structure of
language, and this is deeply misleading for structures like gender or
class. Stressing the ‘virtuality’ of structure, an argument that sees
the context of an event as the alternatives allowed by given structural
principles, rather than seeing its context as being its history, Giddens
is back with the logic of reversible transformations that characterizes
structuralism.

Dualist models, then, need an opening towards history. The crucial point
is that practice, while presupposing structure in much the sense
Bourdieu and Giddens explain, is always responding to a situation.
Practice is the transformation of that situation in a particular
direction. To describe structure is to specify what it is in the
situation that constrains the play of practice. Since the consequence of
practice is a transformed situation which is the object of new practice,
‘structure’ specifies the way practice (over time) constrains practice.

Since human action involves free invention (if ‘invention within
limits’, to use Bourdieu’s phrase) and human knowledge is reflexive,
practice can be turned against what constrains it; so structure can be
deliberately the object of practice. But practice cannot escape
structure, cannot float free from its circumstances (any more than
social actors are simply ‘bearers’ of the structure). It is always
obliged to reckon with the constraints that are the precipitate of
history. For example, Victorian women rejecting marriage were not free
to adopt any other sexual life they pleased. Often the only practicable
alternative was chastity.

Most treatments of the social relations of gender make no subdivision of
structure. Texts like Michèle Barrett’s Women’s Oppression Today
certainly distinguish topics such as ideology, education, production and
the state. But the strong tendency in feminist thought has been to see
all such fields as manifestations of a single structure, the
subordination of women and superordination of men. Sex role theory, for
once, is in agreement.

That there might be some problem here is suggested by the remarkable
proliferation of ‘ultimate causes’ proposed for that single structure.
Evolutionary imperatives, hormonal aggression advantage, the physical
strength of men, the demands of childbearing, the universality of the
family, the functional imperatives of capitalism, the sexual division of
labour in childcare, and others, jostle each other as explanations.
Since none can be decisively established, the rival root causes cancel
each other out. So in the feminist theorizing of the later 1970s and the
1980s there is a tendency for subordination/superordination to float
free as pure phenomenon with no roots at all.

But this impasse could also suggest that the treatment of structure is
too simplified. A fundamentally different approach was proposed by
Juliet Mitchell in her first book, Woman’s Estate; indeed it was
outlined in her famous article ‘Women: The Longest Revolution’ as early
as 1966. Following the method though not the letter of Althusser’s
revision of Marxism, Mitchell divided gender relations into four
‘structures’: production, reproduction, socialization and sexuality.
Each of them, she argued, generates its own form of the oppression of
women. Each has its own historical trajectory, and at different times
may be changing at a faster or slower pace than the others. Though
Mitchell does not emphasize the point, it is implicit in her argument
that the patterns of relationship in the different structures may come
into conflict with each other. That is, the structure of gender
relations may be internally contradictory.

I would argue that the concepts of internal differentiation, historical
unevenness and internal contradiction are essential for understanding
the structure of gender relations. This aspect of Mitchell’s thought has
been remarkably neglected by later theorists, though the fourfold model
has been used to good effect in social history by Kerreen Reiger and
Michael Gilding.

One reason why the model has not been taken up in theory is that
Mitchell’s version of it was inconsistent. Production, reproduction,
etc. are not, strictly speaking, structures at all. They are types of
practice, and they overlap each other. Sexuality is implicated in
reproduction, clearly enough. Socialization – if we accept feminist
analyses of childcare as work – is a form of production. Certainly there
are structures to be discovered in these practices, but there is nothing
in Mitchell’s argument to imply that the structures active in these
domains of practice are separate ones. So Mitchell has pointed towards a
new form of structural analysis, but has not produced it.

The detailed research on women’s subordination since Woman’s Estate has
nevertheless fulfilled its promise. Studies over the past decade have
traced the outline of two substantially different structures of
relationship between women and men. One has to do with the division of
labour: the organization of housework and childcare, the division
between unpaid and paid work, the segregation of labour markets and
creation of ‘men’s jobs’ and ‘women’s jobs’, discrimination in training
and promotion, unequal wages and unequal exchange. The second has to do
with authority, control and coercion: the hierarchies of the state and
business, institutional and interpersonal violence, sexual regulation
and surveillance, domestic authority and its contestation.

To say these structures are substantially different is not to imply they
are generally separate. Indeed they interweave all the time. It is to
point to some basic differences in the ordering of the social relations
involved. As a first approximation one might say that the major
organizational principle of the former is separation or division, and of
the latter, unequal integration. The accumulation of wealth through the
production of goods and services follows a different historical
trajectory from the institutionalization of power, and has different
effects in the shaping of femininity and masculinity.

Many of the institutional and psychological issues about gender can be
understood in terms of the structures of labour and power, but not all.
The ways people create emotional links between each other, and the daily
conduct of emotional relationships, seem to follow a different, though
undoubtedly social, logic. The issues raised by gay liberation, by
psychoanalysis and by feminist arguments on sexuality, are not accounted
for by labour and power alone. In short, there seems to be a third major
structure. It has to do with the patterning of object-choice, desire and
desirability; with the production of heterosexuality and homosexuality
and the relationship between them; with the socially structured
antagonisms of gender (woman-hating, man-hating, self-hatred); with
trust and distrust, jealousy and solidarity in marriages and other
relationships; and with the emotional relationships involved in rearing
children.

The argument of this chapter now proceeds on the assumption that these
three structures are empirically the major structures of the field of
gender relations. That is to say they (a) are discoverable in current
gender research and sexual politics, and (b) account for most of the
structural dynamics currently understood. The argument does not assume
that they are the only discoverable structures, that they exhaust the
field. Nor does it claim that they are necessary structures (a claim
which in any case might land us back with the metaphysics of ultimate
causes). The argument rests on the gentler, more pragmatic but perhaps
more demonstrable claim that with a framework like this we can come to a
serviceable understanding of current history.

The general conception of social structure as the pattern of constraint
on practice inherent in a set of social relations can be made specific
in a number of different ways. The structures just outlined – the
division of labour, the structure of power and the structure of cathexis
– are examples of what I will call ‘structural models’. They operate at
a particular level of logical complexity and implicitly make comparisons
across historical situations at this level. They lead to questions like
what changed in the sexual division of labour as a result of capitalist
industrialization; or whether there is a difference in sexual power
structure between communist and non-communist states.

In the long debate about structuralism, structural modelling became the
be-all and end-all of structural analysis. There was an understandable
intoxication with structural models based on virtual transformation,
such as Lévi-Strauss’s theories of kinship and myth, Piaget’s theory of
intelligence, Chomsky’s theory of syntax. They are intellectually
powerful, and they gave order and precision to social science at a time
when it was dominated by a mixture of functionalism and muddy
empiricism. Yet they drew attention away from other possibilities for
structural analysis; and especially from the connection with history.

These possibilities have been indicated, in a rather programmatic way,
by Lucien Goldmann. His theory of ‘genetic structuralism’ never got
beyond a methodological sketch, though he gave classic practical
demonstrations of the structural analysis of culture. Goldmann showed
that it is possible to study the transformations of a complex structure
over real time as opposed to the ‘virtual’ time of structuralism – an
approach adopted in the rest of this chapter. His method in The Hidden
God also indicates the importance of a second kind of structural
analysis, the compiling of what might be called an inventory of the
structural features of a given situation.

Where structural models push towards comparisons across situations at a
given logical level, structural inventories push towards a more complete
exploration of a given situation, addressing all its levels and
dimensions. There is nothing arcane about this. Any historian reviewing
the background to a particular event, any politician scrutinizing the
current state of play or balance of forces, is compiling a structural
inventory. Any attempt to grasp the current moment in sexual politics,
to define where we have got to, any attempt to characterize the gender
relations of another culture or another time, likewise involves a
structural inventory.

Two useful concepts have been developed for this procedure. Jill
Matthews speaks of the ‘gender order’, a historically constructed
pattern of power relations between men and women and definitions of
femininity and masculinity. Following Matthews I will use this term for
the structural inventory of an entire society. The concept of the
‘gender regime’ developed in our educational research to describe the
state of play in sexual politics within a school involves the same kind
of logic on a smaller stage. I will use this term for the structural
inventory of a particular institution.

Recognizing the procedure of structural inventory does not introduce a
separate set of issues or topics. The division of labour, the structure
of power, the structure of cathexis are the major elements of any gender
order or gender regime. Structural models and structural inventories are
in principle complementary ways of looking at the same facts. In
practice they are constantly done together, with shifting emphases. This
chapter and the next discuss them separately to emphasize the logic of
analysis, but the separation is far from absolute.

Labour

The sexual division of labour at its simplest is an allocation of
particular types of work to particular categories of people. It is a
social structure to the extent that this allocation becomes a constraint
on further practice. This happens in several interrelated ways. First,
the prior division of work among people becomes a social rule allocating
people to work. An employee entering a firm is given job X if a woman,
job Y if a man. The working of such rules is found in almost every study
of paid employment that has considered the issue of gender, and this is
no primitive hangover found only in low-technology industries. The
superb ethnography of a British motor vehicle component assembly plant
by Ruth Cavendish, Women on the Line, shows an almost absolute
separation between jobs allocated to women and to men. ‘It was obvious’,
the author remarks, ‘that the only qualification you needed for a better
job was to be a man’. Motor vehicles are not the cutting edge of
technology any more, but computers certainly are. Game and Pringle in
Gender at Work show that the growth of computing has resulted in job
markets as segregated as any in the work-force. Women are hired as data
entry key-punchers; men predominate as operators, salesmen, systems
analysts and managers.

A segregation rule in operation becomes the basis of new forms of
constraint on practice, such as differential skilling. Where women and
men have been skilled or trained differentially, discriminatory
employment becomes rational from the employer’s point of view. As Carol
O’Donnell shows in The Basis of the Bargain; differential skilling and
training by sex is a very general feature of the interface between the
education system and labour markets. Through such mechanisms the sexual
division of labour is transformed into an apparently technical division
of labour, resistant to the more obvious antidiscrimination strategies.
Where men are usually better prepared or trained than women for a given
job, choosing ‘the best applicant’ will normally mean choosing a man.
The almost complete dominance of the upper echelons of universities by
men is a striking example of this indirect discrimination.

Skilling and training is one of the mechanisms by which the sexual
division of labour is made a powerful system of social constraint. Just
how powerful is revealed when a conscious attempt is made to change it.
The experience of antidiscrimination and affirmative action programs is
relevant here, and the slow progress they have made is familiar. Less
well known, but equally important, is the evidence that has begun to
accumulate about attempts to alter the sexual division of labour in
unpaid work, notably housework and childcare. This has become, as Lynne
Segal notes, an important focus of the personal politics that grew out
of the New Left in the 1970s in Britain. Paul Amato, reflecting on two
years experience house-husbanding in Melbourne, notes that the reversal
was never accepted by most men he dealt with, who felt that men should
work (i.e., housework was not work) and men should not be economically
dependent on women. One solution to the dilemma was to regard him as
successfully exploiting his wife. Clearly the conventional sexual
division of labour has strong cultural supports. A recent survey in
southern England by R. E. Pahl shows no tendency for unemployed men to
take on more housework; and the Australian study of domestic ‘role
reversal’ by Graeme Russell shows shared childcare arrangements between
husband and wife to be highly unstable.

Nevertheless the fact that there are some attempts to reverse it,
together with the creation of a new sexual division of labour in
industries like computing, indicate that the structure is not only a
constraint but also an object of practice. The research that documents
division in workplaces also documents the activity, the social labour,
that sustains it. In Ruth Cavendish’s factory, management was in the
hands of men, so was the union, and it is no accident that both
hierarchies resisted the attempt of women workers (eventually by a
wildcat strike) to alter their situation. Another British workplace
study, by David Collinson and David Knights, vividly shows the methods
that sustain the sexual division of labour in a white-collar workplace,
in this case an insurance firm. Women who look for promotion above
routine clerical work are talked out of it by men in management,
appealing to anxieties that the men themselves have done much to create.
What amounts to a complete miniature ideology of women’s psychological
unsuitability for insurance work is sustained; and the real prejudice of
managers against women is rationalized by appeal to the presumed
prejudices of customers.

The gender regimes of these two workplaces are, however, significantly
different, and it is possible that the mechanisms by which the sexual
division of labour is sustained are quite specific. Michael Korda’s Male
Chauvinism, an early American account of sexual politics in the
workplace, presents the oppression of women mainly as a consequence of
individual discrimination by bosses. This cannot be true for a situation
of collective exploitation like Cavendish’s factory. But in the New York
corporate office world from which Korda writes, where hiring and firing,
salary determination and promotion are all highly individualized, the
exclusion of women perhaps does mainly operate through the individual
sexism of corporate executives.

Beyond the individual workplace there is a wider social process that
constitutes the sexual division of labour in terms of whole categories
of workers. Margaret Power speaks of ‘the making of a women’s
occupation’ as a historical process in which new categories of work and
workers are formed. It is by no means a matter of an existing division
being mechanically reproduced. We now have case studies of individual
occupations that document this. One of the best is Eve Gamarnikow’s
study which shows how the modern occupation of trained nurse was
constructed by entrepreneurs such as Florence Nightingale. Its basis was
a trade-off that accepted the control of medical practice by men (i.e.,
doctors) in order to open a semi-professional career path to
middle-class women.

As this case shows, the construction of the sexual division of labour is
not just a matter of the allocation of work to people. It also involves
the design of the work. The argument about ‘appropriate technology’ –
machinery or techniques that are less environmentally destructive, or
cheaper, or particularly suited to Third World needs – has made it
obvious that there is never just one technique for doing a job. There
are even alternative ways of building a nuclear bomb. A socio-technical
system, such as industrial manufacturing or domestic work, can be set up
in various ways. The particular designs and practices current at a given
time therefore represent a social choice of some kind. The current
labour practice gets embodied in technology designed with given social
arrangements in mind – among them the sexual division of labour. For
instance the waterframes in the cotton mills of north-western England
and southern Scotland in the early Industrial Revolution were designed
to be operated by women and children. As T. C. Smout notes, women and
children were preferred as workers for the new factories because they
were presumed more docile in the face of unprecedented demands for
labour discipline. The factory owners faced the interesting problem of
what to do with the husbands in order to attract their preferred labour
force.

A more complex example is the technology of housework. Machines like
vacuum cleaners or washing machines are equally suited to be operated by
women or by men. The models widely sold are however designed to be used
by just one household and presuppose one permanent domestic worker per
household. This arrangement happens to be provided by the conventional
sexual division of labour and not by any other likely or practicable
arrangement. Accordingly they are always advertised with pictures of
smiling women operating them, not smiling men. It is quite possible to
design equipment for doing the same work under other social
arrangements. For instance the communal laundries operated by British
local government provided a practical alternative way of mechanizing
laundry in the 1930s and 1940s. They were squeezed out by post-war
privatization. The consumer-goods boom of the 1950s was, among other
things, a reconstitution of the domestic sexual division of labour by
new means.

These considerations imply that the idea of a ‘division of labour’ is
itself too narrow. We are dealing not just with the allocation of work,
but with the nature and organization of that work. It is impossible to
separate either fact from the distribution of the products of work –
that is, the distribution of services and income. Coming back to
Cavendish’s factory, the fierce insistence on the sexual division of
labour by the men makes more sense when we learn that the men’s jobs
were much better paid. Some of the men in the plant were paid twice what
the women got, for doing easier jobs. The women got ‘married women’s
wages’ whether married or not. This is far from being an isolated case.
As shown in chapter 1 for a country which has theoretically had ‘equal
pay’ for men and women for fifteen years, the actual average income of
women in Australia is still less than half the average income of men.

So the ‘sexual division of labour’ can no longer be seen as a structure
in its own right. It must be seen as part of a larger pattern, a
gender-structured system of production, consumption and distribution.

To think of a gender structuring of production, not just a sexual
division, allows a clearer recognition of differentiations within the
work-force that have to do with sexual politics but which operate within
the broad categories of sex. Some have to do with the marketing of sex
itself, in prostitution or the entertainment industry. But the issue is
much broader. Cases include the making of jobs like receptionist, air
hostess and secretary as a combination of particular technical skills
with a particular femininity. Particular industries, notably clothing
and theatre, are associated with homosexual masculinity. On the other
hand business management is integrated with forms of masculinity
organized around interpersonal dominance: ‘tough’ stances towards labour
are admired in business, and phrases like ‘aggressive marketing’ are
terms of approval in management jargon.

This extension of the concept, however, runs up against the concept of
the ‘mode of production’, or its near equivalent the ‘social division of
labour’, in Marxist theory. There is a good deal of literature
attempting to link the position of women to these concepts; as noted in
chapter 3, this has been the most important extrinsic theory of gender.
The barrenness of this theoretical enterprise is largely because the
theorizing has not been bold enough. Almost all this literature has
accepted the traditional definition of the ‘capitalist mode of
production’ in Marxism as a production system fundamentally defined by
class relations. Even the attempt to define a ‘domestic mode of
production’ located in the household has left the class analysis of
capitalism undisturbed.

It must now be accepted that gender divisions are not an ideological
addendum to a class-structured mode of production. They are a
deep-seated feature of production itself. They are not confined to
domestic work, or even to the division between unpaid domestic work and
paid work in industry. They are a central feature of industrial
organization too. They are not a hangover from pre-capitalist modes of
production. As the cases of computing and world-market factories show,
they are being vigorously created in the most advanced sectors of the
capitalist world economy.

A series of arguments lead firmly to the conclusion proposed by Game and
Pringle. Gender divisions are a fundamental and essential feature of the
capitalist system; arguably as fundamental as class divisions. Socialist
theory cannot any longer evade the fact that capitalism is run by, and
mainly to the advantage of, men.

This is one of the grounds for a wider rethinking of the socialist
analysis of capitalism. For the feminist argument has an interesting
parallel with the view from Third World radical movements, which have
seen capitalism mainly as a system of global inequality and imperialism.
Together they suggest a new view of capitalism, as a system for the
concentration and regulation of profits extracted by a number of
qualitatively different mechanisms of exploitation, rather than the
basically homogeneous structure implied by the concept of a ‘mode of
production’. If that is broadly correct, we no longer need the kind of
sideways skip performed by Eli Zaretsky in Capitalism, the Family and
Personal Life, proposing that capitalism took over the existing
patriarchal organization of gender or domestic life and used it for its
own reproduction. The connection is more direct. Capitalism was partly
constituted out of the opportunities for power and profit created by
gender relations. It continues to be.

Given this understanding of gender relations in production and
consumption, what are their main principles of organization? What kind
of ‘system’ are we dealing with? At this point my argument becomes more
speculative and uncertain. I offer the following as an organizing
hypothesis rather than a firm conclusion. It is, nevertheless, based on
the research on domestic and industrial labour already referred to, as
well as some practical experiences of reform. Five points in particular
seem important:

1 the sheer scale and insistence of demarcations between women’s and
men’s work, despite their technical irrationality and the impossibility
of making them complete;

2 the connection of many demarcations with issues of profitability or
labour control, or both, in the workplace;

3 the way they function to exclude virtually all women from
opportunities for the accumulation of wealth on a scale usable as
capital, or from career paths that would lead to the control of
significant capitals;

4 the importance of practices promoting the solidarity of men – often
across class lines – in maintaining these demarcations;

5 the consistency with which divisions of labour and differences of
income operate to allocate childcare to women, especially younger women.

Much of this can be understood in terms of two major principles. One
might be called the gendered logic of accumulation. The overall gender
organization of labour concentrates economic benefits in one direction,
economic losses in another, and on a scale sufficient to produce a
dynamic of accumulation in its own right. Christine Delphy identified
such a mechanism in her study of French marriages, but by confining the
issue to the household and the one-to-one marriage relation, missed the
larger possibilities of accumulation in industry. The benefits and costs
are not distributed in an all-or-nothing manner between the sexes as
blocks. The printing tradesmen studied by Cynthia Cockburn are minor
beneficiaries; the media capitalists who employ them are major
beneficiaries. Not all women are major losers, a fact of strategic
importance to feminism. Overall the benefits, opportunities and costs
are large enough to be worth fighting for, and motivate the active
practice of demarcation and exclusion by many groups of men.

There are two internal limits to the pace and scale of gender-based
accumulation. One is the fact that the division of labour, while marked,
is far from absolute. Very few women are sailors and very few men are
secretaries, but quite a lot of both are clerks, shopkeepers, sales
personnel, programmers and teachers. Much of the labour in peasant
agriculture is shared. The second is the fact that marriage is a
one-to-one relationship. There is limited scope to extract material
advantages from the labour of just one other person. So the scale of
economic inequalities resulting from labour organized through marriage
is severely limited, when compared with the economic inequalities that
can be produced by accumulation in industry. In this respect the nuclear
family form must be seen as an important restraint on sex inequality.
The current commercialization of domestic work, for instance in the
growth of ‘fast food’ outlets, is likely to increase the economic
inequalities of gender.

The second principle might be called, perhaps less happily, the
political economy of masculinity. A number of important practices have
to do with the definition of masculinity and its mobilization as an
economic resource. Ann Curthoys has argued that childcare is the basis
of the sexual division of labour and that the childcare issue is the
structural basis of feminism. This overstates the case, but the general
importance of the issue is undeniable. Curthoys acutely observes that
childcare is not just an issue for women but an issue about men: ‘the
notion that caring for young children is not a fit occupation for men is
extraordinarily deepseated’. Since men have more control over the
division of labour than women, their collective choice not to do
childcare, as Margaret Polatnick has argued, reflects the dominant
definition of men’s interests, and in fact helps them keep predominant
power. The ability of management, in many industrial conflicts, to
mobilize men workers and their unions in tacit alliances against women
workers confirms the strength of these definitions of interest. How
particular definitions of masculinity are interrelated will be discussed
later. Here I will simply note that a hegemonic pattern of masculinity,
in organizing the solidarity of men, becomes an economic as well as a
cultural force.

This force does not operate without resistance. The sexual division of
labour itself creates bases for solidarity among women. In industrial
employment the widespread exclusion of women from career grades has the
effect of giving them shared work experiences and little structural
reason to be in competition with each other. The routines of commuting
make women the daytime majority in dormitory suburbs; and studies of new
suburbs by sociologists such as Lyn Richards emphasize how important,
how carefully sought and monitored, are their relationships with each
other. Beatrix Campbell, discussing the current recession in Britain,
notes how the division of labour in childcare means that young single
mothers on state welfare benefits enter a community of women that links
very different age-groups. While none of these are blanket effects, they
do indicate a potential for self-definition or resistance.

Power

Particular transactions involving power are easy enough to observe. Mr
Barrett the Victorian patriarch forbids his daughter to marry;
parliament makes homosexual intercourse a crime; a bank manager refuses
a loan to an unmarried woman; a group of youths rape a girl of their
acquaintance. It is often difficult to see beyond individual acts of
force or oppression to a structure of power, a set of social relations
with some scope and permanence. Yet actions like the ones just listed
are not intelligible without the structure. Rape, for instance,
routinely presented in the media as individual deviance, is a form of
person-to-person violence deeply embedded in power inequalities and
ideologies of male supremacy. Far from being a deviation from the social
order, it is in a significant sense an enforcement of it.

This connection of violence with ideology points to the multiple
character of social power. Force is one important component. It is no
accident that the means of organized violence – weapons and knowledge of
military technique – are almost entirely in the hands of men, as shown
in chapter 1. Yet ‘naked force’ is rare. Much more often violence
appears as part of a complex that also involves institutions and the
ways they are organized. Power may be a balance of advantage or an
inequality of resources in a workplace, a household, or a larger
institution. By and large the people who run the corporations, the
government departments and the universities are men, who so arrange
things that it is extremely difficult for women to get access to top
positions. Organizational control is no more naked than force usually
is. Both secrete, and depend on, ideologies. The ability to impose a
definition of the situation, to set the terms in which events are
understood and issues discussed, to formulate ideals and define
morality, in short to assert hegemony, is also an essential part of
social power. Much of the critical work of feminism and gay liberation
has necessarily been devoted to contesting cultural power: for instance
cultural definitions of women as weak, or of homosexuals as mentally
ill.

That relations of power function as a social structure, as a pattern of
constraint on social practice, is in one sense all too obvious. The
constraint on practice extends to the elemental question of staying
alive. Helen Ware, in Women, Demography and Development, notes that in
rich countries, where basic nutrition is not a problem, women live
longer than men; in the poorest countries women die earlier than men.
Here, it appears, discrimination against women in forms like less food
and less medical attention is operating at a level where life is at
stake. Differential infant mortality, including infanticide of girls, is
another case in point.

It is less obvious, but also important, that the practice of those who
hold power is constrained as well. Men are empowered in gender
relations, but in specific ways which produce their own limits. For
instance, in a patriarchal gender order emphasizing monogamous marriage
there is serious tension between men about issues of adultery; a
structure that defines women as a kind of property makes men liable to
reprisals for theft. Sustaining hegemonic definitions of masculinity is
often an issue of importance, and homosexual men attract hostility
partly because they undermine these definitions.

As with labour, the structure of power is an object of practice as well
as a condition. Many accounts of patriarchy give the impression of a
simple, orderly structure like a suburban war memorial. Behind the
facade is likely to be a mass of disorder and anomaly. Imposing order
requires a mobilization of resources and expenditure of energy. What
Donzelot calls the ‘policing of families’ is just a part of this.
Research on the welfare state, such as Sheila Shaver’s study of
Australian taxation and benefit payments, shows an apparatus of social
policy that assumes women’s dependence on men and reinforces it.

Imposing order in and through culture is a large part of this effort.
One notes, for instance, the enthusiasm with which the Catholic
hierarchy – all men – emphasize an ideal of purity, meekness and
obedience for women. Its effectiveness has just been demonstrated in
Ireland where the Church has succeeded in defeating a referendum to
permit divorce. Elsewhere in the capitalist world priests are becoming
less important as ideologists of gender, journalists more so. Though
‘quality’ newspapers like The Guardian in Britain are liberal in sexual
politics, most mass-circulation journalism is unrelievedly sexist and
homophobic. The people doing this cultural and material ‘policing’ are
not necessarily the main beneficiaries as individuals. They are, rather,
participants in a collective project in which the power of men and
subordination of women is sustained.

If authority is defined as legitimate power, then we can say that the
main axis of the power structure of gender is the general connection of
authority with masculinity. But this is immediately complicated, and
partly contradicted, by a second axis: the denial of authority to some
groups of men, or more generally the construction of hierarchies of
authority and centrality within the major gender categories.

The authority of men is not spread in an even blanket across every
department of social life. In some circumstances women have authority;
in some others the power of men is diffuse, confused or contested.
Research by American feminists such as Carroll Smith-Rosenberg has
traced the history of institutions and practices which have been
controlled by women, among them girls’ education, friendship networks,
and non-market production. This insight can also be inverted. We can
identify a complex of institutions and milieux where the power of men
and the authority of masculinity are relatively concentrated. There is a
‘core’ in the power structure of gender, contrasted with the more
diffuse or contested patterns of power in the periphery.

In the advanced capitalist countries, four components of this core are
reasonably clear: (a) the hierarchies and work-forces of
institutionalized violence – military and paramilitary forces, police,
prison systems; (b) the hierarchy and labour force of heavy industry
(for example, steel and oil companies) and the hierarchy of
high-technology industry (computers, aerospace); (c) the planning and
control machinery of the central state; and (d) working-class milieux
that emphasize physical toughness and men’s association with machinery.

The connections between (a), (b) and (c) are familiar. President
Eisenhower, not a noted feminist, warned of the power of the
‘military-industrial complex’ in the United States. There is a close
analogue in the Soviet Union. In both countries, as Joel Moses observes
of the latter, there is an ‘almost complete exclusion of women from the
major policy-making centres’. These parts of the complex are tied
together by an ideology linking masculinity, authority and technological
violence, which has slowly become a focus of research. But it is their
connection with (d) that is crucial in sexual politics as a whole. This
connection gives a mass base to militarist beliefs and practices that
might otherwise be so repellent as to destabilize the governments that
rest on them. Perhaps the most striking feature of this connection is
the extent to which it is mediated by machinery, especially motor
vehicles. The gradual displacement of other transport systems by this
uniquely violent and environmentally destructive technology is both a
means and a measure of the tacit alliance between the state and
corporate elite and working-class hegemonic masculinity.

It was often pointed out by ‘men’s movement’ writers in the 1970s that
most men do not really fit the image of tough, dominant and combative
masculinity that the ideologists of patriarchy sell. That image is not
intended to fit. The celluloid heroism of a John Wayne or Sylvester
Stallone is heroic only by contrast with the mass of men who are not.
The ‘justifying’ ideology for the patriarchal core complex and the
overall subordination of women requires the creation of a gender-based
hierarchy among men. (I stress ‘gender-based’ because discussions of
power relations between men have commonly stopped after identifying
divisions of class and race.) As gay liberation points out, an essential
part of this process has been the creation of a negative symbol of
masculinity in the form of stigmatized outgroups, especially homosexual
men. In general, then, a hierarchy is created with at least three
elements: hegemonic masculinity, conservative masculinities (complicit
in the collective project but not its shock troops) and subordinated
masculinities.

Feminist thought around 1970 commonly identified the family as the
strategic site, the key to the oppression of women. If anything the
pendulum has now swung too far the other way. It has become clear that
household and kinship relations are not a test-tube case of pure
patriarchy. The family as an institution might best be regarded now as
part of the periphery rather than the core complex. Colin Bell and
Howard Newby remark that the authority of husbands requires a good deal
of bargaining and negotiation for it to be maintained in working order.
The importance of bargaining and the tensions around marital authority
are confirmed by a considerable body of close-up research on families,
from Mirra Komarovsky’s classic Blue-Collar Marriage to more recent
studies like Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain in the United States,
Pauline Hunt’s Gender and Class Consciousness in Britain, Claire
Williams’s Open Cut and Jan Harper and Lyn Richards’s Mothers and
Working Mothers in Australia. These studies also suggest a recent
historical shift, with husbands now finding it more difficult to impose
an openly patriarchal regime in the home.

The contestation of domestic patriarchy is so widespread in some
settings that it makes sense to talk of a working-class feminism, rooted
in these struggles as much as in paid employment. Marital power
struggles are often won by the wives. The research that produced the
case study of the Princes in chapter 1 also showed a number of families
where the father’s control was eroded or simply non-existent. Komarovsky
noted this in the 1950s too. I think it is important to acknowledge that
there are genuine reversals of power here. It is not a question of women
being conceded an apparent power which can then be revoked, but of the
hard relational outcomes of domestic conflicts and negotiations over
years or even decades.

It is also important to acknowledge that these local victories do not
overthrow patriarchy. Komarovsky observed among her American
working-class couples that where the wife was the controlling member of
the marriage, this could not be acknowledged publicly; a facade of men’s
authority was maintained. The general implication is that we must
distinguish the global or macro-relationship of power, in which women
are subordinated to men in the society as a whole, from the local or
micro-situation in particular households, particular workplaces,
particular settings. It is possible for the local pattern to depart from
the global pattern, even to contradict it. Such departures may provoke
‘policing’, i.e., attempts to establish the global pattern locally as a
norm. They may also signify structural tension that leads to large-scale
change in the longer run.

Cathexis

To recognize a social structure in sexuality it is necessary first to
see sexuality as social. The following analysis therefore presupposes
the argument, made in Gagnon and Simon’s Sexual Conduct, Foucault’s
History of Sexuality and Weeks’s Sexuality and its Discontents, that
sexuality is socially constructed. Its bodily dimension does not exist
before, or outside, the social practices in which relationships between
people are formed and carried on. Sexuality is enacted or conducted, it
is not ‘expressed’.

There is an emotional dimension, and perhaps an erotic dimension, to all
social relationships. However the focus here will be on what are called
‘sexual social relationships’ by the Red Collective in The Politics of
Sexuality in Capitalism; relationships organized around one person’s
emotional attachment to another. The structure that organizes these
attachments I will call the ‘structure of cathexis’.

Freud used the term ‘cathexis’ to refer to a psychic charge or
instinctual energy being attached to a mental object, i.e., an idea or
image. Here I am generalizing it to the construction of emotionally
charged social relations with ‘objects’ (i.e., other people) in the real
world. As with Freud’s usage, it is important to note that the emotional
attachment may be hostile, not only affectionate. It may also be hostile
and affectionate at the same time, i.e., ambivalent. Most close
relationships have this degree of complexity.

Of course sexual practices are governed by other structures as well.
Emma Goldman put this pungently when trying to deromanticize ‘the
traffic in women’: ‘It is merely a question of degree whether she sells
herself to one man, in or out of marriage, or to many men. Whether our
reformers admit it or not, the economic and social inferiority of women
is responsible for prostitution.’ Yet psychoanalysis and the sexual
liberation movements both point to the constraining power of patterns of
emotional attachment in their own right. It should be possible to
analyse them without falling into romanticism.

The social patterning of desire is most obvious as a set of
prohibitions. The incest taboo, and specific laws about rape, age of
consent and homosexuality, all prohibit sexual relationships between
certain people. (Strictly speaking the laws prohibit particular actions,
but the intention is to destroy the relationships.) Psychoanalytic
theories of the Oedipal crisis and the super-ego interpret the impact of
society on emotions mainly in terms of the internalization of
prohibitions. Yet the prohibitions would be pointless without
injunctions to love and marry the right kind of person, to find
such-and-such a kind of masculinity or femininity desirable. The social
pattern of desire is a joint system of prohibition and incitement.

Two principles of organization are very obvious in our culture. Objects
of desire are generally defined by the dichotomy and opposition of
feminine and masculine; and sexual practice is mainly organized in
couple relationships.

Historically and cross-culturally, sexual attachment has not always been
organized in terms of a dichotomy. Nevertheless in the rich capitalist
countries at present sexuality is firmly organized as either
heterosexual or homosexual. If it is not, we actually label it as mixed:
‘bisexual’. Though coupling is often seen as the basic structure of
attachment, the gender dichotomy of desire seems to have some priority.
When couples break up and their members form new attachments, it is
almost universal practice for the new companion to be of the same sex as
the old one, whichever that was.

In the pattern of desire that is socially hegemonic, cathexis
presupposes sexual difference. ‘Woman needs man and man must have his
mate’, as time goes by. The solidarity of the heterosexual couple is
formed on the basis of some kind of reciprocity, rather than a basis of
common situation or experience. This is in marked contrast to
solidarities generated by the structures of labour and power. The latent
contradiction here has often been noticed, indeed is a theme of romantic
literature, as well as a political issue of some importance in feminism
in the last decade. More, the sexual difference is a large part of what
gives erotic flavour to the relationship. Hence it can be emphasized as
a means of intensifying pleasure. This goes some way to explaining the
systematic exaggeration of gender differences discussed in chapters 4
and 8.

But ‘difference’ is a logical term, and social relationships are more
loaded. The members of a heterosexual couple are not just different,
they are specifically unequal. A heterosexual woman is sexualized as an
object in a way that a heterosexual man is not. The fashion industry,
the cosmetics industry, and the content of mass media are tangible proof
of this. For instance, the glamour shots on the covers of women’s
magazines and men’s magazines are pictures of women in both cases; the
difference is in the way the models are dressed and posed. Broadly
speaking, the erotic reciprocity in hegemonic heterosexuality is based
on unequal exchange. There are, as Emma Goldman noted, material reasons
why women participate in unequal relationships. The ‘double standard’,
permitting promiscuous sexuality to men and forbidding it to women, has
nothing to do with greater desire on the part of men; it has everything
to do with greater power.

The process of sexualizing women as objects of heterosexual desire
involves standardizing feminine appeal, as the term ‘fashion’ itself
implies. There is a complex of tensions and contradictions around this.
Though hostility can be and often is directed at a whole gender category
(misogyny, misandry, homophobia), attraction is not. Rather,
heterosexuality and homosexuality as structural principles are
definitions of the social category within which a partner can be chosen.
Perhaps the implication is that both are constructed mainly by blocking
out the category from which the partner is not to be drawn.

At the psychological level this implies repression and at the social
level prohibition. Both imply some attraction to the negated object.
Classical psychoanalysis made us familiar with this under the name of
‘ambivalence’. Its significance in understanding the construction of
masculinity will be discussed in chapter 9; here I want to raise its
structural implications. In The Ego and the Id Freud noted that the
‘complete Oedipus complex’ is twofold. Underneath the familiar triangle
of love and jealousy is another set of emotional relations where the
attachments run the other way: ‘A boy has not merely an ambivalent
attitude towards his father and an affectionate object-choice towards
his mother, but at the same time he also behaves like a girl and
displays an affectionate feminine attitude to his father and a
corresponding jealousy and hostility towards his mother.’ Carl Jung
proposed as a general rule that what is repressed is emotion that cannot
be expressed in social practice, with the result that the unconscious
comes to be a negative of the conscious mind and public life.

If we take these ideas seriously, it can be argued that the visible
structure of emotional relationships coexists with a shadow structure
whose sense is very different. It is a familiar fact that public
affection in a married couple often coexists with private hostility. The
Red Collective has suggested a great difference between the ‘inside’ and
‘outside’ of couple relations in general. Gay men have often suspected
that the hostility they receive is sharpened by unconscious desire.
Bringing up small children is virtually guaranteed to produce both love
and hostility on both sides and to a strong degree. Since most of this
parenting is done by women, relationships involving mothers are likely
to be highly ambivalent, a theme stressed by Nancy Friday in My
Mother/My Self.

There is so little research that gives depth-psychological information
and has a sense of social context that it is difficult to do more than
speculate on how this shadow structure is organized. All that is clear
is that the structure of cathexis must be regarded as multilevelled, and
major relationships as ambivalent, in the general case. The old cliches
about how easily love and hatred turn into each other, and the power of
fables on this theme like Puccini’s Turandot, make better sense if
sexual practices are generally based on structural relationships in
which both love and hatred are already present.

Nancy Friday’s argument points towards another principle of
organization. She remarks that when girls develop a desire for men, it
is more security than sexuality that they want. It is often said of
teenage sex that the girls want affection and the boys want sex.
Gabrielle Carey and Kathy Lette in Puberty Blues add that in teenage
peer-group life, the sex is as much for symbolic purposes as for
physical pleasure. This is probably true of adults too. The argument
connects with Herbert Marcuse’s observations in Eros and Civilization
about the development of genital primacy and the de-erotization of the
rest of the body under the rule of the performance principle. It appears
that a broad opposition has been constructed between genital performance
and diffuse sensuality. In contemporary hegemonic heterosexuality these
forms of eroticism are defined as masculine and feminine respectively.
But they need not be. In other cultures they certainly are not, as the
Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana illustrates. It is wonderfully ironic that this
compendium of mannered and leisured sensuality is now (in the West)
mainly sold in porn shops dedicated to the mighty erection and the quick
climax.

With labour and power, the structure can be the object of practice; with
cathexis, it commonly is. One of the striking things about sexuality is
that the structure itself can be cathected. Hence, for instance, the
erotic value of gender difference already noted. Hence the gender
element in narcissism, the extent to which cathexis of the self is
focused on the diacritical marks of gender. Hence, most strikingly, the
erotic circularities of sexual fetishism, where the symbolic markers of
social categories (lace handkerchiefs, high-heeled shoes, leather
jackets) or structural principles (for example, dominance) get detached
from their contexts and themselves become primary objects of arousal.

This kind of practice can be captured for profit-making or repression,
as it is by the advertising industry. But another practice directed
towards structure is possible, the attempt to rework patterns of
attachment in an egalitarian direction. Autobiographies of this
practice, like the Red Collective’s book, or Anja Meulenbelt’s account
of personal life, feminism and the Dutch Left in The Shame is Over, show
the difficulties more readily than the potentials. David Fernbach, who
argues in The Spiral Path that there is an inherent egalitarianism in
gay relationships because of their transitive structure (my lover’s
lover can also be my lover), is more sanguine.

A Note on ‘System’ and Composition

Setting out this account of multiple structures risks a new kind of
reductionism, implying a coherence and completeness in each which
earlier was denied to gender relations as a whole. Certainly the
exercise of separating structures is pointless unless there is some gain
in coherence. But it is important that none of the three structures is
or can be independent of the others. The structure of cathexis in some
respects reflects inequalities of power; the division of labour partly
reflects patterns of cathexis, and so on. In none is there an ultimate
determinant, a ‘generative nucleus’ to use Henri Lefebvre’s term, from
which the rest of the pattern of gender relations springs.

There is, however, a unity in the field, an orderliness, which needs to
be understood. People do not walk around all day with an ache in their
shoulders from the sociological cross-pressures. A gay man can be beaten
up in the streets of Sydney in a way that somehow fits with the
experience of being beaten up in New York. There is some coherence
between the division of labour in childcare, the psychodynamics of
femininity and the possibilities of women’s liberation.

My argument, briefly, is that this unity is not the unity of a system,
as functionalist analysis would imply. Nor is it the expressive unity
that would be provided by the existence of a generative nucleus. It is a
unity – always imperfect and under construction – of historical
composition. I mean ‘composition’ as in music: a tangible, active and
often difficult process of bringing elements into connection with each
other and thrashing out their relationships. It is a matter of the real
historical process of interaction and group formation. The difference
from music is not that the process lacks a composer, but that it has a
whole stack of them; and that all are inside the piece being composed,
since what is being composed is their own lives. The product of the
process is not a logical unity but an empirical unification. It happens
on particular terms in particular circumstances. At the level of a whole
society it produces the gender order to be discussed in the next
chapter.

The idea of ‘composition’ implies that a structure may be less than
perfectly formed, and a field of practice less than completely governed
by a particular structure. In short, the level of systematicity in
gender relations varies. It is possible for the processes I have called
‘empirical unification’ to work powerfully and achieve a high degree of
order, as seems to be the case for the core complex within the structure
of power. But if this is achieved, it is not the consequence of an
inherent or categorical logic, and never justifies functionalist
analysis. It is the outcome of strategy in the historical process of
group formation and interaction.

A high degree of systematicity is likely to reflect the dominance of a
group whose interests are served by a particular gender order. For
instance, the extent to which housing, finance, education and other
spheres of life are all organized around the model of the heterosexual
couple reflects the dominance of heterosexual interests and the
subordination of homosexual people. The extent to which homosexual
experience itself has been organized in heterosexual terms (‘butch’ and
‘femme’ for instance) is a striking proof of subordination. A major task
of gay-liberation politics has logically been to contest this way of
organizing homosexual experience – to ‘desystematize’ or ‘de-compose’
gender, so to speak.

It is historically possible to have a low degree of systematicity, a
good deal of incoherence and contestation. And it is possible to have
the combination of structured conflict of interest and potential for
de-composition that can be recognized as a crisis tendency. This will be
explored in chapter 7.

NOTES

Structure and Structural Analysis

(pp. 92–9). The critique of structuralism and of Bourdieu draws on
several essays in Connell (1983). The account of ‘dualist’ theory
follows discussions in a seminar course on ‘Practice, Self and Social
Structure’ held at Macquarie University in 1985; my thanks to Sue Kippax
in particular. On the logic of structuralism I find Piaget (1971)
illuminating. Giddens rejects the definition of structure as
‘constraint’ but I would argue that this can be formulated in ways that
make it simpler and at least as powerful as his model. My definition of
‘structural models’ is entirely distinct from the concept of ‘structural
modelling’ in business-oriented operations research: see e.g. Linstone
et al. (1979) and other papers in the same issue of Technological
Forecasting and Social Change, where ‘structure’ has the extremely weak
sense noted in the text and ‘modelling’ means feeding vague ideas into a
computer to make them look precise. Quotation from Young and Willmott
(1962, p. 133).

Labour

(pp. 99–106). Quotation from Cavendish (1982), p. 79. Segal et al.
(1979–80) provide a rare analysis of a sustained attempt to change
childcare in a politicized environment. Quotation from Curthoys (1976,
p. 3).

Power

(pp. 107–11). The argument here assumes the points established by Lukes
(1974) about the different forms of social power. For American
historical research tracing women’s fields of power see Du Bois et al.
(1980). Quotation from Moses (1978, p. 334).

Cathexis

(pp. 111–16). Quotations from Goldman (1972a, p. 145) and Freud (1923,
p. 33).

6

Gender Regimes and the Gender Order

Institutions

Theories of gender, with hardly an exception, focus either on one-to-one
relationships between people or on the society as a whole. Apart from
discussions of the family, the intermediate level of social organization
is skipped. Yet in some ways this is the most important level to
understand. We live most of our daily lives in settings like the
household, the workplace and the bus queue, rather than stretched out in
a relation to society at large or bundled up in a one-to-one. The
practice of sexual politics bears mostly on institutions: discriminatory
hiring in companies, non-sexist curricula in schools and so on. Much of
the research that is changing current views of gender is about
institutions like workplaces, markets and media.

When the social sciences have made the connection, it has usually been
by picking out a particular institution as the bearer of gender and
sexuality. The family and kinship have usually been elected to this
honour. Accordingly the structure of the family is the centre-piece of
the sociological analysis of sex roles stemming from Parsons and Mead.
The flip side of this election was that it allowed other institutions to
be analysed as if gender were of no account at all. In text after text
on the classic themes of social science – the state, economic policy,
urbanism, migration, modernization – sex and gender fail to get a
mention or are marginalized.

One of the most important effects of the new feminism on the social
sciences has been a comprehensive proof that this approach is untenable.
Murray Goot and Elizabeth Reid’s classic demonstration of the mixture of
gender-blindness and patriarchal prejudice in mainstream political
science is one example of a series of critiques. They range from
electoral sociology through the welfare state to class analysis, showing
not just that gender relations are present in major institutions but
also that they are systematically important to them.

I will not repeat the details of this research, simply taking the
general conclusion now firmly established. We cannot understand the
place of gender in social process by drawing a line around a set of
‘gender institutions’. Gender relations are present in all types of
institutions. They may not be the most important structure in a
particular case, but they are certainly a major structure of most.

The state of play in gender relations in a given institution is its
‘gender regime’. An example may help to clarify the idea. In the
research project in which Delia Prince was interviewed (chapter 1), we
found an active though not always articulate politics of gender in every
school. Among both students and staff there are practices that construct
various kinds of femininity and masculinity: sport, dancing, choice of
subject, class-room discipline, administration and others. Especially
clearly among the students, some gender patterns are hegemonic – an
aggressively heterosexual masculinity most commonly – and others are
subordinated. There is a distinct, though not absolute, sexual division
of labour among the staff, and sex differences in tastes and leisure
activities among the students. There is an ideology, often more than
one, about sexual behaviour and sexual character. There are sometimes
conflicts going on over sexism in the curriculum or over promotion among
the staff, over prestige and leadership among the kids. The pattern
formed by all this varies from school to school, though within limits
that reflect the balances of sexual politics in Australian society
generally. No school, for instance, permits open homosexual
relationships.

Compact formal organizations like schools perhaps have particularly
clear gender regimes, but others have them too. Diffuse institutions
like markets, large and sprawling ones like the state, and informal
milieux like street-corner peer-group life, also are structured in terms
of gender and can be characterized by their gender regimes. In this
chapter I will take up three cases. The discussions are very condensed,
and represent no more than a start with each case. I hope they will
still be enough to get some bearings on the institutionalization of
gender.

The Family

Conservative ideology speaks of the family as the ‘foundation of
society’ and traditional sociology has often seen it as the simplest of
institutions, the building-block of more elaborate structures. Far from
being the basis of society, the family is one of its most complex
products. There is nothing simple about it. The interior of the family
is a scene of multilayered relationships folded over on each other like
geological strata. In no other institution are relationships so extended
in time, so intensive in contact, so dense in their interweaving of
economics, emotion, power and resistance.

This is often missed in theorizing because of a concentration on the
normative standard case. Enough has been said already about how little
we can rely on that concept; but it is worth noting that even families
which match it to a reasonable degree are internally complex. The
emotional undercurrents in the Prince household have been suggested in
chapter 1. Lillian Rubin’s Worlds of Pain documents the ambivalences and
complexities of conventional working-class families in the United
States. Laing and Esterson’s Sanity, Madness and the Family, dealing
with the more combustible materials of schizophrenia, shows the
extraordinary tangles that can be produced in British families by the
pursuit of respectable normality.

To understand gender and the family, then, it is necessary to unpack the
family. The three structures outlined in chapter 5 provide a framework
for the attempt.

The sexual division of labour within families and households has a
specific literature and is well recognized. Both broad types of work and
very fine details are subject to this division. In the English village
studied by Pauline Hunt, for instance, wives clean the insides of window
panes and husbands clean the outsides. The division of tasks is not
absolute, and does change with time. There are now fewer wives than in
the 1920s of whom it could be said: ‘Her husband was a steady man, but
the same as other men – went out and left her to it [i.e. to bring up
the children and run the home] to do as she liked.’

Yet not all the changes reduce sexual divisions. The autobiography of a
shepherd’s son notes that as the eldest surviving child he had ‘to be
mother’s help, to nurse the baby, clean the house, and do sewing like a
girl’. That was in England in the 1830s. There are few households now
that depend on children’s labour to such an extent and hence give boys
experience in mothering. Studies of the changing sexual division of
labour over more recent periods, like Michael Gilding’s research on the
family in Sydney up to 1940, suggest that the main effects have been
redistribution of housework among women rather than from women to men.

It is equally well recognized that the contemporary urban
family/household is constituted by a division of labour that defines
certain kinds of work as domestic, unpaid and usually women’s, and other
kinds as public, paid and usually men’s. The interplay of the structure
of production inside and outside the family changes character in
different class settings. In Mirra Komarovsky’s American working-class
families this revolves around the husband’s wage. In a study of American
bourgeois ‘lives in progress’ done at much the same time by Robert
White, the connection revolves around the husband’s career. The latter
case is an important qualification to Delphy’s picture of domestic
labour as a form of appropriation by the husband. A professional’s or
businessman’s wife may well maximise her own lifetime income by
integration into a successful husband’s career.

Most households include children for a considerable part of their
history, and this affects the division of labour in two ways.
Childrearing is itself work, and bulks large in the sexual division of
labour as a whole. Since in rich capitalist countries most care of young
children is done unpaid and in the home by their mothers, this has
particular prominence in the domestic division of labour. So it is not
surprising that R. E. Pahl’s recent study in southern England finds the
most clear-cut and conservative sexual division of labour in those
households which currently have children under five to care for. The
second point is made by the shepherd’s son already quoted: children
themselves work, both in the home and at school. This work too is
structured on gender lines. Given the points already made, it is not
surprising that the study of Sydney adolescents by W. F. Connell and
others found housework to be done by girls about twice as often as by
boys.

The sexual division of labour reflects ideas about ‘a woman’s place’;
but who defines that? As Colin Bell and Howard Newby observe, the way
families work is partly a consequence of the husbands’ power to define
their wives’ situation. The underlying interest appears to be consistent
and strong. The patriarchal pattern, with young people subordinated to
old and women subordinated to men, reappears in a long series of
sociological researches on families in different countries, together
with the ideologies of masculine authority that support it.

Research into family power-structure, by and large, has taken a
conventional approach to the definition of ‘power’ as influence in
decision-making. Other kinds of evidence suggest this is not enough. The
work on domestic violence shows that force is important in many
families. On the other hand the research on ‘schizophrenia’ by Gregory
Bateson, R. D. Laing and others indicates the fierce emotional pressures
that can be brought to bear on family members without any open command
or display of power. These cases often concern the power of mothers over
their children; but the prohibition on escape in Bateson’s double-bind
theory of schizophrenia is also reminiscent of the ‘factors preventing
women leaving violent relationships’ in domestic violence research. In
more ways than one the family can be a trap. Finally the marital sexual
relationship can itself embody power. The topic is not very thoroughly
studied but it seems likely, from evidence such as Lillian Rubin’s, that
in most cases it is the husbands who hold the initiative in defining
sexual practice.

Given some awareness of this, it is understandable that critics of
marriage like Emma Goldman should declare the husbands’ ‘protection’ of
their wives a farce. It is also understandable that one way of handling
a strong power imbalance is to build a praxis of compliance. Marabel
Morgan’s stunning The Total Woman, a Florida dream of being totally
subordinate and loving it, is at the same time a shrewd how-to-do-it
manual for this kind of practice. It is notable that her right-wing
religion and social outlook are strongly flavoured with eroticism. In
getting the husband to stay home, it is the wife’s business to
titillate:

  ‘For an experiment I put on pink baby-doll pyjamas and white boots
  after my bubble bath. … When I opened the door that night to greet
  Charlie, I was unprepared for his reaction. My quiet, reserved,
  nonexcitable husband took one look, dropped his briefcase on the
  doorstep, and chased me around the dining-room table.’

The power of husbands shows in the family, but it is certainly not based
in the family alone. Studies of the erosion of patriarchal authority by
migration, such as Gillian Bottomley’s research on Greek families in
Australia, show that domestic patriarchy is dependent on support from
its environment. Even without the drastic upheaval of migration, this
support has not always been consistent or sufficient. The family
sociologies, even in the 1950s, found some power-sharing between
husbands and wives. As noted in chapter 5 some families show a pattern
of eroded patriarchy, where a claim to authority is made by the husband
but is not successful – where wives control the household in reality.
Under the impact of the New Left and feminism in the 1970s, conscious
attempts have been made in some families and households to dismantle
power relations altogether. This has not been easy, but a certain amount
of experience about egalitarian households has now accumulated.

Marabel Morgan’s white boots point daintily towards the connection
between domestic power and the structure of cathexis. Of all aspects of
the family this is perhaps the most researched, since it is the main
subject-matter of psychoanalysis. The theory of the Oedipus complex is a
map of the emotional interior of the family. However the yield for
social theory from some eighty years of psychoanalytic investigation is
much less than the volume of evidence would suggest. This is partly
because what psychoanalysts publish in their journals is so strongly
framed by questions about therapy. But part also is a result of the
influence of the normative standard case as a presupposition in Freud’s
own writings and in most psychoanalytic thinking since.

When a psychoanalyst is led to question this norm the results can be
striking. A notable example is Anne Parsons’s study of a non-Oedipal
‘nuclear complex’ in Naples. Cultural and psychological evidence here
shows a family pattern where the mother is central, the father has
little real domestic authority and the mother-son and father–daughter
relationships are emphasized more than same-sex identifications. This
highlights the importance of cross-sex relationships in the formation of
femininity and masculinity, and suggests a kind of discontinuity in the
history of gender that bears thinking about in other contexts. The
evidence on sexual abuse similarly indicates the charged character of
cross-sex relationships within the family.

The shadow structure of cathexis suggested in chapter 5 is clearer for
the family than for any other case, again because of the concentration
of psychoanalytic research. Phyllis Chesler in About Men suggests its
importance when noting the degree of hostility between fathers and sons
that persists despite identifications. She speculates about a connection
with larger patterns of violence between men. Repressed fear and hatred
is a possible though certainly incomplete way of explaining how large
numbers of men are motivated to staff the institutions of violence. It
is not, of course, any explanation of how those institutions work on the
large scale.

At several points already the interplay between structures within the
family has been evident. Wage and career affect domestic power; domestic
power affects the definition of the division of labour; Marabel Morgan
eroticizes powerlessness. The very ideas of ‘the housewife’ and ‘the
husband’ are fusions of emotional relations, power and the division of
labour. The gender regime of a particular family represents a continuing
synthesis of relations governed by the three structures.

This synthesis is not trouble-free: the components of a family gender
regime may contradict each other. In the traditional patriarchal
household, a marked sexual division of labour actually places some
limits on the patriarch’s ability to exercise power, since women
monopolize certain kinds of skill and knowledge. Vanessa Mahler
describes a considerable degree of psychological independence for women
in Moroccan culture, where patriarchal domination is massive and the
division of labour strong. A very sharp division of labour may produce a
degree of segregation of daily life that makes it difficult to sustain
patriarchal power as a routine. This is suggested, for instance, by
Annette Hamilton about Australian Aboriginal societies.

Such contradictions mean potential for change within the family as an
institution, most likely to be realized when its context changes
markedly. The case of migration has been mentioned. Another powerful
pressure is the arrival of capitalist market relations in a
non-capitalist setting. The pressure is not all in the one direction. A
study of peasant households in Mexico by Kate Young shows a splitting of
family patterns as class stratification develops, with gender regimes
moving in different directions.

The State

Theoretical literature on the state is at the other pole from the
family: almost no one has seen it as an institutionalization of gender.
Even in feminist thought the state is only just coming into focus as a
theoretical question.

Yet reasons to address it are easy to find. The personnel of the state,
as noted in chapter 1, are divided by sex in quite visible, even
spectacular, ways. State elites are the preserve of men, with a very few
exceptions. The state arms men and disarms women. President Carter,
though supporting the Equal Rights Amendment, still announced that he
would not give women a combat role in the military. The diplomatic,
colonial and military policy of major states is formed, as noted in
chapter 5, in the context of ideologies of masculinity that put a
premium on toughness and force. The South Pacific is at present having a
textbook demonstration of this from the French, with atomic testing at
Muroroa Atoll, the bombing of the Rainbow Warrior in New Zealand in
1985, and anti-independence violence by French settlers in Kanaky (New
Caledonia).

The state engages in considerable ideological activity on issues of sex
and gender; this very diverse activity ranges from birth-control in
India and China, through the reimposition of the chador on women in
Iran, to the Soviet efforts to increase the number of women in paid
work. States attempt to control sexuality: criminalizing homosexuality,
legislating on age of consent, venereal disease, AIDS and so on. The
state intervenes in the sexual division of labour in ways ranging from
subsidized immigration to equal opportunity policies. It regulates
workplaces and families, provides schools, builds houses.

Given all this, control of the state is a major stake in sexual
politics. Accordingly the state has been a major object of strategy.
From the Seneca Falls convention of 1848 to the Equal Rights Amendment
(ERA) campaign of the 1970s, American feminism has placed demands on the
state and tried to guarantee women’s access to it. Australian feminism
has put considerable energy into gaining a presence inside the state
bureaucracy, through welfare funding and the ‘femocrats’. The main focus
of groups like the Campaign for Homosexual Equality in Britain has been
legal reform through lobbying of parliamentarians and bureaucrats. The
American New Right in its turn has attempted to roll back feminism
through control of courts and legislatures.

It can hardly be denied that the state is deeply implicated in the
social relations of gender. Alain Touraine remarks that ‘the state is
not the one who represents the metasocial guarantees of social order …
but rather the agent of a concrete historical collectivity, situated in
relation to other communities and to its own transformation.’ Yes; but
that ‘historical collectivity’ has to be defined in gender as well as
class terms. The question is how to understand the connections.

There are four arguments in the theoretical literature on the state that
might do the job. The first is the liberal theory that thinks the state
in principle a neutral arbiter, which in practice can be captured by
interest groups, in this case men. The institutional sexism of the state
is therefore a matter of the imperfect citizenship of the excluded
group, women. This approach can make sense of the main concerns of
liberal feminism, both in terms of legal equality (suffrage, Equal
Rights Amendment, equal employment opportunity) and specific welfare
needs. But it does not give any grip on the sexual division of labour
among state personnel, or on the gender structuring of state violence.
On the face of it, the approach is contradicted by the fact of state
oppression of groups of men, notably homosexual men, and by the heavier
criminalization of men’s sexuality than women’s.

This is consistent with a second approach which sees the state mainly as
an apparatus of regulation and soft domination. Jacques Donzelot’s The
Policing of Families and Michel Foucault’s History of Sexuality are the
classics of an approach now also adopted by some theorists of gay
liberation such as Jeffrey Weeks. They picture the state as part of a
dispersed apparatus of social control working through dominant
discourses as much as through force. This is useful in getting beyond
the state as an organization to its sphere of operation, making the
connection with everyday life. It also allows a recognition of the
multiple and sometimes contradictory apparatuses at work. But it is not
at all clear in this approach why the state regulates to the extent that
it does, unless it is simply prurient. Foucault and Donzelot do not
account for the constitution of interests in sexual politics.

A third approach certainly does. It defines the state as a class state
producing effects on sex and gender in pursuit of class interests. The
‘Freudian Left’ from Wilhelm Reich to Herbert Marcuse conceived of state
action in these terms, with sexuality either repressed or carefully
ventilated according to the needs of capitalism. Marxist feminism has
generally seen the state’s motivation in class terms, though seeing its
effects as maintaining men’s subordination of women. Discussions of
state action on wage levels, welfare provision and welfare ideology by
theorists like Mary Mcintosh have succeeded in getting the dimension of
political economy into the argument. But, as the discussion of extrinsic
theories in chapter 3 noted, it is not clear why gender effects are
essential for the reproduction of capitalism or the maintenance of
profit.

A fourth group of theorists tackle this head-on by arguing that the
state is from the start a patriarchal institution. David Fernbach
proposes that the state was historically created as the
institutionalization of masculine violence. Catherine MacKinnon looks at
the form of state action, in particular legal ‘objectivity’, as the
institutionalization of a male point of view, and shows how it impinges
on sexual politics in the management of cases of rape. Zillah
Eisenstein’s dual systems model sees the central state as an agent in
sexual politics at the same time as class politics, showing for instance
how Carter’s support of the ERA made tactical sense in terms of
factional divisions in the American elite. Carole Pateman proposes that
the development of the liberal state was itself underpinned by a new
form of patriarchy in civil society developing in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries.

These lines of work have the potential to deal with the full range of
issues about gender. But before they can converge there are some
difficulties, or at least complexities, to be dealt with.

When the state is considered as a repressive apparatus, it is clear that
the main objects of physical repression are men. The evidence is clear
enough in statistics like those on arrest and imprisonment in chapter 1.
There are cases where state violence is directed mainly against women,
such as the European witch craze that peaked in the seventeenth century,
and the mass rape by the Pakistani army in Bangladesh in 1971; but the
most persisting and general uses of state force are by men against men.

Yet this does not mean that state repression has nothing to do with
gender. There is a very active gender process here, a politics of
masculinity. The state both institutionalizes hegemonic masculinity and
expends great energy in controlling it. The objects of repression, e.g.
‘criminals’, are generally younger men themselves involved in the
practice of violence, with a social profile quite like that of the
immediate agents of repression, the police or the soldiers. However the
state is not all of a piece. The military and coercive apparatus has to
be understood in terms of relationships between masculinities: the
physical aggression of front-line troops or police, the authoritative
masculinity of commanders, the calculative rationality of technicians,
planners and scientists.

The internal complexity of the state is now well recognized in class
theory and is equally important in relation to gender. Actual states are
by no means consistent in their processing of gender issues. The
political leadership in New South Wales has introduced a broad
equal-opportunity program mainly directed at women; much of the
bureaucracy, which is of course run by men, has quietly resisted it.
Recent policy in a number of Western countries has been to hand more
welfare functions from the state to ‘the community’, i.e. to the unpaid
work of women; but at the same time the training of girls for paid work
has been expanded, with rising retention rates in school and new
occupational preparation programs. Equal employment opportunity programs
have been expanding in Australia at the same time that funds for
childcare, which would make them effective, have been cut. The gradual
extension of the civil rights of homosexual men via decriminalization
and antidiscrimination laws is contradicted by continued exclusion from
state employment and now by official scaremongering over AIDS. The
Canadian state has got itself into serious difficulty with the
contradiction between strong antidiscrimination provisions in the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which came into effect in 1985, and the
formal exclusion of homosexuals from the military and Mounted Police.
The patriarchal state even finds itself furíding feminism, across a
considerable spectrum from rape crisis centres through women’s units in
the bureaucracy to grants for feminist academic research. Some of this
is mere incoherence, to be expected from the sheer complexity of the
state as a set of instrumentalities. But some is real contradiction.

How can these points be built into a gender analysis of the state? They
suggest that the state is not inherently patriarchal, but is
historically constructed as patriarchal in a political process whose
outcome is open. The process of bureaucratization is central here, as
conventional bureaucracy is a tight fusion of the structure of power and
the division of labour. Together with selective recruitment and
promotion, these structures form an integrated mechanism of gender
relations that results in the exclusion of women from positions of
authority and the subordination of the areas of work in which most women
are concentrated. But conventional bureaucracy is itself under pressure,
as the huge contemporary output of management-theory repair manuals
testifies. Demands for more efficiency, for decentralization, even for
more democracy, can unhinge parts of this mechanism. It is largely in
the spaces where gender politics and organizational reform intersect
that feminists in the state have gained ground.

Power in the state is strategic because there is more at issue than a
simple distribution of benefits. The state has a constitutive role in
forming and re-forming social patterns. For instance the state at a
superficial level supports marriage through taxation incentives, housing
and so on. At a more fundamental level marriage is itself a legal action
and a legal relationship, defined, regulated and to some extent enforced
by the state. Another notable state enterprise is in the field of
fertility. Pro-natalist and anti-natalist policies have been debated and
contraceptives accordingly banned or distributed. How far state policy
has actually been successful in controlling this aspect of women’s
bodies is debatable, but there have certainly been vehement attempts,
from antiquity to the present, to do so.

In managing institutions and relations like marriage and motherhood the
state is doing more than regulating them. It is playing a major part in
the constitution of the social categories of the gender order.
Categories like ‘husbands’, ‘wives’, ‘mothers’, ‘homosexuals’, are
created as groups with certain characteristics and relationships.
Through them the state plays a part in the constitution of the interests
at play in sexual politics. They in turn react on the state through
political mobilization. The classic example is the state repression and
regulation of sexuality that played a central part in the creation of
‘the homosexual’ as a social category and personal identity. This in
turn became the basis of a politics of civil rights for homosexuals. The
same kind of cycle is very general.

The patriarchal state can be seen, then, not as the manifestation of a
patriarchal essence, but as the centre of a reverberating set of power
relations and political processes in which patriarchy is both
constructed and contested. If this perspective is sound, it makes the
historical trajectory of the state vital to an understanding of its
place and effects in sexual politics. I will finish this discussion with
a couple of hypotheses about this trajectory.

The growth of the modern state depends, as Pateman proposes, on a change
in patterns of gender relations. A key part of this is a change in
patterns of masculinity. The tradition-centered patriarchal authority
that was criticized at the level of public politics by liberal
rationalists such as Locke represented the hegemony of a particular kind
of masculinity in domestic life too. Over the period in which both the
modern state and the industrial economy were produced, the hegemony of
this form of masculinity was challenged and displaced by masculinities
organized much more around technical rationality and calculation. The
system of industrial capitalism was constructed by this shift as well as
by class dynamics; and so was the characteristic form of state
bureaucracy sketched above.

This did not eliminate other masculinities. What it did was marginalize
them: and this created conditions for new versions of masculinity that
rested on impulses or practices excluded from the increasingly
rationalized and integrated world of business and bureaucracy. Such
‘wild’ masculinities emerged through the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. In one direction, the forbidden sexual affection between men
became the basis of a homosexual masculinity labelled and stigmatized by
the state. In another direction, the forbidden violence between men
became the basis for aggressive masculinities that – given the
conditions that followed World War I – were mobilized in fascism. The
importance of front-line soldiers in the fascist movements is familiar.
Less familiar but equally significant is Hitler’s contempt for the
‘gentlemen with diplomas’ who ran the bourgeois world he despised.

The condition of women was also implicated in the process of
rationalization. There was a deepening contradiction between their
subjection to individual men in domestic patriarchy and the powerful
eighteenth and nineteenth century trend to universalize citizen rights,
closely connected with the rationalization of the state and of markets.
This contradiction was picked up in the feminisms of Mary Wollstonecraft
in England and Susan B. Anthony in the United States and pithily
expressed by John Stuart Mill. The early woman suffrage campaign was not
a diversion from ‘social’ issues (though it later came to be a means of
ignoring them); it seized on the major contradiction that the
development of the state at that point had exposed.

The winning of citizen rights by women did have profound effects on
politics, though not in reshaping party politics. Women’s organizations
have been important in some conservative parties, but women’s parties as
such have had no impact. Much more generally women were constituted as
direct consumers of state services. Through the twentieth century a
complex network of services and benefits has grown around the widows’
pensions and maternity allowances that were first provided: baby health
centres, women’s health centres, supporting mothers’ benefits, taxation
allowances and so on. As is well known, women are now the major
consumers of welfare services in toto, partly because they live longer
but also because of the ways in which state support is designed to
substitute for husbands’ wages, presupposing women’s exclusion from the
labour market. Kerreen Reiger notes how such welfare developments
provided vehicles for intervention by professional experts (doctors,
nurses, psychologists, social workers) in households, reshaping women’s
domestic work. Sheila Shaver notes that when welfare and taxation
policies are taken together as a system of transfers, the state is in
effect taking from women as individuals and redistributing to them as
someone’s mother, wife or widow. Putting these points together we can
see the state as being deeply involved in the growth of much more
mediated and abstract relations between women and men through the
twentieth century. It is tempting to link this with the growth of a mere
mediated and alienated sexuality, with commercial standardization in
advertising, pornography and mass entertainment.

The Street

The street is not often thought of as an institution. It is something we
walk and drive along, or that chickens cross. Yet a famous sociological
text is called, with only mild irony, Street Corner Society, and we
speak of ‘street-wise’ kids. It is at least a definite social milieu,
with particular social relations.

A good deal of work goes on in the street. Jobs that concern children,
like pushing them around in strollers, are almost all done by women. So
is most shopping and most prostitution. Selling of newspapers, food and
other small objects is mixed. Driving cars, trucks and buses, petty
crime and policing, repairing vehicles and the street itself are mainly
done by men. Though women have been working as bus drivers more often,
heavy trucks are still a masculine speciality.

The street is the setting for much intimidation of women, from low-level
harassment like wolf-whistling to physical manhandling and rape. Since
it is not always predictable when the escalation will stop, in many
parts of the city women rarely walk, especially after dark. The street
then is a zone of occupation by men. Concentrations of young adult men
are the most intimidating and dangerous.

Such concentrations are commonest in areas where there is high
unemployment and ethnic exclusion to go with it, like Brixton in London,
Redfern in Sydney, the South Side in Chicago. Contests of daring, talk
about sport and cars, drugs (mainly alcohol) and sexism provide
entertainment in a bleak environment. Women generally avoid this; but
since there are no women’s streets and few welcoming public buildings,
the effective alternative is the home: ‘A woman’s place …’. In outer
suburbs this effect is not as strong, but threat still occurs.

The young men who offer this threat are also subject to it. The street
is a scene of intermittent but routine conflict between different
groups, which the media call ‘gangs’, and between them and the police.
It is in fact young men who are the main victims of street violence, not
elderly people, though the elderly are kept in a chronic state of fear
about it. The police are the Great Power in street life, though in a few
cases like the Watts insurrection of August 1965 in Los Angeles they may
vanish as an authority. The reserve power of the state is still great
enough to ‘restore order’ by military means if the political leadership
is willing to pay the price, as in Belfast.

In some ways the street is a battleground; in others it is a theatre. In
an urban shopping centre the street is full of advertising displays:
shop windows, billboards, posters. Their content is heavily sex-typed
and has become more heavily eroticized over recent decades. Some
particularly crude appeals to masculine violence, like the London poster
in 1984 showing a car fired from a pistol and captioned ‘The trigger is
under your right foot’, have been forced off the street. But the
cigarette and beer ads continue in the same merry way.

The pavement is equally full of displays, though more varied. People
convey messages about themselves by dress, jewellery, posture, movement,
speech. The street is one of the great theatres of sexuality and styles
of masculinity and femininity. A bus queue or shopping crowd will show a
wide range of styles and manners, some extroverted and
attention-seeking, some dowdy or uncaring. During the cycle of a day or
week the dominant styles turn over as the population changes:
shift-workers, commuting business men, shopping mothers, after-school
teenagers, late-night lads hanging out.

The street as a milieu thus shows the same structures of gender
relations as the family and state. It has a division of labour, a
structure of power and a structure of cathexis. Similarly the local
patterning of these relationships is linked to the structure of gender
relations outside. As Emma Goldman observed, women working the street as
prostitutes are not in it for the fun; they are there because women’s
wages are low. ‘Opportunist submission’ (the phrase is Jan Morris’s) to
patriarchy may be obligatory, given the different resources that people
bring to it. Gay relationships are rarely displayed on the street
outside tightly defined areas; it could be very dangerous to do so.

At the same time there is something specific to a loosely structured
milieu like a street that distinguishes it from deeply sedimented
institutions like family and state. It gives room not only to diversity
but also to quick turnover of styles. The theatre of the street may be
experimental theatre. A recent example is young women appropriating and
making-over an aggressive style of sexuality, in punk fashions with a
good deal of black and leather about them. Something of a negotiation
goes on about new forms in gender. There are even attempts to turn this
into a conscious political practice, through feminist street theatre or
events like the gay Mardi Gras in Sydney. I suspect the dominance of the
car now prevents any full-blown new development of the street as
festival. But it is still an extremely interesting register of sexual
politics.

The Gender Order

At several points in this analysis of institutions the importance of
context has become obvious, especially the context provided by other
institutions. To compile a complete structural inventory it is therefore
necessary to go beyond a collation of gender regimes to the
relationships between them.

In some cases this relationship is additive or complementary. The
patterns surrounding women’s part-time employment are a familiar
example. The conventional division of labour in working-class families
in Western cities assigns most childcare and housework to the
wife-and-mother; and femininity is constructed in a way that defines the
work of caring for other family members as womanly. The labour market
constructed by capitalist industry and the state offers some low-paid,
low-status part-time jobs; and curiously enough most of the people
recruited to these part-time jobs are married women. This pattern of
recruitment is justified by employers on the grounds that married women
only want part-time work because of their domestic responsibilities and
only need low pay because theirs is a ‘second wage’. At home the much
heavier domestic work of women is justified by husbands because their
wives can only get part-time jobs.

The dovetailing is neat, and it is anything but accidental. The pattern
has developed particularly in the 1970s and 1980s, and in the context of
the recession represents a practical accommodation between the
institutions involved. The dovetailing of structures is produced by a
meeting of strategies: the profit-maximizing strategies of employers in
a slack labour market and the household work strategies (as Pahl calls
them) of the employees.

If this kind of fit were the normal case, we would indeed have the
tightly integrated system presupposed by categoricalism. But the gender
regimes of interacting institutions are rarely so harmonious. I know of
no starker example than ‘The Blood Vote’, a famous poem and poster used
in the World War I campaign against conscription in Australia. Two
stanzas run:

  Why is your face so white, Mother?

  Why do you choke for breath?

  O I have dreamt in the night, my son,

  That I doomed a man to death.

  I hear his widow cry in the night,

  I hear his children weep;

  And always within my sight, O God!

  The dead man’s blood doth leap.

The conflict dramatized here, between the emotional relationships of the
family and the demands of a state at war, is a common theme in pacifist
campaigns, including the current campaign against nuclear weapons. A
well-known poster reads: ‘What to do in the event of nuclear war: Kiss
your children goodbye.’

A more complicated pattern of institutional abrasion surrounds the
reversals of state policy about welfare. There has long been a conflict
between the goal of redistribution implicit in welfare policy and the
goal of stabilization implicit in the machinery of repression and
ideological control. Once internal to the state, a classic ‘steering
problem’ in the language of Jürgen Habermas, this has been externalized
by the recession as a conflict over the terms of the relationship among
state, family and labour market. The welfare conservatism of the
post-war boom, predicated on full employment, managed class and gender
tensions with a gradual extension of welfare measures. But the state was
never accepted as wholly benign. A constituency developed for the New
Right swing towards welfare cuts, labour market discipline and selective
direct repression.

Given the feminization of poverty the welfare cuts have deepened the
economic disadvantages of women, while, as we have seen, the military
and police are the preserves of men. The changing balance of advantage
in gender relations is perhaps reflected in opinion-poll data showing a
much heavier support for Reagan among men than women in the United
States presidential election of 1980. But there is no simple translation
of sexual politics into votes. One of the first governments to use the
New Right rhetoric, the Fraser government in Australia, was elected in
1975 with heavier support from women than men; and even in the 1983
election that ousted it, women stayed with the conservative parties more
than men did.

A third pattern of connection between institutions sets them in
parallel, so to speak, as the domain of a common strategy or movement.
For instance the Equal Employment Opportunity campaigns have moved from
one organization to another, attempting to bring them into line with the
policy, using experience gained in one to move things along in the next.
At another level, ‘coming out’ as gay has to be done in a whole series
of settings: workplace, family, friendship networks, etc. As Wendy Clark
observes, the emotional patterns to be dealt with vary: coming out to
your parents is different. But the logic of the process still links the
institutions.

What is common to the three patterns is the fact of politics, the social
struggle around the terms of relationship between institutions. The
state/family connection has been particularly inflamed. It has given
rise to political programs that range from Alexandra Kollontai’s desire
to use the revolutionary state in the Soviet Union to dismantle the
patriarchal family, to the Vatican strategy of using the Italian and
Irish states to prop it up. The more generalized programs we see here
are a sign of the formation of more generalized interests than the
analysis of any one institution could account for. Here we come to a
second major step in the constitution of the gender order.

The basic point is that the groupings which are the major actors in
sexual politics on the large scale are constructed historically. It may
still sound strange to say this of categories like ‘women’ and ‘men’.
But it makes sense when the ‘construction’ itself is more closely
defined. It means giving a particular content to a social category,
establishing particular contrasts with and distances from other social
categories, and constituting an interest around which identity and
action can be organized. To recall the argument of chapter 4, the
biological categories of female and male determine only a limited range
of practices (bearing, suckling, etc.) which define the participants as
occupants of a range of parallel situations – in Sartre’s technical
term, ‘a series’. Groups which are actors in sexual politics are
constituted by moves in which seriality is negated and a collective
practice undertaken. Such moves are necessarily social processes, action
in history.

That is very abstract, but cases in point have already been discussed.
The categories ‘male’ and ‘female’ are not categories of social life and
sexual politics; the categories ‘men’ and ‘women’ are. The two pairs
overlap but the second pair is far richer and more complexly determined
than the first. The category ‘men’ for instance has a specific cultural
content in a given time and place. Its meaning in social action is not
the same in Bali in the 1980s, London in the 1980s and London in the
1680s. One of the key differences between these two dates in London was
the expulsion of homosexual practice from the conventional definition of
masculinity. The creation of a social category of ‘homosexuals’ has been
mentioned several times; less noticed is the simultaneous creation of a
category of ‘heterosexuals’. Since heterosexuality only has meaning
through a gender opposition, this actually requires two categories,
heterosexual men and heterosexual women. Their newly purged polarity
became the major axis of gender relations in the twentieth century.

The construction of a social category is not quite the same thing as the
constitution of a social interest. ‘Twins’, for instance, is a
well-recognized category, but it is not easy to define any interest that
all or most twins share. An interest is defined by the possibility of
advantage or disadvantage in some collective practice. The groupings of
sexual politics are constituted as interests by the facts of inequality
and oppression. The interests are articulated by processes of
mobilization that define collective goals and strategies. Interests are
not necessarily articulated. For instance it is clear from David Lane
and Felicity O’Dell’s The Soviet Industrial Worker that it is
politically impossible for women workers in the Soviet Union to mobilize
as a distinct group outside the Party and the unions, both of which are
controlled by men. Yet their unequal social and economic situation
provides a good motive for collective action.

Interests can be constituted on very different bases, which may cut
across each other. Marriage and kinship involve collective practices in
which advantage may be gained for one family over another family, and
people may well see this as the primary definition of their interests.
On the other hand ‘men’ and ‘women’ are collectivities of a more
generalized kind which have conflicting interests defined by the
inequalities of income, power and so on already documented.

Both of these cross-cutting sets of interests are real, and both can
become the basis of a very active politics. Feminism is a mobilization
on the latter basis. Mobilization on the former is illustrated by Pierre
Bourdieu’s account of Kabyle society in Algeria, with lineages
manoeuvering for advantage through marriages as much as through land
deals. The tendency in social theory has been to pick one basis of
interest and regard the rest as secondary. Thus Bourdieu simply subsumes
the interests of Kabyle women in those of their menfolks’ lineages.
Conversely Christine Delphy ignores the material interest ruling-class
wives have in their husband’s careers by assimilating their situation to
that of peasant and working-class women. This is not a point to be
settled by postulation. The way of defining interest that is ascendant
at a given time and place is an empirical question. Indeed a great deal
of sexual politics is precisely about trying to make a latent interest
salient in practice.

Interests are immediately defined by existing inequalities, but they can
also be defined in a longer-term sense. Gender relations are historical,
they can be remade in new patterns, and the new patterns will advantage
and disadvantage particular groups. So there are interests in historical
transformations. Barbara Ehrenreich’s The Hearts of Men is a notable
attempt to define the interest heterosexual men had in the remaking of
sexuality and the family in postwar North American society. It is not
easy to do this, since the public articulation of sexual issues reflects
interests only in oblique and censored ways. But it is clear that a
pattern of interest can be found.

The conflict of interest on this society-wide scale, the formation and
dissolution of general categories and the ordering of relationships
between institutions, together amount to a macro-politics of gender.
This is analytically distinct from, though at all points linked to, the
face-to-face issues that are the usual sense of ‘sexual politics’. The
‘gender order’, defined abstractly at the end of chapter 5, can be
defined dynamically as the current state of play in this macro-politics.

Its processes include the creation and contestation of hegemony in
definitions of sexuality and sexual character (see chapter 8) and the
articulation of interests and organization of political forces around
them (see chapter 12). At stake are the institutional resources that
bear on gender relations, such as the state powers discussed earlier in
this chapter; cultural definitions of gender (see chapter 11); and
through both of them, the definition of historical possibilities in
gender relations. The historical dynamic in this macro-politics is the
crux of the social analysis of gender, and the most difficult of all
issues to grasp. It will be addressed, in a preliminary way, in the
following chapter.

A Note on the Definition and Institutionalization of Gender

In common-sense understanding gender is a property of individual people.
When biological determinism is abandoned, gender is still usually seen
in terms of socially produced individual character. It is a considerable
leap to think of gender as being also a property of collectivities,
institutions and historical processes. This view is nevertheless
required by evidence and experience of the kind just traversed. There
are gender phenomena of major importance which simply cannot be grasped
as properties of individuals, however much properties of individuals are
implicated in them. It may be useful to get clearer the exact sense in
which we can speak of gender as collective, and social practices as
gender-structured.

Chapter 4 argued that the social relations of gender are not determined
by biological difference but deal with it; there is a practical
engagement rather than a reduction. It is this engagement that defines
gender at the social level, demarcating gender-structured practice from
other practice. ‘Gender’ means practice organized in terms of, or in
relation to, the reproductive division of people into male and female.
It should immediately be clear that this does not demand an overriding
social dichotomy. Gender practice might be organized in terms of three,
or twenty, social categories. Indeed our society recognizes a fair
variety – girls, old men, lesbians, husbands and so on. It should also
be clear why a dichotomy of women and men is likely to be an important
part of any gender order.

Gender then, is a linking concept. It is about the linking of other
fields of social practice to the nodal practices of engendering,
childbirth and parenting. The definition just offered leaves wholly open
the question of how extensive and how tight those links are, and what
their social geometry is. There are times and places where the links are
more extensive and compelling, where (to change the metaphor) a greater
percentage of the social landscape is covered by gender relations; and
times and places where they are less. This is a basic reason why Gayle
Rubin’s concept of a ‘sex/gender system’ in all societies cannot be
sustained.

Gender in this conception is a process rather than a thing. Our
language, especially its general categories, invites us to reify. But it
should be clear that the ‘linking concept’ is about the making of the
links, the process of organizing social life in a particular way. If we
could use the word ‘gender’ as a verb (I gender, you gender, she genders
…) it would be better for our understanding. The Marxist-feminist
literature of the late 1970s that talked awkwardly about ‘gendered
subjectivity’ was groping in this direction, and discussions of
‘gendered language’ are already there.

The ‘process’ here is strictly social, and gender a phenomenon within
sociality. It has its own weight and solidity, on a quite different
basis from that of biological process, and it is that weight and
solidity that sociology attempts to capture in the concept of
‘institution’.

The notion of institution classically signifies custom, routine and
repetition. Anthony Giddens in The Constitution of Society follows this
by defining institutions as practices with ‘the greatest space-time
extension’ within societies, or ‘the more enduring features of social
life’. But practice does not have the long duration Giddens attributes
to institutions; practice is of the moment. What persists is the
organization or structure of practice, its effects on subsequent
practice. This can either depart from, or reproduce, the initial
situation; that is to say, practice can be divergent or cyclical. As
argued in chapter 3, it is not a logical requirement that social
reproduction occurs; that is simply a possible empirical outcome. But it
is an important one, and the cyclical practice that produces it is what
is meant by an ‘institution’. The process of ‘institutionalization’ then
is the creation of conditions that make cyclical practice probable.

Speaking of a ‘cycle’ is intended as an alternative to the notion of a
continuum of practice, the idea that structure is a matter of sameness
in practice. This is implicit in Giddens, explicit in Adrienne Rich’s
concept of the ‘lesbian continuum’ as a transhistorical reality.
Structure may involve a cycle of opposites. Anne Parsons’s
psychoanalytic study of the non-Oedipal ‘nuclear complex’ in Naples is a
particularly clear example, where a particular pattern of masculinity is
socially reproduced through the relation with the mother, and femininity
through the relation with the father. The opposites may also be at the
collective level. The discussion of power earlier in this chapter noted
situations where a local power pattern is out of kilter with the more
global one, for instance women having authority within a household. This
does not undermine the conception of a power structure, merely the idea
that a structure must be homogeneous.

Putting these bits together, gender is institutionalized to the extent
that the network of links to the reproduction system is formed by
cyclical practices. It is stabilized to the extent that the groups
constituted in the network have interests in the conditions for cyclical
rather than divergent practice.

NOTES

Institutions

(pp. 119–120). For good critiques of gender-blindness in mainstream
social science see Goot and Reid (1975); Wilson (1977) and West (1978).
The analysis of gender regimes in schools is based on Kessler et al.
(1985).

The Family

(pp. 121–5). Quotations on English families from Davies (1977) p. 62 and
Burnett (1982) p. 72, and on Florida eroticism from Morgan (1975) p. 94.

The State

(pp. 125–32). On feminism and the bureaucracy see Eisenstein (1985) and
Pringle (1979). Quotation from Touraine (1981), p. 108. The argument on
relationships between masculinities in armies is developed in Connell
(1985a). On Hitler’s social consciousness see Bullock (1962).

The Street

(pp. 132–4). This section is mainly based on observation and impressions
in Brixton during 1984.

The Gender Order

(pp. 134–9). Full text of ‘The Blood Vote’ is in Harris (1970), p. 239.
Poll figures from 1980 United States elections in Friedan (1982), p.
210; from 1975 and 1983 Australian federal elections from Morgan Gallup
Polls, 102 and 499A.

7

