Current Frameworks

This chapter tests the major frameworks for the social analysis of
gender that have emerged from the history just discussed. The focus is
on the general logic of different kinds of theories rather than on
particular applications or particular concepts.

I take this rather formal approach as it seems the best way to get a
grip on the possibilities for theoretical growth, to define both the
potentials and the inherent limits of existing frameworks. This leads to
a rather unusual classification of theories. Commonly recognized
‘schools’ of thought turn out to contain logically disparate theories.
Socialist feminism for instance contains several of the types of
theories discussed below. The concept of ‘patriarchy’, approached in
this way, does not stand for a particular school at all. It appears in
several logically different forms of theory and takes on different
meanings according to its context.

Three distinctions are basic to what follows: (a) between extrinsic and
intrinsic accounts of the determinants of sex inequality; (b) within
intrinsic theories, between those that focus on custom and those that
focus on power; (c) within power theories, between those that see
categories as prior to practice and those that see categories as
emerging from practice. I start with extrinsic theories, not because
they are less sophisticated but because they do seem the least promising
for the general project of a theory of gender.

Extrinsic Theories: From ‘Class First’ through ‘Social Reproduction’ to ‘Dual Systems’

Chapter 2 noted the divergence between feminist theories that saw direct
power relations between men and women as the main determinant of women’s
oppression, and those that looked elsewhere. The most influential
extrinsic theories (apart from biological determinism, which will be
discussed in chapter 4 and is not a form of social theory) have been
Marxist analyses that locate the fundamental determinants of women’s
oppression in class relations, the capitalist system, or the ‘relations
of production’ understood in class terms.

The simplest version of this idea is the view that ‘women’s liberation
depends on the class struggle’ because capitalism is the root cause of
all social inequalities and class struggle against capitalists is
therefore primary. In Women’s Liberation, Class Struggle, an American
booklet circulated in the early 1970s, Karen Miles summarized a
widespread view of how women’s oppression serves the ruling class.
Capitalists get higher profits because women workers get lower wages;
sexism divides the working class; women’s oppression maintains the
family, which in turn maintains capitalism. This simple synthesis of
socialist and feminist ideas proved too much for more orthodox Marxists
to digest. Recent evidence is the rousing restatement of the class-first
view by the British Trotskyite Tony Cliff, Class Struggle and Women’s
Liberation. At remarkable length (the book is one of the longest
analyses of modern feminism yet published by a man) Cliff argues that
there can be ‘no compromise’ between Marxism and feminism: the latter is
a bourgeois deception of honest working women. Essentially similar views
are official doctrine in the Soviet Union and China, one of the few
points on which these regimes still agree. In China the regime has tried
to break women free from the extended patriarchal family by substituting
the ideal of a harmonious nuclear family, with the sexual division of
labour remaining unchallenged. The Soviet regime is equally complacent
about women shouldering the social burden of childcare and other work in
the home. Policy on sexual politics has been consistently subordinated
to the twists and turns of the class line.

As theory, these views give little to bite on. The priority of class
struggle is, as Christine Delphy comments on similar arguments in
France, ‘a postulate, a dogma’. There is an obvious objection: the
subordination of women started long before capitalism, occurs in all
classes under capitalism, and has continued in countries that have
ceased to be capitalist. The fact that women of different classes have
different interests is of great importance. But it does not need a dogma
of the theoretical priority of class to recognize this.

Nevertheless, the seeds of a much more powerful analysis were present in
Miles’s remarks about the family. In the middle and later 1970s this was
developed by a number of theorists, particularly in Britain, under the
influence of structuralist Marxism.

The central idea was that the family, sexuality or gender relations at
large were the site of the reproduction of ‘relations of production’. A
particular pattern of relations of production (which mainly means class
relations in industry) is taken in Marxist theory to define a ‘mode of
production’ (capitalist, feudal, etc.). A mode of production provides,
so to speak, the backbone of a whole historical epoch. These relations
of production could not exist without being reproduced, from day to day,
year to year, generation to generation. This need calls into existence
social processes centering on the family, domestic life and the raising
of children. Different theorists gave somewhat different accounts of
these processes. Juliet Mitchell saw patriarchy as the sphere of
ideology, inserting people into their slots in the world of production.
Other English theorists traced a whole new set of social relations here,
the ‘relations of reproduction’. There was agreement, nevertheless, that
these processes or this sphere was the main determinant of the
subordination of women.

Social reproduction theory in this form represented a major advance over
simple class-interest theories of patriarchy and offered a synthesis of
several important lines of thought. ‘Reproduction’ could be understood
as bearing children to fill places in production and servicing the tired
worker at the day’s end. Here theory could connect with the basic facts
of life documented by working-class women themselves, in
autobiographical writings from Margaret Llewelyn Davies’s Life As We
Have Known It to Gwen Wesson’s Brian’s Wife, Jenny’s Mum. Alternatively
‘reproduction’ could be seen as a matter of culture and psychology, of
‘socialization’, making square people to fit square holes in capitalist
industry. This picked up themes that were familiar in socialist
critiques of the ways education and culture were distorted to fit the
needs of capitalism. When Andrew Tolson argued a connection between
competitive masculinity and the functional requirements of capitalism,
the material was new but the form of argument was very familiar to
socialists.

Above all, reproduction theory argued a systemic connection between the
subordination of women and economic exploitation in capitalism. The link
was seen as embedded in a whole integrated structure of social
organization, not in particular interests or groups. The
bourgeoisie-as-devil faded from the picture. This allowed the tremendous
complexity of the issues to be recognized; some subtle and important
researches resulted. But it also made the target of reform seem much
more formidable and less vulnerable than the politics of the early 1970s
had assumed. There was more than a flavour of pessimism about social
reproduction theory.

As this is true of reproduction approaches in other fields of social
analysis, such as Bourdieu’s work on education and Althusserian class
theory, it is likely that it flows from some general feature of the
approach. It is, I think, inherent in the concept of ‘social
reproduction’ itself, which makes sense only if an invariant structure
is postulated at the start. History enters the theory as something added
on to the basic cycle of structural reproduction. For history to become
organic to theory, social structure must be seen as constantly
constituted rather than constantly reproduced. And that makes sense only
if theory acknowledges the constant possibility that structure will be
constituted in a different way. Groups that hold power do try to
reproduce the structure that gives them their privilege. But it is
always an open question whether, and how, they will succeed.

‘Social reproduction,’ therefore, is an object of strategy. When it
occurs, as it often does, it is an achievement by a particular alliance
of social forces over others. It cannot be made a postulate or
presupposition of theory. And the concept cannot take the explanatory
weight that reproduction theories of gender place on it.

The second major difficulty in these approaches is making a convincing
connection between the needs of capitalism and what is specific about
gender. It is clear enough that if capitalism is to continue, its
dominant groups must succeed with some kind of reproduction strategy.
But it is not at all obvious that doing this must produce sexual
hierarchy and oppression. Much the same might be argued (and sometimes
is) about racial and ethnic hierarchies or about hierarchies of age.
There is historical evidence, known to early socialists like Engels and
Bebel, that in some respects capitalism has broken down existing
patriarchal customs and given women greater personal freedoms and more
chances for equality. Recent experience in countries like the United
States and Australia shows that the feminist attack on the restrictions
on women’s lives and careers may unlock their talents for capitalist
purposes. Witness the co-optations not only documented but celebrated in
magazines like Ms and Portfolio. Clearly the relationship between
capitalism and patriarchy is not simply functional. The fit is looser,
the relationship more contradictory, than reproduction theory has
supposed.

In trying to bridge this gap, Marxist-feminist reproduction theory
sought explanatory principles mainly in cultural theory: Lacan’s
reworking of psychoanalysis, Lévi-Strauss’s structural anthropology and
various developments of semiotics. A consequence of this was a strong
tendency to treat gender relations as a truncated structure by
comparison with class relations. In some versions, social reproduction
and patriarchy were regarded as occurring entirely in the realm of
ideology, and not part of the sphere of production at all. In other
versions ‘reproduction’ was connected with a social division of labour,
but only one kind of labour, housework. This sense of gender relations
as being less comprehensive than class relations underpinned a view of
the history of gender which saw its major turning-points in terms of a
class periodization of history. For in Marxist theory it is the history
of class relations in production that defines the ‘modes of production’
and the transitions between them.

In this tendency to truncate the concept of patriarchy the logic of
reproduction theory led steadily away from the developing practical
concerns of socialist feminists. In Australia and Britain at least there
was increasing involvement in the late 1970s and early 1980s with issues
that were very much about the material world and the sphere of
production: women’s employment, wage rates, unionism, health care, state
regulation and like matters. At the same time there was an increasing
flow of research studies, inspired by socialist-feminist concerns but
not by reproduction theory, into women’s experience in factories and
labour markets. Studies like Claire Williams’s work on open-cut mining
towns in Australia and Ruth Cavendish’s work on a motor vehicle
components factory in Britain, rapidly demonstrated that gender
relations and sexual divisions were deeply embedded in the production
system of advanced capitalism – the traditional heartland of class
theory. The clear implication is that gender relations are not a
truncated structure. Gender is part of the ‘relations of production’,
and has been from the start; it is not just mixed up in their
reproduction.

Along this track lay a different answer to the question of how
capitalism and patriarchy were connected. Socialist feminists in several
countries in the 1970s pointed in this direction. Mariarosa Dalla Costa
and Selma James wrote that ‘class exploitation has been built upon the
specific mediation of women’s exploitation’. Barbara Ehrenreich argued
that socialists must see women at the heart of the working class. Anja
Meulenbelt contested the idea that the class struggle was the ‘general’
struggle and feminist organizing was a diversion. Nancy Hartsock argued
for a fundamental rethinking of the category of class in the light of
gender issues.

To start with, these arguments were unrelated; but they had in common
the implication that gender relations are parallel to, interacting with,
and in some sense constitutive of, class relations. Heidi Hartmann’s
paper ‘The Unhappy Marriage of Marxism and Feminism’ and Zillah
Eisenstein’s collection Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist
Feminism, both published in 1979, crystallized an approach that came to
be called ‘dual systems theory’. The basic idea is that capitalism and
patriarchy are distinct and equally comprehensive systems of social
relations which meet and interact. The present form of their interaction
is the social order which Eisenstein calls ‘capitalist patriarchy’.
Understanding the contemporary world requires the simultaneous analysis
of its class and gender structures. The analysis of gender requires in
principle an intrinsic theory logically independent of the theory of
class.

In terms of our present knowledge of gender, this is better founded than
social reproduction theories. It is consistent with the fact that gender
relations appear in all domains of social practice and pre-date
capitalism and possibly class societies of all kinds. The approach meets
Meulenbelt’s practical criterion of giving full weight to women’s
experience of sexual politics, without abandoning the politics of class.
Yet it has two considerable difficulties. One is the idea of a ‘system’.
It is not immediately clear what makes the patriarchal ‘system’
systematic, and in what sense capitalism and patriarchy are the same
kind of thing. The other difficulty is how to understand the
‘interaction’ between capitalism and patriarchy. The link may be seen as
a boundary exchange (in the sense of Parsons’ systems theory), or as a
more-or-less chance intersection of structures. Neither idea gives much
grip on the task that socialist-feminist theory is presumably for, that
is, explaining oppression and developing a strategy of liberation.

These difficulties are substantial. It is unlikely that formulations of
the class and gender problem like Hartmann’s and Eisenstein’s can stand
in their present terms. Yet the overall direction they are taking does
seem right. If we regard them as first approximations within a general
type of theory their potential can be developed in new ways. The first
thing required is an adequate intrinsic theory of gender. Accordingly
the rest of the chapter considers the main versions of intrinsic theory.

Sex Role Theory

The literature on ‘sex roles’ is very large. It is also more than a
little confused, especially over the differences between ‘sex roles’,
‘sex differences’ and ‘sexual character’. An example is the well-known
research on androgyny by Sandra Bern, which attempts to measure
psychological traits of masculinity and femininity. Her questionnaire is
entitled the ‘Bern Sex Role Inventory’ though it does not include
questions about roles in any strict sense of the term. In literally
hundreds of other studies, information on sex differences is presented
with a loose assumption that role phenomena explain the differences
observed. So it is often quite difficult to specify exactly what theory
is contained in ‘sex role’ literature.

There is, nevertheless, a definite body of social theory organized
around the concept of ‘role’. While formulations of the concept (which
go back to the 1930s) differ in detail, most have five points in common
which form the logical core of role theory. The first two state the
essential metaphor, an actor and a script:

1 an analytic distinction between the person and the social position she
occupies;

2 a set of actions or role behaviours which are assigned to the
position.

The other three state the means by which the social drama is set in
motion and held to its script:

3 Role expectations or norms define which actions are appropriate to a
given position;

4 they are held by people occupying counter-positions (role senders,
reference groups),

5 who enforce them by means of sanctions – rewards, punishments,
positive and negative reinforcements.

These concepts are the tools by which role theory attempts a general
analysis of social interaction. Broadly, role theory is the approach to
social structure which locates its basic constraints in stereotyped
interpersonal expectations.

This paradigm can be applied to almost any type of human behaviour, and
in either very general or very narrow terms. Textbooks make a point of
this range, listing examples of roles ranging from the breadth of
‘speaker of a language’ to the narrowness of ‘astronaut’ (cases given in
Bruce Biddle’s Role Theory). Accordingly the role paradigm can be
applied to gender relations in various ways. In one direction the
‘roles’ can be very specific. Mirra Komarovsky’s work on the family for
instance attempts detailed descriptions of role behaviour in courtship
or marriage. In a more recent text called Role Structure and the
Analysis of the Family a group of American sociologists list a
remarkable number of roles they have discovered inside the American
family, including the ‘childcare role’, the ‘kinship role’, the ‘sexual
role’, the ‘recreational role’, not to mention the ‘provider and
housekeeper roles’ (which are, happily, complementary). What such lists
mainly demonstrate is the vagueness of the role paradigm.

Most applications of role concepts to gender are of a different kind.
Their basic idea is that being a man or a woman means enacting a general
role definitive of one’s sex – the ‘sex role’. There are, accordingly,
always two sex roles in a given context, the ‘male role’ and the ‘female
role’; less commonly but equivalently called ‘man’s role’ or ‘woman’s
role’, the ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine role’, etc.

This way of talking about gender is attractive in several ways. First,
it allows a shift away from biological assumptions about sex
differences, emphasizing that women’s and men’s behaviours are different
because they respond to different social expectations. Some of the most
fruitful research stimulated by role ideas has looked at the way these
expectations are defined in the mass media. The constricted character of
media images of women is striking, a point noted in the 1960s by Betty
Friedan as part of ‘the feminine mystique’ and repeatedly confirmed in
media studies since.

Second, sex role theory connects social structure to the formation of
personality, an important and difficult theoretical task. Proponents of
general role theory such as Ralf Dahrendorf claim that the concept
‘falls on the borderline of sociology and psychology’. More exactly it
offers a simple framework for describing the insertion of individuals
into social relations. The basic idea is that this occurs by ‘role
learning’, ‘socialization’ or ‘internalization’. Thus feminine character
is produced by socialization into the female role, masculine character
by socialization into the male role – and deviants by some kind of
failure in socialization.

This argument leads to an interest in the people and institutions
responsible for the learning, the so-called ‘agencies of socialization’:
mother, family, teachers, peers, media. Another large body of research
inspired by sex role ideas has explored the different treatment of girls
and boys by these ‘agencies’, the ways models of femininity and
masculinity are conveyed to children, and (in a few cases) what happens
when the messages are mixed. In the most sophisticated versions of sex
role theory, such as Talcott Parsons’s, the concept of socialization is
linked to psychoanalytic ideas about the structuring of the unconscious.
Usually, however, sex role theory is seen as an alternative to
psychodynamic explanations such as Freud’s, and the focus is firmly on
overt influences and overt behaviour.

Third, sex role theory offers principles for a politics of reform. If
the subordination of women is largely a result of role expectations that
define them as helpmates or subordinates, their characters as passive or
expressive (rather than instrumental), then the obvious path forward is
to change the expectations. A great deal of energy in contemporary
feminism has gone into just this kind of enterprise. It is formalized in
counter-sexist curricula in schools, antidiscrimination laws, equal
opportunity policies in the labour market and ‘affirmative action’
campaigns. Though broadly the territory of liberal feminism, this goes
beyond the classical liberal focus on the individual, as the sex role
concept points to the collective dimension of social stereotyping. As
Alison Ziller, the Director of Equal Employment Opportunity for the NSW
government, observed: ‘an affirmative action plan … means that remedy
for discrimination does not rely on grievance procedures initiated by
individuals’.

These virtues are substantial. Accordingly, sex role theory must be
taken seriously as an intrinsic theory of gender for reasons beyond the
sheer volume of its literature. Yet these virtues are bought at the
price of very serious conceptual difficulties.

The problems begin with what many role theorists see as their greatest
strength, the emphasis on the social via the concept of ‘expectations’.
Role theory is often seen by psychologists as a form of social
determinism, stressing the way individuals are trapped in stereotypes.
Stereotyped interpersonal expectations are indeed social facts. They are
made effective, in role theory, by the idea that other people reward
conformity to them and punish departures from them. In role jargon, the
occupants of counter-positions sanction role performance. Little boys
are praised for being assertive, ridiculed for being girlish, and so on.
But why do the second parties apply the sanctions? This cannot be
explained by their role expectations; if so, role theory reduces to an
infinite regress. It quickly comes down to a question of individual will
and agency, revolving around choices to apply sanctions. The social
dimension of role theory thus ironically dissolves into voluntarism,
into a general assumption that people choose to maintain existing
customs.

Ultimately, then, role theory is not a social theory at all. It comes
right up to the problem where social theory logically begins, the
relationship between personal agency and social structure; but evades it
by dissolving structure into agency.

What happens in sex role theory is that the missing element of structure
is covertly supplied by the biological category of sex. The very terms
‘female role’ and ‘male role’, hitching a biological term to a
dramaturgical one, suggest what is going on. The underlying image is an
invariant biological base and a malleable social superstructure. This is
why discussion of sex roles constantly slides into discussion of sex
differences. The implicit question in sex role analysis is what
particular superstructure has been created in such-and-such
circumstances, and how far the biological dichotomy still shows through.

The result of using the role framework, then, is an abstract view of the
differences between the sexes, and between their situations, not a
concrete account of the relations between them. As Suzanne Franzway and
Jan Lowe observe in their critique of sex role theory in feminism, the
role literature focuses on attitudes and misses the realities that the
attitudes are about. The political effect is to highlight the pressures
that create an artificially rigid distinction between women and men, and
to play down the economic, domestic and political power that men
exercise over women.

As some critics have observed, we do not speak of ‘race roles’ or ‘class
roles’ because the exercise of power in these areas of social life is
more obvious to sociologists. With ‘sex roles’, the underlying
biological dichotomy seems to have persuaded many theorists that there
is no power relationship here at all. The ‘female role’ and the ‘male
role’ are tacitly treated as equal. They are of course different in
content, but reciprocally dependent on each other (‘complementary’),
made of the same ingredients, and (in the eyes of the mid-1970s liberals
who created a critical literature on the ‘male role’) equally oppressive
of the human being within.

For an account of power, role analysis substitutes a theory of norms.
Anne Edwards has observed how drastically sex role theory simplifies the
complexities of gender: reducing all masculinities and femininities to
one dualism; sweeping all women into one feminine role, which in turn is
equated to being a housewife and located in the family. Most sex role
theory is not constructed around problems raised by field observation,
but as analysis of a normative standard case.

This standard case is, typically, an abstract model of a nuclear family
with a conventional sexual division of labour. It is ‘standard’ in the
sense that most people’s lives are presumed to be like it, with a
minority being deviant. It is ‘normative’ in two senses. First, it is
presumed that people in general regard it as the proper way to live – so
it defines actual role expectations. Second, theorists regard it as the
proper (or socially functional or biologically appropriate) way to live.
Much of the intuitive, common-sense appeal of sex role literature arises
from the blurring of these ideas. Thus when the sexologist John Money
writes of the ‘proper’ path of psychosexual development, the effect is
to stigmatize any departure from it (including homosexual choice) as
pathological, and to reinforce the idea that conventional
heterosexuality is a good thing both for the person and the society.

A crucial difficulty is that what is normative, i.e., expected or
approved, is not necessarily standard, i.e., actually the way things
usually happen. Perhaps especially not in the case of sexuality.
Research has produced a series of upsets. The Kinsey studies are the
most celebrated, finding frequencies of homosexual behaviour in the
American population that normative sex role theory has never come to
terms with. Data on premarital and extramarital heterosexuality make
further trouble. Data on intra-family violence are also difficult to
absorb: sober estimates by Straus and others that more than 50 per cent
of American families have experienced domestic violence suggest a very
large gap between what is morally approved and what actually happens.
Statistics on household composition show that the
mother-father-two-kids-cat-and-dog nuclear family routinely invoked by
priests, presidents and advertising copy-writers, is not the majority
form of household now and perhaps never was. The normative pattern of
husband-as-breadwinner and wife-as-home-maker, still powerful in
ideology, has been undermined in fact by economics: as shown in chapter
1, around a third of the world’s paid workers are women, while a good
many men are not in the labour force. Role theorists who do close-up
field research, like Komarovsky, have to push the data very hard to get
anything like the theoretical model of ‘roles’ out of it.

If we distinguish what is normative from what is common, instead of
blending them together, new and important questions emerge. It becomes
possible to see what is ‘normative’ not as a definition of normality but
as a definition of what the holders of social power wish to have
accepted. This raises questions about whose interests are embodied in
the ‘norms’; how far the daily life of other people represents
resistance to those interests; and what potentially normative principles
might emerge from currently non-normative but widespread practices.

Sex role theory has a way of accommodating departures from the normative
standard case, through the concept of deviance. This term is out of
favour as a result of sharp criticisms of ‘labelling’ in welfare
practice, but it persists in role theory because it is logically
required by the normative concept of ‘role’. Euphemisms are available –
inadequate self-concept, nonconformity – but it is no surprise when a
role theorist like Biddle roundly talks of ‘deviant behaviour’, ‘deviant
identities’, ‘causes of maladjustment’, and contrasts them with
‘successful role learning’.

The dominance of the normative standard case in sex-role literature,
plus the concept of deviance, have a distinct effect. They create the
impression that the conventional sex role is the majority case, and that
departures from it are socially marginal and likely to be the result of
some personal eccentricity, produced by imperfect or inappropriate
socialization. Lesbianism, men’s homosexuality, chastity, prostitution,
marital violence and transvestism are all liable to this treatment.
Again the role framework eliminates the element of power from gender
relations. It also eliminates the element of resistance to power and
social pressure, the fact of social struggles – open or covert – going
on around definitions of sexuality and gender.

Here, in thinking about the conflict of interests, the use of sex-role
theory in feminism is most limiting. The conceptualization of sexual
politics as role reform – as updating, liberalizing, or expanding the
‘female role’ (and in the men’s movement version the ‘male role’ also) –
means that there is no social theory of the reforming movement as such,
no conception of the constitution of collective interests within gender
relations. The motive of role reform is individual discomfort in the
existing version of the sex role. When comfort is achieved, there is
nothing to carry either the politics or the analysis forward.

The lack of a theory of movement and social struggle reflects, at a
deeper level, the lack of a way of grasping social contradiction and
formulating a social dynamic. The sex role framework is fundamentally
static as social theory. This is not to say that role analysts ignore
change. Far from it. Modernization of the female role was a leading
theme in one of the first important statements of sex role theory, by
Talcott Parsons in 1942. Shifting expectations have been a leading issue
in North American discussions of the male sex role in recent decades.
Changing definitions of the female role are the central theme in
academic social science’s response to feminism.

The point is that sex role theory cannot grasp change as history, as
transformation generated in the interplay of social practice and social
structure. Structure is given to sex role theory in the form of
biological dichotomy. And the ultimate voluntarism of the practical side
of role concepts prevents the formulation of a concept of social
determination. As a result, change is always something that happens to
sex roles, that impinges on them. It comes from outside, from society at
large, as in discussions of how technological and economic changes
demand a shift to a ‘modern’ male role. Or it comes from inside the
person, from the ‘real self demanding a relaxation of the constricting
sex role. The role itself is always being pushed. Sex role theory has no
way of grasping change as a dialectic arising within gender relations
themselves. As an intrinsic theory of gender it is therefore limited in
a fundamental way.

To sum up, four basic considerations oblige us to abandon sex role
theory as a framework for the social analysis of gender: its voluntarism
and inability to theorize power and social interest; its dependence on
biological dichotomy and its consequently non-social conception of
structure; its dependence on a normative standard case and systematic
misrepresentation of resistance; and the absence of a way of theorizing
the historicity of gender.

To recognize these weaknesses, as Edwards notes, does not prevent
fruitful research on stereotypes of femininity and masculinity, that is,
on sex roles as social constructs, cultural ideals, media contents and
so forth. (I will take up these questions in chapter 11.) But as Edwards
also argues, it is necessary to look for ways of theorizing the domain
of sex and gender that give more attention to social institutions and
social structures.

The critique of sex roles has nevertheless given some useful pointers
towards what such a theory should be. Plainly one of the issues it must
be able to grasp is the formation and conflict of social interests that
occur in gender relations. I will now turn to approaches that make this
their central concern.

Categorical Theory

Accounts of gender that do give a major place to power and conflicts of
interest have generally expressed this awareness through a particular
form of theory. It has no familiar name, partly because its logic cuts
across such familiar divides as the conflict between cultural feminism
and socialist feminism. I will call the approach ‘categorical’.

Its major features are, first, a close identification of opposed
interests in sexual politics with specific categories of people. Jill
Johnston’s definition of men as ‘the natural enemy of women’ is a
pungent example. Second, the focus of argument is on the category as a
unit, rather than on the processes by which the category is constituted,
or on its elements or constituents. Third, the social order as a whole
is pictured in terms of a few major categories – usually two – related
to each other by power and conflict of interest. If sex role theory
tends to dissolve into individualism, categoricalism resolutely stays
with the big picture and paints it with a broad brush.

In sex-role theory a common terminology blurs logically distinct
concepts; here the same basic idea is expressed in many different terms.
Early women’s liberation theorists borrowed from political economy and
anthropology. Roxanne Dunbar argued that women were a lower ‘caste’,
while Shulamith Firestone wrote of ‘sex class’, modelling her argument
self-consciously on Marx. Academic feminists borrowed terminology from
academic social science. Alice Schlegel and Janet Chafetz wrote of
‘sexual stratification’, while Myra Strober registered ‘the birth of a
new science, dimorphics’. The term seems to have been coined as a joke;
the fact that it was taken seriously shows how desperate was the need
for a theoretical framework. Similarly the discussion of ‘patriarchy’ in
radical feminism from the mid-1970s was commonly based on a categorical
theory of gender, as in Susan Brownmiller’s well-known argument that
rape is ‘a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all
women in a state of fear’.

Chafetz, who has gone furthest in formalizing this approach as social
theory, is particularly clear about its major presupposition. Women and
men can be treated as ‘internally undifferentiated general categories’.
Analysis takes the categories for granted while it explores the
relationship between them. Categorical theories of gender differ from
each other mainly in the accounts they give of this relationship.

In one line of thought it is essentially a relation of direct
domination. Dunbar and Firestone were among the pioneers of this
approach. Newer versions such as Mary Daly’s picture of global
patriarchy have focused on men’s violence towards women as its essence.
The treatment of pornography and rape in cultural-feminist analyses by
authors like Susan Griffin and Andrea Dworkin is closely connected.
Pornography is regarded as an expression of the violence in male
sexuality and a means of domination over women; rape as an act of
patriarchal violence rather than sexual desire.

The academic literature on ‘sexual stratification’ generally takes a
more abstract and open-ended approach, assuming no more than that the
relationship between the categories is unequal. This has been the
framework of a great deal of empirical research (some cited in
chapter 1) mapping the unequal material resources of women and men and
their unequal life-chances. As theory this is slender. But it has raised
questions about the correlates or conditions of different levels of
inequality between the sexes. Chafetz for instance conducted a
cross-cultural survey to see what general conditions (economic
development, environment, religion, etc.) were linked to high or low
levels of inequality in ‘the overall status of women and men’.

Here Chafetz verges on an extrinsic approach to gender. Categoricalism
in fact provides the model of gender for most of the extrinsic theories
discussed above. Analyses of the sexual division of labour, for
instance, have usually set up the gender categories as a simple line of
demarcation in economic life, adding complexity by mapping the twists
and turns of this line in different societies. Only a minority have
concerned themselves with what Margaret Power called ‘the making of a
woman’s occupation’ (my italics), a question which, by making the
process of constructing categories a central issue, leads away from the
abstract logic of categoricalism.

Similarly, much of the discussion of ‘relations of production’ has
little to say about practice at the point of production. Notionally
about social relations, actually it uses such concepts mainly to
demarcate categories. Ultimately the person and personal practice can be
eliminated from the equation altogether, as happened in French
structuralism. Theoretical attention is focused on the social place or
category into which the individual is inserted. Along these lines one
can arrive at a strongly categorical theory of gender which is not
biological-determinist. The ‘places’ in Juliet Mitchell’s and Gayle
Rubin’s structuralist models are socially defined and the male-female
opposition they stress is socially constructed. Much the same is true of
the semiotic analyses of gender that appeared from the late 1970s on.

In other cases the social basis of categoricalism is a simplified
normative model of the family. This is true of most of the
Marxist-feminist literature on ‘domestic labour’. It is also true of
Christine Delphy’s more original analysis of patriarchy as an economic
system. Here the categories are constructed by the social institution of
marriage, and the core of the relation between them is the husbands’
appropriation of a surplus from the wives’ unpaid labour. Yet another
example is Chodorow’s psychology of femininity, consciously based on an
attempt to find a social rather than a biological underpinning for the
psychoanalytic account of children’s emotional development. Here the
sexual division of labour in childcare is the core of the relationship
between the categories.

For all the sophistication these authors show in developing social
frameworks, the overall map of gender they produce is not too different
from one based on a simple biological dichotomy. Categorical thinking
about gender is most obvious when the categories can be presumed to be
biological and the relationship between them a collective or
standardized one. Thus Brownmiller’s ‘rape … all men … all women’, or
Dworkin’s ‘pornography: men possessing women’. It is worth noting that
biological reductionism does not necessarily produce categoricalism. In
some of the literature on transsexualism, for instance, researchers are
interested in biological bases for deviance from conventional
categories. But theories of biological bases or ‘biogrammars’ usually
lead to categoricalism in one of its strongest forms. For most authors
assume (wrongly) that reproductive biology divides humans neatly into
two distinct categories.

Categoricalism came from a number of sources: structuralism, biologism
and the sheer rhetorical appeal of large plain categories for mobilizing
political action. It has remained important because it met the need for
a clear-cut alternative to liberal feminism and role theory. For some
problems, treating gender in terms of ‘internally undifferentiated
general categories’ is perfectly adequate as a first approximation. The
descriptive literature on sex inequalities in income, education,
occupation and health is certainly successful in these terms.

The trouble starts when the first approximation becomes the end of the
analysis; when the categories ‘women’ and ‘men’ are taken as absolutes,
in no need of further examination or finer differentiation. For there
are problem areas where this will not work at all, and others where the
approach rapidly becomes misleading. Analysis couched in terms of a
normative standard family is perhaps the commonest example. A good deal
of feminist research on welfare has gone towards exploding the
assumptions that underpin so much official welfare and economic policy:
that everyone (or nearly everyone) lives in a nuclear family, that all
women have (or should have) a man supporting them, that having children
presupposes having a husband.

Another form of categoricalism focuses on a representative individual.
The treatment of ‘male sexuality’ in much of the literature on violence
against women is a case in point. So is the argument that explains
pollution, indiscriminate exploitation of resources and the threat of
nuclear war, by the personal aggressiveness and ruthlessness of the
typical man.

The insight underlying this argument is certainly correct. A
power-hungry and emotionally blunted masculinity is part of the social
machine that is wrecking the environment, that has for instance
devastated half of the beautiful island of Tasmania by wood-chipping and
hydroelectric development. Historical research like that of Brian Easlea
has traced the themes of masculinity, control and power in the growth of
the sciences and technologies that culminated in the nuclear bomb. But
to theorize this as the direct outcome of masculinity is to miss the
point of the social machinery that makes a given form of masculinity
environmentally destructive. (In other periods of history aggressive
masculinity did not result in a radically degraded environment.) It
misses the social arrangements that give a particular kind of
masculinity a hegemonic position in sexual politics and that marginalize
others. And in many arguments it misses the social processes that
construct this kind of masculinity in the first place.

The analysis of gender through a representative individual is one case
of what Hester Eisenstein calls ‘false universalism’. She poses the
issue in these terms:

  To some extent, this habit of thought grew inevitably from the need to
  establish gender as a legitimate intellectual category. But too often
  it gave rise to analysis that, in spite of its narrow base of white,
  middle-class experience, purported to speak about and on behalf of all
  women, black or white, poor or rich.

Theory framed in this way has a strong tendency to lump together
different periods of history and different parts of the world. Texts
like Mary Daly’s Gyn/Ecology and Kathleen Barry’s Female Sexual Slavery
recite patriarchal atrocities from wife-burning in India, genital
mutilation in Africa, foot-binding in China, to pornography in the
United States. These are offered on the assumption that each is an
example of the same underlying structure. In such theories the
world-wide dimension of gender becomes a universal common structure of
patriarchy.

The conviction that every country and every period shows the same
structure has led Western feminists arguing on these lines into
classically ethnocentric positions. As critics like Kalpana Ram have
pointed out, an account of suttee based on racist Western sources that
present Indian women as passively suffering atrocity, and which takes no
account of their resistances, mobilization, or purposes, does justice
neither to the issue nor to Indian women. It is possible to combine a
clear recognition of the exploitation and subordination of women, and
the fundamental character of the social changes needed to correct it,
with an equally strong recognition of the specific ways in which
subordination is embedded in different cultures, the different forms it
takes and the different strategies therefore required. Such a case is
argued for instance by the Draft Report of the 1979 workshop on feminist
ideology and structures held in Bangkok by the United Nations Asian and
Pacific Centre for Women and Development. But this leads away from
categorical theory.

It is possible to incorporate class, race or nationality into a
categorical theory of gender, if these structures are treated in a
categorical way too. It involves cross-classification on several
variables at once – a very familiar move in quantitative social science.
The basic operation is logical multiplication, and the result is a grid
on which people can be located. A simple two dimensional
cross-classification is central to Tolson’s work on masculinity, for
instance:

[Image]

A three dimensional cross-classification underlies recent discussions of
the triple oppression of non-Anglo working women:

[Image]

Any number of dimensions can be added. They become harder to picture on
paper, but can easily be handled by computers.

Yet the more sophisticated the cross-classification becomes, the more
firmly is the analysis embedded in a static logic of categories. And
this intensifies the difficulty categorical theory has in dealing with
divisions that arise within the field of gender itself; that is,
divisions that have to do with the constitution of the gender
categories.

The most notable problem is the politics of sexual object-choice.
Heterosexism and homophobia must be regarded as one of the key patterns
in gender relations. It is very difficult to come to grips with
heterosexual dominance while using a categorical model of gender. One
might set up a new cross-classification, with ‘homo/hetero’ crossing
‘female/male’. But there is no obvious reason in categorical analysis
why this division should matter in the first place. Cross-classification
confuses the issue, since that operation logically equates women’s
homosexuality with men’s homosexuality. There is every reason to think
there are important differences between them, not only in the forms of
their expression but in the ways they are initially constituted. As the
chequered experience of lesbians in the gay liberation movement shows,
the solidarity of women and men against oppression from straight society
cannot be taken for granted. That is to say, the logical
cross-classification does not correspond in any simple way to the
constitution of a social interest.

Categorical theory often stresses conflict of interest, but has
difficulty with the way interests are constituted and the ways people
contest the structures that define interests. Its recognition of social
conflict is highly schematized. Over a range of issues, categoricalism
underplays the turbulence and contradictoriness within the social
process of gender.

The political consequences are important. Of the two main varieties of
categorical theory, the academic or stratificationist leads to a
politics of access, for instance trying to raise the number of women in
political leadership positions, in the law or in business management. It
does not generate any particular reasons to question the social
arrangements that create those positions. To this extent its practical
consequences are little different from the strategy of role reform in
liberal feminism.

The women’s liberation movement certainly has called conventional power
arrangements into question, and so do the more radical categorical
theories of gender. Their tendency, however, is to pose this as an
all-or-nothing issue. Rather like the ‘big bang’ theory of revolution
implicit in Marxist structuralism, categoricalism projects a distant
future and a distant past where there is no oppression, but tends to
assimilate everything in the grim present to manifestations of male
power and female subordination. The effect is to offer women a
metaphysical solidarity (‘all women …’), an omnipresent enemy (‘all men
…’), and a strong implication that struggle in existing relationships is
pointless, since the structure and the categories are universal. Since
most women do not have the conditions in their own lives for substantial
withdrawal from relationships with men, the practical result is an
unresolvable dilemma within feminism. Tension around themes of purity
and guilt has been tangible in the movement for a number of years.

Towards a Practice-based Theory

In the final analysis, categoricalism can recognize power but deletes
from its analysis the element of practical politics: choice, doubt,
strategy, planning, error and transformation. The ‘battle of the sexes’
comedy in traditional popular culture is a vision of sexual politics
with just this kind of deletion. From one year to the next husbands err,
wives nag, mothers-in-law carp, girls flirt, boys will be boys and so on
for ever amen. Whatever people attempt, nothing ever changes. In more
sophisticated categoricalism practical politics is marginalized by logic
rather than by humour. In texts like Gyn/Ecology a particular line in
sexual politics is seen as a logical necessity springing from the inner
nature of patriarchy, rather than as a choice of strategy.

Choice always implies doubt, and the possibility of going wrong. To give
full weight to the practical character of politics, while holding to the
recognition of power that is categoricalism’s advance over role theory,
is the most general requirement of the next steps in the theory of
gender.

This requires a form of social theory that gives some grip on the
interweaving of personal life and social structure without collapsing
towards voluntarism and pluralism on one side, or categoricalism and
biological determinism on the other. In modern writing about gender this
has been done best in fiction and autobiography. In books like Doris
Lessing’s The Golden Notebook, Anja Meulenbelt’s The Shame is Over,
Patrick White’s The Twyborn Affair, Nadine Gordimer’s Burger’s Daughter,
there is a strong sense of the constraining power of gender relations
(and other structures like class and race), a sense of something that
people fetch up against. Yet this ‘something’ is neither abstract nor
simple, being real in other people and their actions, with all their
complexities, ambiguities and contradictions. And this reality is
constantly being worked on and – in ways pleasant and unpleasant –
transformed.

In very general terms, we know how to build this kind of understanding
into social theory, since parallel problems have arisen in other fields.
In class analysis they arose in a debate between ‘structure’ à la
Althusser and ‘history’ à la Thompson. In theoretical sociology they
arose in the polemic of symbolic interactionism and ethnomethodology
against systems theory and functionalism à la Parsons; and more recently
in the debates about Lévi-Strauss and structuralism. The outlines of a
solution can be found in the work of Sartre, Kosík, Bourdieu, Giddens
and other theorists who have focused on the interconnections of
structure and practice. In principle, categoricalism can be resolved by
a theory of practice, focusing on what people do by way of constituting
the social relations they live in. In principle, voluntarism can be
overcome by an attention to the structure of social relations as a
condition of all practices.

Though no theory of gender has been formally couched in these terms,
some feminist and gay liberation theorists, and a larger number of field
researchers, have made a beginning with this kind of analysis. Their
work is not recognized as a ‘school’, and their politics are very
diverse. So it is worth reciting some examples to indicate the kinds of
bases that already exist for a development of theory in this direction.

One of the first was Juliet Mitchell. The second section of her now
somewhat neglected book Woman’s Estate described the social position of
women in terms of four ‘structures’, in each of which a particular form
of oppression is generated. This idea has important implications for the
concept of structure that will be discussed in chapter 5. Partly
influenced by Mitchell’s work, the American anthropologist Gayle Rubin
developed a formal comparative analysis of the ‘system of relationships’
by which women are subordinated to men. Though her discussion of the
‘sex-gender system’ leans toward an abstract structuralism, her 1975
paper ‘The Traffic in Women’ shows more clearly than any other study
what a systematic social theory of gender might be like.

In another famous essay, ‘Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian
Existence’, Adrienne Rich points to the importance of the social
relationships constructed by women among themselves in contradistinction
to their connections with men. Her concept of a ‘lesbian continuum’
drifts towards categorical theory but can be approached historically.
This is one of the issues taken up by Jill Matthews in her study of ‘the
historical construction of femininity’ in twentieth-century Australia.
Good and Mad Women uses the records of psychiatric incarceration to
study the impact of changing ideals of femininity in the lives of
particular women. She stresses the historicity of femininity (and by
implication of masculinity) as lived experience, not just imposed
regulation; and links face-to-face household relationships to the
large-scale patterns of demographic, economic and cultural change. On a
larger scale again, David Fernbach in The Spiral Path offers a social
and relational analysis of what is commonly seen as pre-social desire
(or antisocial behaviour). Focusing on homosexual relationships among
men, he sets the modern emergence of homosexual identity in the context
of the history of gender relations stretching back to the neolithic age.
This is speculative in many ways, but certainly a good deal more like a
real history than the myth-making about ultimate ‘origins’.

Instead of unanswerable questions about ultimate origins, root causes or
final analyses, these studies pose the question of how gender relations
are organized as a going concern. They imply that structure is not
pre-given but historically composed. That implies the possibility of
different ways of structuring gender, reflecting the dominance of
different social interests. It also implies different degrees to which
the structuring is coherent or consistent, reflecting changing levels of
contestation and resistance. Sexual politics is embedded in the
structure of gender relations at the most basic level. Structures
develop crisis tendencies which materialize in radical sexual politics.
These questions are the point of departure for the chapters of Part II,
which attempts to develop a practice-based approach to the structure of
gender relations.

But this is not the whole scope of the theory of practice, which also
points to the historicity of gender at the level of personal life. The
idea that forms of sexuality are socially constructed has emerged in the
work of radical historians and in discourse analysis and interactionist
sociology, not to mention the work of Marcuse. Femininity and
masculinity as character structures have to be seen as historically
mutable. There is nothing to prevent several forms of sexual character
emerging in the same society at the same time. Multiple femininities and
masculinities are, I would suggest, a central fact about gender and the
way its structures are lived. These questions are taken up in Part III,
which develops from several starting-points a practice-based approach to
personality.

Before launching out, however, there is one more issue to address. The
main reason why it has been difficult to grasp the historicity of gender
relations is the persistent assumption that a transhistorical structure
is built into gender by the sexual dichotomy of bodies. This is the
assumption that sex role theory finally falls back on, and most kinds of
categoricalism too. A social theory is pointless, or at best peripheral,
if it is true that the basic determinants are biological. The
relationship between the body and social practice is thus a crucial
issue for the theory of gender, which needs to be clarified before the
structure of social relations can be addressed.

NOTES

Extrinsic Theories

(pp. 41–7). Delphy (1977) p. 25 issued an unanswerable challenge to
‘class-first’ dogmatism; which rolls on regardless. On Chinese family
policy see Stacey (1979) and Croll (1983). The major statements of
social reproduction theories of gender are Mitchell (1975); Kuhn and
Wolpe (1978); Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Women’s Studies
Group (1978) and Burton (1985). My criticisms here are partly based on a
general critique of reproduction theory, reprinted in Connell (1983),
chapter 8. The difficulties in British Marxist-feminist theory are
carefully set out by Barrett (1980). For the practical campaigns of
socialist feminists in that country see Coote and Campbell (1982), and
in Australia Court (1986) and Stevens (forthcoming). The most thoughtful
criticism of ‘dual systems’ concepts I have seen is by I. Young (1981).
I have written in more detail on the link between patriarchy and
capitalism in Connell (1983), chapters 3, 4 and 5.

Sex Role Theory

(pp. 47–54). Bern (1974) and Steinmann and Fox (1974) illustrate the
blurring of sex role and sexual character; Wesley and Wesley (1977) the
blurring with sex differences. Carrigan, Connell and Lee (1985) sketch
the history of sex role ideas. My argument in this section is based on a
general critique of role theory in Connell (1983) chapter 10, and its
application to sex roles in Carrigan, Connell and Lee; and the analyses
of sex role concepts by Franzway and Lowe (1978) and Edwards (1983). Nye
et al. (1976) is the source of the list of family roles quoted. The
‘agencies of socialization’ argument is discussed in more detail in
chapter 9 below. Pleck (1981) sees role theory as alternative to
psychodynamics. David and Brannon (1976) illustrate the tacit equation
of male and female roles. Edwards (1983) provides a comprehensive
criticism of ‘deviance’ notions in sex role theory. For the theme of
change in sex roles see Lipman-Blumen and Tickamyer (1975) and Pleck
(1976). One outgrowth was a curious literature purporting to be a
history of sex roles, e.g. Branca (1978). My argument on role theory’s
failure to meet real criteria of historicity was formulated in
discussions with Tim Carrigan and John Lee.

Categorical Theory

(pp. 54–61). Johnston’s (1973) witty argument for separatism helped
establish lesbianism as a political question; the quote is on p. 276.
Willis (1984) gives an excellent history of the emergence of categorical
views of gender in the women’s liberation movement. The categorical
treatment of ‘relations of production’ reaches a peak in Bland et al.
(1978). Money (1970) is an example of biological-determinist
investigation of deviance. Raymond (1979) is a notable example of theory
being pushed towards biological essentialism by a categorical political
logic. Categoricalism as rhetoric is well illustrated in the work of
Spender (1982). Baldock and Cass (1983) and Campbell (1984) are among
many feminist studies undermining the normative model of the family. On
masculinity and aggression see Farrell (1974); Dinnerstein (1976) and
Kelly (1984); Connell (1985a) expands the argument here. Quotation on
false universalism from Eisenstein (1984) p. 132. On the complexity of
interests in gay liberation see Gay Left Collective (1980) and Thompson
(1985), chapter 3.

Practice-based Theory

(p. 61–4). On images of the ‘battle of the sexes’ see Orwell’s famous
1941 essay on the picture postcards of Donald McGill. The connection
between strategy and doubt is clearer in grass-roots radical politics
than in radical theory: compare Alinsky (1972). Thompson’s history
(1968) is more valuable as a model than his polemic against
structuralism (1978), though that has some fine moments. I have
attempted a critical evaluation of Sartre’s and Bourdieu’s theories of
practice in Connell (1983), chapters 5 and 8. Lefebvre’s (1976) pp.
73–91 criticism of the search for a ‘generative nucleus’ is important in
opening up a fully historical perspective on structures of power.

4

The Body and Social Practice

The Knot of Natural Difference

‘Female’ and ‘male’ are biological categories arising in a specific
system of reproduction. Humans share this division with a vast array of
animal and plant species. Non-sexual reproduction is characteristic of
simpler life forms, and some relatively complex ones up to the fungi,
algae and sponges. Some more complex species, like strawberries and
orchids, alternate between sexual and non-sexual reproduction. On the
whole, however, the more advanced species reproduce sexually. It seems
that the sexual division of function in reproduction has been a major
feature in the evolution of life.

In our culture the reproductive dichotomy is assumed to be the absolute
basis of gender and sexuality in everyday life. This is not true of all
cultures. But it is so strongly marked in ours that biological or
pseudo-biological accounts of gender relations have wide popular
credibility. Books like The Naked Ape, The Imperial Animal and The
Selfish Gene carry rival versions of this message to a very large
public. For many people the notion of natural sex difference forms a
limit beyond which thought cannot go. Debates about sexual politics
often end with the assertion that men and women are ultimately
different, as a self-evident proposition that closes off further
discussion. It is seen as a knock-out argument by many opponents of
feminism.

So powerful is this assumption that it has been able to co-opt
intellectual currents initially unsympathetic to biologism, such as role
theory, psychoanalysis and feminism itself. For instance, in Maccoby and
Jacklin’s The Psychology of Sex Differences it is striking how different
are the authors’ attitudes to biological and social explanations of
observed differences in traits like aggressiveness. Biological
explanations clearly have priority, when they are available, and social
explanations are residual. Freud’s method pointed the way to one of the
most radically social analyses of sex and gender yet proposed. Yet Freud
believed in ultimate biological determinism and his followers have
repeatedly drifted towards that view. Theodore Reik, for instance, rests
a very long essay on ‘the emotional differences of the sexes’ on a
simple biological determination; while Robert May in Sex and Fantasy can
think of no other organizing principle for his studies of schizophrenia,
imagination and myth than the natural difference between women and men.

Early second-wave feminism often implied that all sex differences are
socially produced. During the 1970s, as shown in Hester Eisenstein and
Alice Jardine’s The Future of Difference, a good many Western feminists
again began emphasizing difference and celebrating what was specifically
feminine. And a significant number abandoned the idea that what was
‘specifically feminine’ was socially produced. Notions of ineradicable
difference have proliferated: the idea that men are mutants from the
true (female) stock; the idea that men are ‘biological aggressors’ or
‘natural rapists’; the idea of ‘metaphysical difference’; the idea that
women as nurturers must save the world from male wars and technology.

In this chapter I will argue that doctrines of natural difference,
whatever their political complexion, are fundamentally mistaken. This is
not to contest the facts of reproductive biology, nor to deny their
interest and importance for understanding human life. What I will
challenge is the assumption that the biological makeup of our bodies is
the ‘basis’, ‘foundation’, ‘framework’, ‘essence’, or ‘mould’ of the
social relations of gender. The argument accepts that there is a strong
relation between social practice and biology; indeed ‘gender’ would be
inconceivable without it. I will propose that this relation has a very
different character from that assumed by theorists of natural
difference.

There are two main versions of the doctrine of natural difference. The
first takes society to be epiphenomenal to nature, the second sees the
two as additive.

In the first type of theory, biology (or ontology as its surrogate)
determines gender. Society registers what nature decrees – or becomes
sick if it doesn’t. The best-known examples are the pseudo-evolutionary
accounts of masculinity and femininity in texts like Desmond Morris’s
The Naked Ape, Lionel Tiger’s Men in Groups and The Imperial Animal,
George Gilder’s Sexual Suicide – the literature dubbed by Marshall
Sahlins ‘vulgar sociobiology’. The basic point of view is neatly
summarized by Morris:

  Behind the facade of modern city life there is the same old naked ape.
  Only the names have been changed: for ‘hunting’ read ‘working’, for
  ‘hunting grounds’ read ‘place of business’, for ‘home base’ read
  ‘house’, for ‘pair-bond’ read ‘marriage’, for ‘mate’ read ‘wife’, and
  so on. … It is the biological nature of the beast that has moulded the
  social structure of civilisation, rather than the other way around.

Tiger and Fox’s imagery is different but the idea is the same:

  Natural selection has produced an animal that has to behave
  culturally, that has to invent roles, make myths, speak languages and
  form men’s clubs. … Agricultural and industrial civilizations have put
  nothing into the basic wiring of the human animal. We are wired for
  hunting. … And we are wired basically on a primate model.

I have called this literature ‘pseudo-biological’ because it does not in
fact rest on serious biological investigation of human social life, as
for instance ecological studies of industry do. Rather it rests on a
series of loose analogies, which, as Marie de Lepervanche notes, are
changed by logical slides into taken-for-granted facts. The basic logic
is exactly the reverse of what it is claimed to be. The argument starts
with an interpretation of current social life (in Morris’s case an
interpretation that is sexist, ethnocentric and often factually wrong)
and reads this back into a speculative prehistory. ‘Evolution’ is called
in to justify the social patterns these authors advocate, under the
guise of explanation. Tiger, for instance, ends up talking about which
social arrangements are and are not ‘biologically healthy’ – by which he
means that they conform to his view of human evolution as a hunting
species.

It is difficult to take this literature seriously as science. The social
analysis is crude in the extreme. The understanding of ‘evolution’
itself is obsolete. The fundamental problem of understanding the shift
from organic evolution to history is obliterated by the biological
reduction. Yet these arguments are extremely popular. This is partly to
do with a touch of salacious humour (breasts as buttocks, the corporate
executive as anthropoid ape). More fundamentally it comes from their
mirror construction. They reflect what is familiar back as ‘science’,
and justify what many readers wish to believe.

A serious attempt to repair these deficiencies has been made by the
‘scientific sociobiologists’ led by E. O. Wilson. In a chapter of On
Human Nature Wilson applies the calculus of genetic advantage to show
how ‘human sexuality can be much more precisely defined with the aid of
the new advances in evolutionary theory’. It is curious how traditional
the ‘new advances’ turn out to be. Wilson’s argument recites differences
in athletic performance, studies of twins and the like to reject a
‘totally environmental explanation’ of sex differences, proffers the
universality of the family, and tries to show that homosexuality has a
genetic explanation – thus assuming that homosexuality is a unitary
trait and reverting to concepts that became obsolete in sexology seventy
years ago.

The conceptual confusions underlying ‘sociobiology’ as a school of
thought are now reasonably well understood. An impoverished
understanding of biology, and of the process of evolution itself,
underlies the slides between social institutions and biological
advantage. As Sahlins shows for Wilson’s general argument, and Janet
Sayers shows in Biological Politics for gender specifically, the
sociobiologists’ arguments ignore the fact that human action is highly
structured in a collective sense; it is constituted interactively, not
by context-free individual predispositions. A war, for instance, is a
social and institutional process within history, not the sum total of
several hundred thousand genetic predispositions towards aggressiveness.
Most strikingly, sociobiology for all its claims to scientific
explanation cannot produce for inspection the mechanisms of biological
causation. Wilson, for instance, in his essay on sex, is reduced to
speculations like this: ‘Sexual love and the emotional satisfaction of
family life can be reasonably postulated to be based on enabling
mechanisms in the physiology of the brain that have been programmed to
some extent through the genetic hardening of this compromise.’ The
triple caution (‘reasonably postulated’ – ‘enabling’ – ‘to some extent’)
shows, as clearly as language can, that Wilson here is simply guessing.
And guesswork is what this literature mostly offers on the actual
determination of social life.

This gives a particular interest to Steven Goldberg’s version of
biological determination in The Inevitability of Patriarchy. Though
somewhat dated, it is a serious attempt to do what Wilson and others
avoid, providing a detailed account of the mechanisms linking biological
difference and social inequality. It is worth examining as a type of
argument.

From physiological research Goldberg takes the finding of differences in
average blood concentrations of particular hormones, especially
testosterone, between men and women. From psychopharmacological research
he takes the findings of some differences in average performance, on
certain tests, of animals and people with differing levels of these (or
other) hormones in their bloodstream. He deduces that these hormones
cause differences in social behaviour which give an ‘aggression
advantage’ to men over women. This explains both the sexual division of
labour and patriarchal power structure. In competition for jobs of any
importance, men have the edge in assertiveness. It is rational for women
to accept a subordinated position rather than exhaust themselves in a
competition for power where they are constantly dragged down by their
hormones. Therefore we have social arrangements that allocate
home-making to women, competitive striving in the world of business to
men.

The logical error in the later stage of this argument is easy to see.
Goldberg postulates a situation of open competition in order to explain
institutional arrangements that prevent open competition. In fact, as
far as real historical evidence goes, a situation of free competition
between women and men – or among men – has never existed; it is a
rhetorical device constructed by social-contract theorists in the
seventeenth century. A more complex slide occurs earlier in the
argument. Goldberg’s argument moves from average differences in hormone
concentrations to categorical differences in social behaviour.

A difference between two groups on average is compatible with a great
overlap in distributions. So far as mainstream psychologists have
succeeded in measuring traits like aggressiveness, a great deal of
overlap between women and men is exactly what they do find (see chapter
8). It is not credible to start from
a-small-average-difference-within-a-large-overlap and deduce the
institutional exclusion of women as a group from major political
authority or economic power that is evident in the data on state and
business elites in chapter 1. This problem is sufficiently serious to
lead sociobiologists sometimes to speak of society ‘amplifying’ natural
sex differences, and thus to move towards the additive framework to be
discussed shortly.

The biological-reductionist argument, then, is too weak for at least
some of the social phenomena it tries to explain. In other respects it
is too strong. The idea that differences in hormone levels reach out
through the complex situational, personal and collective determinants of
individual behaviour to remain the ultimate determinants of its social
consequences, supposes a mechanism of hormonal control far more powerful
than physiological research has actually found. A typical conclusion by
the physiologists is stated by Anke Erhardt and Heino Meyer-Bahlburg in
a recent review of research on the ‘effects of prenatal sex hormones on
gender-related behaviour’ – an area where hormonal effects might
reasonably be expected. Some hormonal influence is probable, they
conclude, but the effects are subtle. The social events of a child’s
upbringing are plainly the major influence: ‘the development of gender
identity seems to depend largely on the sex of rearing’, not on hormonal
determination.

This might lead to a doctrine of weak biological determination of social
patterns; but even that would be speculative. It is worth noting that
over the last century a whole series of attempts has been mounted to
prove the biological determination of various forms of social
inequality. Arguments for racial differences in courage and
intelligence, the heritability of IQ, the heritability of mental
disorder, parallel the arguments for innate sex differences in
temperament and ability. In none of these cases has a mechanism been
discovered that would translate the proposed biological cause into
complex patterns of individual behaviour, let alone social institutions.
In all of them, serious questions have been raised about the validity of
the data used to establish a significant biological effect at all.

It is possible that there are some innate differences in temperament or
ability between women and men. The hypothesis cannot be ruled out
entirely. But if they exist, we can say quite confidently that they are
not the basis of major social institutions. We can also say that in
terms of human evolution they pale into insignificance beside the common
capacities of women and men. These are the human ‘species
characteristics’ of capacity for language, intellect and imagination,
upright stance, thumb opposition and manipulation, tool-making and
tool-using and extended childhood and parenting, that mark us off from
other species and are constituents of the evolutionary jump to human
society. These characteristics are shared between the sexes, and there
is no good reason to doubt that the shift from biological evolution to
history was also a shared accomplishment.

Once this shift was accomplished – and it would seem we are talking
about a process taking two or three million years – the basis existed
for a relationship between the body and behaviour that was radically
different from relationships governed by organic evolution. Biological
reductionism, in essence, is two or three million years out of date.

A variant of reductionism sees biology not as fixing individual
characteristics, but as setting limits within which social arrangements
may vary. All societies, a familiar argument runs, must reproduce
themselves and their members, and therefore must accommodate and sustain
the sexual and social relationships that produce new people. All
societies, therefore, must accommodate themselves to the biological
facts of sex. It is usually inferred that all societies must be based on
the nuclear family or some variant of it. The functionalist tone of this
argument is not hard to detect, and its classics are found in American
social science in the heyday of functionalism, such as the work of
Talcott Parsons and Margaret Mead. It is textbook orthodoxy (a) that the
nuclear family is universal, (b) because it is the social form that
responds to universal biological demands for sex and reproduction. A
society that wanders beyond these limits will collapse, or come under
terrible strain. Therefore – according to Parsons – every society has
sanctions against homosexuality, so as to reinforce the differentiation
of sex roles and protect the family.

This version of reductionism may sound more plausible than sociobiology;
at least it sounds more social. Its difficulty is that the biological
constraints proposed are so feeble that they explain almost nothing. An
enormous range of social arrangements are consistent with the occurrence
of enough heterosexual intercourse to reproduce the species. An enormous
range of economic arrangements are consistent with giving children
enough care for them to survive and grow. On the issue of sexual
object-choice it is simply not true that all societies prohibit
homosexuality. In quite a number of societies homosexuality is
institutionalized as part of the social and religious order, for example
in the New Guinea culture studied by Gilbert Herdt. The real force of
the limits-to-variation version of biological reductionism is that, like
sociobiology, it is a mirror structure, reflecting familiar social
arrangements back to the reader as what is required by nature.

The second major type of natural-difference theory drops the notion of
constraint in favour of an additive conception of society and nature.
Biology, in this line of thought, establishes a certain difference
between human females and males, but this is insufficient for the
complexity of social life. It must be added to, built upon. Society
therefore culturally elaborates the distinction between the sexes.
Clothing is a familiar example. There are modest differences in average
physique between men and women. Society exaggerates them, for instance
with garments that emphasize women’s breasts or men’s penises and makes
them categorical, for instance by putting women in skirts and men in
trousers. Different societies elaborate the distinction of sex in
different ways. Research into the variations produces the ethnography of
exotic clothing, kinship and sexual customs that has titillated Western
readers since anthropology began.

Sociobiology sometimes tilts towards an additive conception, as in
Wilson’s remark that ‘the physical and temperamental differences between
men and women have been amplified by culture into universal male
dominance’. Most commonly, however, additive conceptions of gender are
found in sex-role theory and liberal feminism. The now very large
literature on sex-role socialization proceeds with impressive unanimity
along additive lines, tracing out the ways society improves on nature’s
handiwork in shaping little girls and little boys. The very term
‘sex/role’ sums up the additive approach.

This may be turned in a critical direction, because some room for social
choice is implied. Liberal-feminist sex-role theory condemns the way the
addition is currently done, especially the imposition of derogatory
stereotypes and submissive behaviour on women. Maccoby and Jacklin put
this critical view with particular clarity:

  We suggest that societies have the option of minimizing, rather than
  maximizing, sex differences through their socialization practices. A
  society could for example, devote its energies more toward moderating
  male aggression than toward preparing women to submit to male
  aggression, or toward encouraging rather than discouraging male
  nurturance activities. In our view, social institutions and social
  practices are not merely reflections of the biologically inevitable. A
  variety of social institutions are viable within the framework set by
  biology. It is up to human beings to select those that foster the life
  styles they most value.

The most striking thing about this passage is the contradiction between
the notion of ‘a society’ as a freely choosing agent and the underlying
sense of biological constraint. If social arrangements are ‘not merely
reflections’ of biological inevitability it is still clear that Maccoby
and Jacklin think they are substantially so. This passage comes from an
argument against Goldberg’s hormonal version of biological reductionism.
But the difference at this point is slight: it is mainly that Goldberg
thinks social training should reinforce natural difference while Maccoby
and Jacklin think it should not. The framework is not greatly different.
Indeed Wilson, the high priest of sociobiology, reproduces almost
exactly Maccoby and Jacklin’s argument about societal choice on a basis
of natural difference; he professes neutrality.

The critical content of liberal feminism, then, is consistent with the
concept of natural difference. It presumes that a kind of base-level
gender distinction is left when we strip away the pancake make-up or the
Playboy philosophy. This basal difference is taken to be unoppressive
because it is natural. So, for instance, Betty Friedan in The Second
Stage can look to a post-feminist future which takes the comforting
shape of the family. For her and many others the underlying reality
includes an unchallenged heterosexuality as the taken-for-granted shape
of sexual attraction. It begins to look as if we are in the land of
mirrors again.

Objections to the idea of natural difference usually take the form of
extra emphasis on the social end of an additive conception of gender.
This is what happens when sex-role theory is used to combat crude
nativism. A notable example is the 1970s literature on masculinity,
where ape-man reductionism was challenged by role theorists.

This line of argument runs into two main difficulties. Because the
underlying conception of gender is additive, the effect of this extra
emphasis on the social is to minimize the importance of the body.
Therefore the argument loses its grip on what people do find central in
their experience of sex and gender: pleasure, pain, body-image, arousal,
youth and ageing, bodily contact, childbirth and suckling. Second, the
correct relative weighting of social versus biological determinations is
never accurately established in practice. The ‘addition’ remains an
aspiration. And the weighting cannot be assumed equal in all departments
of life. So this objection always remains a statement of opinion with no
logical force.

There are, nevertheless, two arguments against the doctrine of natural
difference that cut deeper and apply to all its forms. The first is
developed in a brilliant though little-recognized book by the American
sociologists Suzanne Kessler and Wendy McKenna. In Gender: An
Ethnomethodological Approach they demonstrate that the scientific as
well as the popular literature on sexuality and gender works within a
cultural framework in which the ‘natural attitude’ (in the technical
sense of ethnomethodology – i.e. the everyday stance) is to take gender
as strictly dichotomous and unchanging. What they call ‘gender
attribution’, the social process ‘by which we construct our world of two
genders’, is sustained despite the failure of human reality on almost
any count to be strictly dimorphic. Perhaps the most striking part of
their argument is where they examine the biological literature on
gender, which so much social analysis takes to be holy writ, and show
that this research too is founded on the social process of gender
attribution. And following this social logic, biological research
continues to create new dichotomies as old ones become untenable. A
striking example is the effort to reconstitute athletics as a strict
dichotomy. Chromosome testing was introduced to international athletics
in 1967 and used on a large scale at the 1968 Mexico Olympics. The
International Olympic Committee defines people with intermediate
chromosomal patterns as men, disqualifying them from women’s events.

So far the argument is negative, simply pointing out that our
taken-for-granted assumptions about gender dichotomy are not forced upon
us by nature. The positive side of the argument is about the social
process itself. Kessler and McKenna re-examine the anthropological
literature on berdache, institutionalized transvestism among American
Indian societies particularly. They show that when the anthropologists’
perceptions based on dichotomous gender attribution are allowed for, the
research reveals cultural worlds where gender is not dichotomous and is
not necessarily assigned on biological criteria. It can, for instance,
be chosen. Michel Foucault makes the same point in his essay on the case
of Herculine Barbin. At an earlier period in the history of Western
European culture, a strict dichotomy of sex and a lifelong commitment to
membership of one, was not presupposed in the way it is now.

Studies of transvestism and transsexualism in contemporary Western
societies provide an exceptional insight into the social construction of
gender in everyday life. Harold Garfinkel, one of the first to explore
this issue, in his case study of ‘Agnes’ stressed the amount of work
that had to be done to sustain an identity as a woman by someone
starting out as a boy. Much of this is also done by people who start out
as girls, but in that case it is hardly noticed as work – it is taken
for granted, or as being natural.

Kessler and McKenna argue that transsexualism is itself based on the
natural attitude that assumes dichotomy; what transsexuals claim is that
they are ‘really’ members of the other sex, and seek ways of correcting
the anomaly. The studies of Sydney transsexuals by Roberta Perkins show
that the situation is more complex than this. For some that is true; but
others are much more uncertain about where they belong and why. Further,
the growth of a commercial subculture of transsexual prostitution and
show business has created a new option. ‘Drag queens’ can make a living
as transsexuals. In effect a new gender category is being constructed.
Its history, some case studies indicate, has roots in the ambiguous
situation of homosexual men in the 1950s and 1960s. This in turn points
back to a tradition of thinking about homosexuality as an intersex
status – the ‘third sex’ in one version. Even in modern Western culture,
it seems, the cultural construction of gender has repeatedly failed to
produce consistent dichotomies.

To sum up, our conception of what is natural and what natural
differences consist of, is itself a cultural construct, part of our
specific way of thinking about gender. Gender is, in Kessler and
McKenna’s term, a practical accomplishment – something accomplished by
social practice. (We might add, not a completely consistent one.) This
is not a matter of some bias or error in our ideas that might in
principle be corrected by future biological research. It is a
fundamental feature of the way we have knowledge of human beings.

The second basic criticism of the concept of natural difference can be
stated more briefly, as it is a general point about the character of
human life. The idea of natural difference is that of a passively
suffered condition, like being subject to gravity. If human life were in
its major internal structures – gender being one – so conditioned, human
history would be inconceivable. For history depends on the transcendence
of the natural through social practice.

This point holds good without the bland optimism about progress that has
usually accompanied it. In a period of rising awareness of environmental
disaster and nuclear threat, it is easier to see the negative side of
the human rupture from the non-human. It is also possible to see an
expanded meaning in the idea central to the work of Gordon Childe, the
pioneer of global history as a science, that the relation between nature
and history is one of practical transformation. This means both the
transformations of the natural world by human practice (domestication of
plants and animals, smelting of metal ores, invention of steam engines,
etc.) that have sustained each stage of historical development; and the
changes of practice itself that have made great shifts of social
structure possible. Practical transformations open up new possibilities,
which are the tissue of human life. But they do this by creating new
social pressures and risks.

As shown by the title of one of his books, Man Makes Himself, Childe was
not exactly sensitive to issues of gender. Nor is gender much registered
in the recent reworking of these themes by Jürgen Habermas. But this is,
I would argue, more a consequence of the influence of sexual ideology on
social theorists, than any logical sense in which the social processes
of gender are exceptions to the principles that apply to other social
processes. There is no reason to make this exception. The body is
implicated in the processes of gender, certainly; but then the body is
involved in every kind of social practice. The natural world is
implicated in class relations, for instance through the labour process
and the function of the body as tool. This does not prevent class
relations from being historical. No more should the implication of the
body in gender relations through sexuality prevent us from seeing the
historicity of gender.

To make these points is already to imply a relation between the social
and the natural that is different from biological determination in any
form. I will now try to spell out how this relation might be understood.

Transcendence and Negation

To speak of ‘transcendence’ is to imply the production of something
qualitatively different. The social is radically unnatural.
(‘Non-natural’ might be a more neutral term but I think the stronger
overtones are correct.) Its structure can never be deduced from natural
structures. What undergoes transformation is genuinely trans-formed.

But this unnaturalness does not mean disconnection, a radical separation
from nature. On the contrary, the unnaturalness of society is sustained
by a particular kind of connection with nature – a connection through
practice. In the practice of labour, the natural world is appropriated
by human beings and transformed, both physically and in terms of
meaning. In the practices of sexuality and power, as well as certain
kinds of labour (for example nursing), the human body itself is an
object of practice.

The natural or pre-social qualities of objects are of course important
to the practices that deal with them. We do not offer coffee to a tree,
nor try to paint with sawdust. Nor should we expect someone who is
chromosomally male to give birth to a child. Where reductionism goes
wrong is in taking these qualities as determinants of the practice. This
gets things precisely the wrong way round. Practice issues from the
human and social side of the transaction; it deals with the natural
qualities of its objects, including the biological characteristics of
bodies. It gives them a social determination. The connection between
social and natural structures is one of practical relevance, not of
causation.

Thus a person with a chromosomally male body can be treated as a woman
in social practice, and sometimes is. The person concerned will still
not give birth to a child. Kessler and McKenna’s demonstration of the
primacy of ‘gender attribution’ can be seen as a particular case of the
concept of practical relevance. It describes specifically the
incorporation and transformation of certain aspects of bodies by
cognitive and interpretive practices.

‘Dealing with’ is not a neutral term. What practice produces is not what
it began with. The qualities of objects are changed, whether they are
bits of wood or human beings. The bits of wood become a chair; the human
being becomes a lover, or angry, or better educated. A transforming
practice in a basic sense negates what it starts with in order to
produce something new. This negation and supersession is the basis of
historicity. For the outcomes of practice do not sit around outside
time, but themselves become the grounds of new practice. As the Czech
philosopher Karel Kosík puts it, practice has durability through its
products and effects.

We are now in a position to formulate the non-reductionist strong
connection between biology and the social. The social practices that
construct gender relations do not express natural patterns, nor do they
ignore natural patterns; rather, they negate them in a practical
transformation. This practical transformation is a continuing historical
process. Its materials are the social as well as the biological products
of previous practice – new situations and new people.

We might say that reproductive biology is historicized in gender. This
is true so far as it goes, but is a weak formulation suggesting an
additive conception. More precisely, reproductive biology is socially
dealt with in the historical process we call gender; a history that
negates its biological materials as well as its social ones.

This is not an exotic or original idea. Gayle Rubin, for instance,
observes of the kinship structures which are taken by reductionists to
express biological imperatives: ‘A kinship system is not a list of
biological relatives. It is a system of categories and statuses which
often contradict actual genetic relationships.’ She observes of the
cultural emphasis on difference between the sexes:

  Men and women are, of course, different. But they are not as different
  as day and night, earth and sky, yin and yang, life and death. In
  fact, from the standpoint of nature, men and women are closer to each
  other than either is to anything else – for instance, mountains,
  kangaroos, or coconut palms. Far from being an expression of natural
  differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural
  similarities.

The same goes for gender relations in our society. Texts on sex roles
almost always contain a party-piece on sex-typed adornment – make-up,
clothing, hair-style and accessories. Erving Goffman’s Gender
Advertisements adds positioning and posture to the catalogue. In the
additive framework of sex role theory this is interpreted as a social
marking of the natural difference: we put girls in frilly dresses, boys
in running shorts and so on. But there is something odd about this. If
the difference is natural why does it need to be marked so heavily? For
the sex-typing of clothes and adornment really is obsessive. At some
moments it reaches quite fantastic levels. No one is likely to doubt the
femaleness of a nursing mother. Yet the front-opening dresses and
dressing-gowns marketed to nursing mothers (in shops like the British
‘Mothercare’ chain) are an absolute mass of ‘feminine’ frills, tucks,
bows, lace, ribbons and such like. When you think of the mess created by
a nursing baby, it is clear there is nothing functional about this.

In fact the social practices are not reflecting natural differences with
these diacritical marks of gender. They are weaving a structure of
symbol and interpretation around them, and often vastly exaggerating or
distorting them. As Rubin observes, social emphasis on difference
negates natural similarity. When we push further into the detail of the
social arrangements about gender, it is striking how regularly denials,
transformations and contradictions appear. Homosexual men are socially
defined as effeminate, homosexual women as mannish; in fact there are no
physical or physiological differences between homosexual and
heterosexual people. Employment practices that discriminate against
women because of presumed childcare obligations define all women as
mothers of young children; in fact most are not. Girls in early
adolescence are on average bigger and stronger than the boys in their
own school classes; yet it is just at this age that enormous pressure is
applied to make them dependent and fearful in relation to males. To
sustain patriarchal power on the large scale requires the construction
of a hypermasculine ideal of toughness and dominance; the physical image
of masculinity this produces is grotesquely unlike the actual physique
of most men. The corresponding point has often been made about images of
physical beauty in women.

At the same time another negation is taking place. The members of either
sex vary tremendously in height, strength, endurance, dexterity and so
on. As noted already, the distributions in the two sexes overlap to a
great extent. Social practices that construct women and men as distinct
categories by converting an average difference into a categorical
difference – ‘men are stronger than women’ – negate the major pattern of
difference that occurs within sexes rather than between them.

In grasping these apparently paradoxical processes, the kind of
distinction between levels of practice that Jean-Paul Sartre makes in
the Critique of Dialectical Reason is helpful. The biological
differentiation of sex in reproduction is a passively suffered
condition: men cannot bear children, infants require suckling and so on.
To these conditions correspond a limited range of practices and
consequences (of a type Sartre calls the ‘practico-inert’). People can
be lumped together in logically primitive categories through an external
logic, a logic imposed on them that places them in parallel situations
(Sartre calls this ‘seriality’) – like a queue of people waiting for a
bus, or the audience for a radio broadcast.

These however are not the gender categories as we encounter them in
social life. Indeed the practices of sexual reproduction are often quite
remote aspects of the social encounters in which gender is constructed
and sustained. This is obvious in the key case of children, who have
gender forms vehemently imposed on them long before they are capable of
reproducing, or even have much understanding of the business of
reproduction. There are other, more sophisticated, levels of practice
involved. To move to these levels requires negation of the previous
level of practice. Thus to construct the social category of ‘man’ or
‘woman’, with a common identity and interest, requires negation of the
serial dispersion characteristic of the array of parallel situations
constructed by the biological categories. This is done in practices that
create and assert the solidarity of the sex (or group within it).

This social solidarity is a new fact, in no way implied by the
biological category. It can therefore be constructed, historically, in a
variety of ways. Thus it is possible for a new type of solidarity, a new
organization of the gender, to emerge. Masculinities and femininities
can be re-constructed historically, new forms can become dominant. It is
even possible for a whole new gender category to be constructed, as with
the emergence of ‘the homosexual’ in the late nineteenth century, and
perhaps ‘the transsexual’ now. Such a development does not make sense in
any theory of natural difference as the basis of gender. It does make
sense when the significance of contradiction is grasped.

There is, therefore, a logic to such paradoxes as the gross exaggeration
of difference by the social practices of dress, adornment and the like.
They are part of a continuing effort to sustain the social definition of
gender, an effort that is necessary precisely because the biological
logic, and the inert practice that responds to it, cannot sustain the
gender categories.

The shift to a second level of practice is also found in the
psychodynamics of gender, according to some classical formulations.
Alfred Adler’s account of the ‘masculine protest’ as a key structure of
motivation, for instance, is based on the small child’s discovery of a
physical fact about its body, its organic inferiority to others. This
perception of the body is, however, transcended in the psychological
process that constructs, in over-compensation, a desire to dominate, a
striving for power. That a real transcendence has occurred is shown by
the fact that as the child grows up the psychological structure outlives
the physical conditions in which it was produced. The same is true for
‘castration anxiety’ in Freud’s psychodynamic theory, which outlives the
originally extreme disparity of force between child and parent.

The creation of the ‘new fact’ in transcendent practice in no sense
excludes the body, the biology of reproduction, bodily difference or
physical experience. To lose this connection would be to make the kind
of suppression made by patriarchal ideology when it defines menstruation
as embarrassing and unmentionable, and thus eliminates part of women’s
experience from the language. The point is that we do not need to fall
back on reductionism to keep the body and its ways in view. In practical
transcendence the body is carried forward, so to speak, into the next
transaction. It remains a presence, indeed a ferment, in the order of
things constructed by more complex social processes. Even when the
physical conditions of some social process change – as when the
psychoanalytic baby grows up – the body remains the screen on which the
well-launched dramas of power and anxiety are projected. ‘Hysterical’
symptoms like the paralyzed limb are the classic case, but depression
and dissociation are also experienced in the flesh.

Contradiction between the body and a developing practice is a continuing
fact in sexuality itself. In sexual intercourse, nobody but the most
inexperienced, insensitive or frightened person always follows the
simple bodily logic of arousal to climax. There is tension and pleasure
in working against immediate bodily demand, holding back, creating
rhythms, exploring. You can communicate pleasure to a partner by working
against your own desire in favour of hers or his; you learn the ways of
another body which does not contain your own desire or need. In this way
the immensely complex practical edifice of a sexual relationship is
built as a structure of tensions and contradictions. That is the meaning
of a union of two people as distinct from a rubbing-together of two
bodies.

Practical Transformations of the Body

Even to speak of contradiction between social process and the body is
not to have moved far enough from doctrines of natural difference and
biological determination. For this is still to treat the body as unmoved
mover, as what is fixed in relation to what is fluid, as what gives
meaning and does not receive it. The body in relation to the social
system still seems like the monster looming outside the bright lights of
the space station, alien and immovable, compelling by its sheer
presence.

That the body is intractable and recalcitrant is important. More than
one radical theorist has found in a kind of biological intransigence an
ultimate grounding for human freedom in the face of overwhelming social
powers: Herbert Marcuse on the bodily basis of Eros, Noam Chomsky on the
biological basis of speech. This may be valid as a speculation on
ultimate limits to social control; I am not sure. But it should not
imply that in general the body becomes a social agent as if from pure
nature, from some standpoint outside society. The body-as-used, the body
I am, is a social body that has taken meanings rather than conferred
them. My male body does not confer masculinity on me; it receives
masculinity (or some fragment thereof) as its social definition. Nor is
my sexuality the irruption of the natural; it too is part of a social
process. In the most extraordinary detail my body’s responses reflect
back, like the little mirrors on an Indian dress, a kaleidoscope of
social meanings.

The body, without ceasing to be the body, is taken in hand and
transformed in social practice. I do not have a systematic analysis of
this process to offer, but it may be helpful to illustrate the point.
What follows are brief notes on three examples: symbolic eroticism, the
physical sense of masculinity and the history of body politics.

  Whenas in silks my Julia goes
  Then, then (methinks) how sweetly flows
  That liquefaction of her clothes

Commenting on Herrick’s remarkable poem, Judy Barbour notes that the
force of its eroticism depends a good deal on the connotations of silk
as a sexual and status fetish, operating within a closed system of
social thought (which she calls ‘mythical’) about men’s and women’s
sexuality. Maureen Duffy makes a similar observation on Spenser’s Faerie
Queen, an erotic dream-poem in which some typical problems of
Renaissance sexuality and culture are explored and resolved in violence.
Jean Genet’s Our Lady of the Flowers is equally striking as a document
of the link between imagination and eroticism. Genet creates here a
world of erotic objects in whose ritual dances masculinity and
femininity dissolve and coagulate, now taking on sharp edges in the form
of the hard youth who combines criminality and desirability, now
ambiguous in the shape of Divine.

The importance of ritual in sexuality is familiar. In some forms of
sexuality it becomes the matrix for an amplification of the tension set
up by working against the body. Using pain, fear and humiliation,
sado-masochistic rituals with ‘forbidden symbols and … disowned
emotions’, in the words of Pat Califia, practically turn the body
against itself in the pursuit of pleasure. In the milder fetishisms
where pleasure comes with rubberized raincoats or white kid gloves, the
role of the imagination and the centrality of socially constructed
meaning – here non-verbal and built into tactile response – is very
obvious. (Even here, however, the ideological ‘naturalization’ of the
social is under way. The standard fantasy in fetish pornography is about
the unpremeditated discovery of an uncontrollable ‘natural’ response to
the fetish, whatever it is.)

Fetishism and fetish pornography work to a large extent by playing with
and recombining elements of the symbolism of gender. As sexuality, they
presuppose a connection between this symbolism and the body – social
definitions of the feel of femininity and masculinity. This physical
sense of genderedness (to coin a horrible word) needs exploration. I
will take the case of masculinity, as femininity has been analysed more
extensively.

The physical sense of maleness is not a simple thing. It involves size
and shape, habits of posture and movement, particular physical skills
and the lack of others, the image of one’s own body, the way it is
presented to other people and the ways they respond to it, the way it
operates at work and in sexual relations. In no sense is all this a
consequence of XY chromosomes, or even of the possession on which
discussions of masculinity have so lovingly dwelt, the penis. The
physical sense of maleness grows through a personal history of social
practice, a life-history-in-society.

In Western countries, for instance, images of ideal masculinity are
constructed and promoted most systematically through competitive sport.
Though adults are spectators more often than participants,
schoolchildren do play sport a great deal and are taught to regard
sporting success as a matter of deep importance. The combination of
force and skill that is involved in playing well at games like football,
cricket and baseball, and which is central even in highly individualized
sports like surfing, becomes a strongly cathected aspect of an
adolescent boy’s life. Though rejected by some (a point that will be
explored in chapter 8), for most it becomes a model of bodily action
that has a much wider relevance than the particular game. Prowess of
this kind becomes a means of judging one’s degree of masculinity.

So the concern with force and skill becomes a statement embedded in the
body, embedded through years of participation in social practices like
organized sport. And it is not a ‘statement’ that comes from the void.
Its meaning condenses some crucial features of the social structures
that environ, and participate in, those masculinizing practices. One of
these is the structure of class relations. The system of individual
competition in sport has taken on a particular form in advanced
capitalism, as recent analyses of the Olympics and the culture of sport
have shown. More directly important is the structure of power in gender
relations. The meanings in the bodily sense of masculinity concern,
above all else, the superiority of men to women, and the exaltation of
hegemonic masculinity over other groups of men which is essential to the
domination of women.

The social definition of men as holders of power is translated not only
into mental body-images and fantasies, but into muscle tensions,
posture, the feel and texture of the body. This is one of the main ways
in which the power of men becomes ‘naturalized’, i.e. seen as part of
the order of nature. It is very important in allowing belief in the
superiority of men, and the oppressive practices that flow from it, to
be sustained by men who in other respects have very little power. The
importance of physical aggression in some of the major forms of
working-class masculinity is familiar. A vignette: among a peer group of
South London boys in a particular club (where a youth worker interested
in the issue of masculinity works), the mark of friendship is hitting
each other – playfully, but hard. No one who is not a friend is admitted
to this intimacy.

The violence implicit in the physical construction of hegemonic
masculinity points directly to the social distribution of violence
outlined in chapter 1. It was noted there that at least some features of
this distribution change historically. This is one facet of a much
larger politics of the body.

Our bodies grow and work, flourish and decay, in social situations that
produce bodily effects. For instance the class system that we live in
produces malnutrition for the children of poor people, obesity from
overeating and overdrinking among the affluent. The institutionalized
racism of the Australian social order means massively higher levels of
eye disease among Aborigines than among whites: in a national study of
rural areas 38 per cent of Aborigines had trachoma compared with 1 per
cent of whites.

The politics of the body has a gender dimension as well – which is to
say, physical effects that follow from the gender structuring of social
relations. Alcoholism provides a clear example. In an Australian
national study of 1980 it was found that 14 per cent of men and 6 per
cent of women were at intermediate to very high risk levels. Another
kind of physical effect is lucidly documented in studies of the material
circumstances of working-class family life. Margery Spring Rice’s
classic Working-class Wives, for instance, traced the physical effects
on women of the division of labour that assigned them to back-breaking
daily labour in ‘the small dark unorganized workshop of the home’.

That was in Britain in the 1930s. A number of social processes gradually
altered those physical effects. One was the spread of effective and
reliable contraception. The history of contraception shows that the term
‘politics of the body’ is no metaphor. Marie Stopes, leader of the
contraception movement in early twentieth-century Britain, was a
political organizer and propagandist of genius – though not, it seems
from Ruth Hall’s biography, much of a technical expert on her subject.
From World War I through the 1920s and 1930s she fought a long and
sometimes bitter campaign to establish openly available contraceptive
services. The story in Australia shows more clearly the other side of
the struggle: that is, the mobilization of political resources against
contraception in the early years of the century by propagandists like
Octavius Beale. Fear of the ‘yellow peril’ from Asia overwhelming the
white settlements, imperial patriotism seeking to bolster the British
‘race’ against the German, fear of working-class depravity, combined
with medical mythology and a rational distrust of available methods of
contraception to fuel a widespread pro-natalist campaign. The state was,
for a while, swung to pro-natalist positions.

Concern about imperial and racial decline fed into another kind of body
politics, the attempt to cultivate physique by education. As an
organized practice in the schools, general physical education (distinct
from sport and from military drill) developed in capitalist countries in
the late nineteenth century. Some key innovations came from Sweden and
the scheme for a ‘scientific’ physical education was known elsewhere as
‘Swedish drill’. It spread through the mass schooling system in the
twentieth century, with particular vigour where interventionist states
developed a concern with the military or industrial efficiency of their
populations. Nazi schooling, in consequence, was a model of physical
education for its time. In somewhat less militarized but still
ideologically loaded forms physical education continues to be an
essential part of contemporary mass schooling.

We may say, then, that the practical transformation of the body in the
social structure of gender is not only accomplished at the level of
symbolism. It has physical effects on the body; the incorporation is a
material one. The forms and consequences of this incorporation change in
time, and change as a result of social purposes and social struggle.
That is to say they are fully historical. Symbolically, ‘nature’ may be
opposed to ‘culture’, the body (fixed) opposed to history (moving). But
in the reality of practice the body is never outside history, and
history never free of bodily presence and effects on the body. The
traditional dichotomies underlying reductionism now have to be replaced
by a more adequate and complex account of the social relations in which
this incorporation and interplay occur.

NOTES

Natural Difference

(pp. 66–77). A charming short introduction to the evolutionary history
of sex is Stevens (1984). On Maccoby and Jacklin’s privileging of
biology, note that even on the trait of aggressiveness the biological
predisposition thesis is disputable: see Tieger (1980). Vulgar
sociobiology quotations from Morris (1979), pp. 74–5 and Tiger and Fox
(1971), pp. 20, 22; scientific sociobiology from Wilson (1978). pp.
139–40, 128. Parallels between sociobiology on natural sex difference
and the pseudo-sciences of IQ and mental disease are noted in the useful
critique of genetic determination by Lewontin, Rose and Kamin (1984).
Additive quotation, Maccoby and Jacklin (1975), p. 374.

Transcendence and Negation

(pp. 78–82). The discussion of practical transcendence draws extensively
on Sartre (1976), with some assistance from Kosík (1976), whose theory
of praxis is outlined by Schmidt (1977). Kovel (1981), pp. 234–6 offers
an analysis of negation between praxis and desire that has some
similarity to the argument here, but almost entirely misses the issue of
gender – quite a feat for a psychoanalyst. Quotations from Rubin (1975),
pp. 169, 179–80.

Practical Transformations

(pp. 83–7). The social meanings in eroticism are extensively explored in
the fiction of Angela Carter (e.g. 1974). On sado-masochism see Greene
and Greene (1974) and Califia (1983), pp. 118–32; the quotation is from
another of Califia’s writings cited in Smart 3 (1984), p. 8. The social
meanings in the physical sense of masculinity are explored in Willis
(1979); Connell (1983) and Corrigan (1984). On sport and capitalism see
Brohm (1978). Data on trachoma from House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Aboriginal Affairs (1979); on alcoholism from Department of
Health (1984). Marie Stopes’s political struggles are surveyed by her
biographer Hall (1978); and Australian pro-natalism by Pringle (1973)
and Hicks (1978).

