Part IV

Sexual Politics

11

Sexual Ideology

Discourse and Practice

When Mary Wollstonecraft wrote to vindicate the rights of women, it was
mainly questions of ideology that she had in mind: morals, manners,
education and religion. These topics have been constant friends in the
literature of gender since, and few authors have doubted the power of
ideology. Even so vigorous a materialist as Emma Goldman was content to
explain the difficulty of unionizing women this way:

  The woman considers her position as worker transitory, to be thrown
  aside for the first bidder. That is why it is infinitely harder to
  organize women than men. ‘Why should I join a union? I am going to get
  married, to have a home.’ Has she not been taught from infancy to look
  upon that as her ultimate calling?

In contemporary theory too there is a strong tendency to make ideology
the site of sexual politics. Julia Kristeva writes of the ‘inseparable
conjunction of the sexual and the symbolic’ as the terrain of the new
feminism. Juliet Mitchell and Roberta Hamilton treat patriarchy as the
realm of ideology in contrast to a realm of production governed by class
relations. A vigorous literature drawing on French semiotics and
discourse theory analyses patriarchal symbolism and language as,
effectively, a self-contained system.

Some notable research on the symbolization of women and men has
resulted, moving beyond the familiar research on stereotypes to the
implicit structure of whole discourses about gender. The most
penetrating, such as Jo Spence’s ‘What do People do all Day?’ and Wendy
Hollway’s ‘Gender Difference and the Production of Subjectivity’ go on
to trace change and contradiction in the process of symbolic
representation.

The results of these researches are important. But there are serious
difficulties with a theoretical program that gives an absolute priority
to ideology or to semiotic analysis and treats discourse as a closed
system. Lynne Segal remarks on the drift towards idealism in recent
feminist theory, and how an overemphasis on matters like language
marginalizes grass-roots concerns of the feminist movement. From a
theoretical viewpoint too, much of this writing appears startlingly
one-sided. Neglecting institutions, economics and the routines of
politics means that analyses of ideology are often parked on top of
crude categorical assumptions about power and the relations between
person and group. No matter how sophisticated the analysis of
symbolization much of its value must then be lost.

The way to resolve this is not only to give due attention to
institutions, economics and so forth. It is essential to recognize that
discourse and symbolization are themselves practices, which are
structurally connected with other practices and have a great deal in
common with other forms of practice. They too have to be analysed with
attention to context, institutionalization and group formation. It is
important to consider what groups engage in them and how specialists in
these kinds of practice are socially constituted within gender
relations. This is why I have delayed the analysis of ideology, despite
its prominence in current debate about gender, until after a framework
for the structural and personal analysis of gender has been established.

The practical context and institutionalization of language is more than
a question of ‘pragmatics’, the application or use of an existing
syntactic and semantic structure. Practice is constitutive of syntax and
semantics too, when considered over historical time. For instance,
historians of language have noted the increasing sexism of the English
language in the early modern period, as in the use of masculine pronouns
to refer to men and women together. As Casey Miller and Kate Swift
argue, this has to be seen in the context of the historical emergence of
intellectuals (Dr Johnson being one) able to act as ‘authorities’ on
language and impose sexist usage as standard. One of the major tools
invented was the dictionary. It is notable that early dictionaries were
in part directed to the education of women, as a substitute for
schooling.

The importance of social context in the ‘uptake’ of culture, in the
appropriation and use of elements of ideology, can be documented in a
wide range of situations. Angela McRobbie’s research on the ‘culture of
femininity’ in Britain is an especially convincing example because her
theory is structuralist. The field-work shows very clearly how the
impoverished, constricted and oppressive situation of working-class
teenage girls is made tolerable by a cultural practice exaggerating
femininity and romanticizing marriage as the main goal in life.

Studies of families similarly show ideology in context among adults.
Pauline Hunt’s research on the division of labour in an English village
shows how ‘the situation itself breeds traditionalism’ for wives who do
full-time childcare at home. They are obliged to adapt to their
husbands’ timetables, are isolated from the public world and intimidated
by politics, and find that childbearing has become the central
experience of life. Yet in some ways ideology is able to override the
logic of other practices. The belief that husbands are breadwinners is
sustained in families where the wife earns a wage. Even when she earns
more than he does, the ideology is not criticized but the couple’s
situation is – ‘it’s degrading for a man.’

It is, however, in studies of workplaces that the interplay of situation
and ideology is clearest. Michael Korda’s description of New York office
life in Male Chauvinism shows how sexist ideology is embedded in
management and supervisory practices, such as promotion of staff and the
segmentation of tasks, and acts as a discursive rationalization of
inequality. In this setting, Korda notes, the shift of feminist argument
onto issues of sexuality (for example in Germaine Greer’s The Female
Eunuch) came as a relief to men, as it excused corporate executives from
facing the issues that were the hard ones to them – about money. The
study of an insurance office in Britain by Collinson and Knights,
described in chapter 5, underlines the amount of work that goes into
constructing and defending sexist ideology.

The most complex and sophisticated account of the maintenance of sexual
ideology in the workplace is Cynthia Cockburn’s Brothers. Here the
analysis of ideology is set in the context of the historical development
of the British printing industry, from which women were expelled some
generations ago. The ideology of the ‘natural’ weakness of women and
their unsuitability for work as compositors is thus a suppression of
history as well as a rationalization of present practice. The collective
practice of the compositors is now being undermined by drastic
technological change, and with it the traditional justifications of the
sexual division of labour. Cockburn documents the passing of a
particular form of sexual ideology, traditional patriarchalism, while
the institutional bases of men’s power in these workplaces, the control
of management, unions and training, remain. New rationalizations, such
as the masculine mystique of high technology, are imperfect substitutes.

Parallel evidence of process and tension in sexual ideology can be found
in research on schools. In the literature on sex roles, schools are
frequently discussed as an ‘agency of socialization’ impinging on
children. They are also workplaces, with a workforce divided on gender
lines. Recent research on teachers shows a good deal of involvement in
issues of sexual politics. Teachers are one of the main occupational
groups to be influenced by the growth of the new feminism; their
reactions range from strong endorsement to bitter hostility. In many
schools the result is an active negotiation, sometimes turning into open
conflict, about issues of curriculum, promotion, sexual harassment and
so on. A school’s whole policy may be made over. A case in point is the
private secondary school for girls, ‘Auburn College’, mentioned in
chapter 8. This school was repositioning itself towards the professional
labour market and revamping its curriculum to emphasize maths and
sciences. A changed definition of femininity was at issue in almost
every aspect of the school’s educational policy.

Such evidence does not imply that ideology can be reduced to economics
or institutional arrangements, nor that ideology is to be contrasted
with a ‘material’ world. It does imply that ideology has to be seen as
things people do, and that ideological practice has to be seen as
occurring in, and responding to, definite contexts. Some ideological
practice is very plainly work. The school curriculum, for instance, is a
labour process for the teachers as well as a definition of the pupils’
learning. To understand it fully requires an investigation of the social
structure of the workplace and the political economy of the industry, as
well as its connections with patterns of ideology in other milieux.

These considerations lead to an approach to sexual ideology that is
closer to the tradition of the sociology of knowledge than it is to
contemporary theories of discourse. There are some well-recognized
difficulties with this approach. Some versions of the ‘sociology of
knowledge’ are reductionist, presenting ideology as a reflex of social
interest. Much of the sociology of knowledge takes a rather crude
approach to the internal structure of ideas and has little to say about
the process of symbolization. Finally, most of the sociology of
knowledge has been based on a class analysis of social structure and
ignores gender completely.

None of these problems is insoluble. Reductionism can be avoided, not by
claims for the autonomy of ideological practice, but by consistently
seeing it as practice, ontologically on a par with any other practice
and equally involved in the constitution of social interests. Some
classic researches in the sociology of knowledge, such as Georg Lukács’
analysis of reification and European philosophy, and Lucien Goldmann’s
analysis of Jansenism, are very concerned with the internal structure of
ideology. And there is a notable proof that the sociology-of-knowledge
approach can be effectively applied to gender: Viola Klein’s The
Feminine Character, which appeared as long ago as 1946.

The point is not to apply a precast ‘sociology of knowledge’ to the
subject-matter of gender but to use methods generated in that tradition
to expand the social theory of gender. In what follows I draw partly on
analyses of discourse and symbolization to characterize ideological
practice; and partly on ideology theory and the sociology of knowledge
to raise questions about the contexts of the production of sexual
ideology, its consequences for the gender order, and the social
character of its producers.

Ideological Processes

Gender relations involve the structuring of social practice around sex
and sexuality. The commonest process in sexual ideology involves
collapsing that structure, merging the elements into one by
‘naturalizing’ social practice.

The interpretation of gender relations as natural facts is
extraordinarily widespread. Sexual divisions of labour are constantly
interpreted this way. Cockburn, for instance, notes how women were
firmly believed to be naturally incapable of handling the machinery of
printing, in the teeth of the fact that women actually had done so. In
discussions of the division of labour in childcare women’s natural
desire to mother children is almost always taken for granted. The
mechanism operates equally powerfully on the structure of cathexis.
Heterosexual attraction is constantly interpreted as natural – the
‘attraction of opposites’ – and socially forbidden relationships,
especially homosexual, are interpreted as ‘unnatural’. Even the
structure of power is naturalized, for instance in sociobiology, though
this seems less insistent than with the other two structures.

The profoundly political character of this process becomes apparent when
quite opposite social relations are ‘naturalized’ in different times and
places. For instance women were treated as naturally frail in European
polite culture in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, naturally
tough in most peasant cultures. At times the mechanism of naturalization
is used in an argument for social change, for instance the suffrage
movement’s argument that the realm of politics needed an injection of
women’s natural qualities of compassion and purity. Some contemporary
eco-feminism is very close to this. Nevertheless the main effect of
naturalization is conservative; progressive uses of it risk being
incorporated. To interpret social relations as natural is,
fundamentally, to suppress their historicity. To do that is to close off
the possibility of human practice recreating humanity. Verena Stolcke’s
and Marie de Lepervanche’s studies of the ‘naturalization’ of inequality
show close connections between this process in relation to gender and in
relation to other forms of social inequality such as racism. Indeed one
becomes a condition of the other. As Stolcke notes, biologism leads to a
drive to control women’s sexuality in the name of racial purity.

Naturalization, then, is not a naive mistake about what biological
science can and cannot explain. At a collective level it is a highly
motivated ideological practice which constantly overrides the biological
facts. Nature is appealed to for justification more than for
explanation. To be able to justify, nature itself must be got in order –
simplified, schematized and moralized.

Naturalization thus implies a second basic process in sexual ideology,
the cognitive purification of the world of gender. Its most familiar
form is the stereotyping documented in media studies such as Patricia
Edgar’s Media She. Real practices are messy and complicated, ideological
representations of them squeaky-clean. The families in television
advertisements are all happy, their fathers are all employed, their
mothers just love housework. The ‘girls’ dancing on the screen all have
long legs, white teeth, ladder-resistant stockings and are certainly
free this evening. Children’s books, as Bob Dixon shows at length in
Catching them Young, are as packed with stereotyped images of gender as
they are with messages about race and class.

Jo Spence’s study of photographic images of women shows how the process
of stereotyping goes beyond the individual item. Taken as a set, a body
of advertising or photo-reportage constructs an ‘implicit narrative’ of
a woman’s life, in which individual items are embedded and to whose
logic they appeal. In the British popular media studied by Spence in the
1970s this narrative was a highly traditional life cycle (though
excluding death), presenting women as providers of services to men and
children. Spence noted, however, an altered narrative emerging in the
late 1970s with rather more acknowledgement of problems and of paid work
and rather more self-gratification for women.

The purification of the ideological world by excluding items that do not
fit the implicit narrative reaches a high point where the narrative
concerns the public world. It is a familiar finding in media research
that only a small percentage of news coverage is devoted to women. Women
are also liable to be dropped from view in other forms of communication.
The first human to step onto the moon announced to the waiting world:
‘That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind.’ A highly
praised book that appeared in the same year (1969) called A History of
the Scottish People was almost entirely about men, often read as if men
were the only inhabitants of Scotland, and discussed every industry
except the one which had the greatest number of Scottish people working
in it (‘houses’ appear in its index, but not ‘housework’). A
high-powered international conference about the ‘Dialectics of
Liberation’ met in London; all of its speakers were men, who discussed
war, madness, the environment, imperialism, race, literature, capitalism
and socialism, but made no reference to the position of women or the
oppression of homosexuals.

These three examples were events of the late 1960s and at least some
areas of cultural practice have changed since. Formal language is less
likely to be openly sexist. Even so establishment a body as the American
Psychological Association introduced a policy of non-sexist language in
its journals in 1977. Most big publishers now have a feminist, women’s
studies, or women writers’ ‘list’; indeed this is one of the more
buoyant areas in contemporary book publishing. But the problem Sheila
Rowbotham noted in Woman’s Consciousness, Man’s World, the difficulty
even left-wing men have in acknowledging gender issues as serious
politics, remains – and not just on the Left. To some extent the
exclusion of women is replaced by marginalization, through such devices
as a separate publishing list, or media trivialization. The main
narrative of the public world – wars, rockets, governments falling,
profits rising – carries on as before.

The familiar public/private distinction is part of a process of
dichotomizing the world that is the most systematic form of
‘purification’ attempted by sexual ideology. In this simplification,
however, is a source of complexity. For if pushed to an extreme, the
qualitative distinction between men’s world and women’s world requires
different cultural mechanisms to operate in each. A curious illustration
of this is an obscure 1951 science-fiction novel by Philip Wylie called
The Disappearance. Its premiss is that women and men disappear from each
other’s physical world for four years; the results are different kinds
of social breakdown, nuclear war in one world and fire and pestilence in
the other.

The drive for purification reaches its greatest emotional intensity in
the treatment of men’s homosexuality as a symbol of disorder, dirtiness
and danger. There is a paradox about a patriarchal social order being so
hostile to erotic relations between members of the dominant sex. A sense
of this paradox is part of the ambivalent feelings between women’s
liberation and gay liberation. The explanation of Western culture’s
homophobia is complex, but part of it must be the degree to which the
fact of homosexuality threatens the credibility of a naturalized
ideology of gender and a dichotomized sexual world.

Within the dichotomized world of sexual ideology two devices for the
representation of social life become dominant. One is romanticism. Since
this term is often associated with fantasy in the style of Georgette
Heyer or J. R. R. Tolkien, I would stress its relevance to everyday
life. The Broadway musical is a notable illustration. Its classic
subject-matter is the lives of little people: farm workers (Oklahoma!);
soldiers (South Pacific); fairground workers (Carousel), small-time
crooks (Guys and Dolls), factory workers (The Pyjama Game), teenage
street ‘gangs’ (West Side Story). Everyday life is appealed to, its
difficulties even emphasized. But it is transformed by the glow of the
love affair on which every plot turns, beside which the other issues
pale. True love – in the Broadway musical, in Mills and Boon novels, in
women’s magazines – is a symbolic reconnection of the dichotomized
worlds. It both asserts the rightness of the dichotomy, and claims a way
for each woman as a loved individual to escape the narrow and
impoverished world the dichotomy constructs for women as a group.

On the other side, hegemonic masculinity is naturalized in the form of
the hero and presented through forms that revolve around heroes: sagas,
ballads, westerns, thrillers. The cultural focus on exemplary
individuals is not only a way of justifying privileges which happen to
be shared by the unheroic majority of men. Like romanticism it is also a
way of dealing symbolically with real problems.

One of the problems about gender relations for men has long been the
level of violence between men. It is no accident that the classic hero
is usually a specialist in violence. ‘I sing of arms and the man’,
announced Virgil at the start of the Aeneid, and one notes that the
‘arms’ come first. Aeneas, Achilles, Siegfried, Tristan and Lancelot
hack their respective ways through quite a tonnage of flesh and bones.
Tarzan, Bulldog Drummond, James Bond, Rambo and the Bruce Lee characters
have different techniques but much the same regard for human life.

The figures in the first list, however, are considerably more than
specialists in violence. The plot of the Iliad, for instance, revolves
not around Achilles’ superiority in war but around his refusal to use
it. When he returns to the fight it is because of his grief for his dead
friend Patroclus. Tristan is not only a champion duellist and
dragon-slayer but also a tormented lover, an ambivalent friend, a
lukewarm husband and something of a songwriter and practical joker to
boot. Violence is part of the framework of these epics, but it is also
posed as a moral and human issue.

By comparison, the twentieth-century killer–heroes are cardboard
cut-outs, and in modern pulp fiction the questioning is gone. There is a
disconnection of action from emotion – at least from emotional
complexity – which relates to the historical trajectory of alienation
and hegemonic masculinity sketched in chapter 7. A wonderful document of
this is a 1955 thriller by Clark Smith called The Speaking Eye. The
tough-guy hero is, of all things, an accountant, who is precipitated
into a Chandler-style narrative of murders and tight-lipped beatings
when sent to do an audit for a company take-over.

Cultural Dynamics

The historicity of sexual ideology is seen not only in details like the
content of heroism, but in its organization on the largest scale. In
pre-capitalist and early modern Europe sexual ideology was organized as
part of a religious world-view. The issues of sexual politics were
framed as moral questions, to be decided by appeal to revelation or to
priestly authority. The massive modern secularization of European
culture occurred in sexual ideology as much as elsewhere. The production
of a natural science of sexuality and a social science of gender were
the theoretical faces of this development.

From the viewpoint of mass practice, the key development was not the
shift from a religious to a scientific form of abstraction but the
shifting basis of authority. Secularization undermined the ability of
ministers and bishops to arbitrate questions of gender. It was by no
means a foregone conclusion who, if anyone, would succeed to the office.
Scientists, bureaucrats, teachers and philosophers all had claims, and
have kept some corner of the action. It was doctors, however, whose
claims were most effective and who took the hegemonic position in
constructing secularized discourses of gender and sexuality.

The medicalization of sexual ideology has now been traced by historians
in a number of areas. Jeffrey Weeks documents the application of the
‘medical model’ to homosexuality in Europe; Barbara Ehrenreich and
Deirdre English the medicalization of women’s bodies in the United
States; Kerreen Reiger the medical take-over of early childcare in
Australia. In all these cases, as Foucault also argues for France, the
crystallization of a medical theory of sexual life is accompanied by a
practice of control. A form of social authority is constructed, which
immediately reaches beyond the business of treating physical diseases.

A major consequence was the medicalization of problems of emotional life
and interpersonal relations in the form of psychiatry. Under the aegis
of psychiatry homosexual relationships were defined as an expression of
mental illness. Resistance by women to domestic subordination became
‘housewife’s neurosis’. A host of conflicts in everyday life were
reinterpreted as outcomes of unresolved childhood complexes.
Medicalization thus had a double effect. It depoliticized gender
relations directly, while building a more mediated power-structure based
on the authority of a masculine profession.

Of course the creation of this authority did not put an end to conflict.
The new authority is itself challenged, sometimes successfully. Gay
activists have forced official psychiatry to abandon the definition of
homosexuality as a pathology, though it is evidently still treated as
such in some psychiatric practice. Rather than ending conflict, the
growth of medical authority highlights the extent to which the dynamic
of sexual ideology is a struggle for hegemony. What is at issue is the
power to set the terms on which questions of gender are understood and
conflicts fought out.

Hegemony, as noted in chapter 8 for relations between masculinities,
does not mean total cultural control and obliteration of alternatives.
Such a degree of control does not happen in practice. In sexual ideology
generally, ascendant definitions of reality must be seen as
accomplishments that are always partial and always to some extent
contested.

Indeed we must see them as partly defined by the alternatives against
which they are asserted. Medicalized ideologies of gender, for instance,
are defined partly against alternative forms of authority such as the
Church. Hence the need to claim scientific warrant for what are actually
judgements of practical morality, like psychiatric interventions in
sexual politics. The claim is often made implicitly, by the use of a
technical language. Medical ideologies are also defined against attempts
to take control of healing into the people’s own hands. Hence the need
to assert a strong distinction between the sound judgement of
professionals and the ignorance and errors of ‘lay’ people. Here
medicine has actually adopted the language of the Church.

Contestation, then, is an integral part of ideology. The forms of
symbolic opposition to which it gives rise, for instance in erotica, are
intricate and fascinating. Here I will consider only one pattern of
contestation, the pattern that follows the lines of crisis tendencies as
defined in chapter 7.

Karl Mannheim made a famous distinction between ‘ideologies’,
world-views that are integrated with the established order, and
‘Utopias’ which transcend it. This is too neat a package; the argument
just made about the contested position of hegemonic sexual ideology
complicates the picture. It is still useful to distinguish perspectives
and frameworks that are broadly compatible with the existing gender
order from those that are not.

Such a distinction is implicit in the argument made in chapter 10 about
masculinity therapy, which adapts hegemonic masculinity to changed
conditions without risking the institutional bases of men’s power. The
anti-sexist men’s movement represented in Jon Snodgrass’s For Men
Against Sexism and Andy Metcalfe and Martin Humphries’s The Sexuality of
Men is looking for conceptions of masculinity that transcend those power
bases. It has clearly had a hard time finding them.

Feminism, by contrast, has generated Utopias both in Mannheim’s broad
sense and in the specific sense of imagined ideal worlds. Texts like
Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Herland (1915), a novel about an all-woman
society hidden in the highlands of the Amazon, document in a striking
way both the break with hegemonic ideology and the limits of the shift.
In the case of Herland the limit of thought is sexuality. Gilman can
conceptualize an all-woman government and radical changes in education,
but cannot admit mass lesbianism in her imagined world. She has to get
around it by doing away with sexual impulses almost completely.

Formal Utopias are the exception, however intriguing; it is an
occupational hazard of academics to overemphasize systematic ideology.
Most of the cultural politics of gender is much less spectacular. Its
field of action is the possibilities that open up in particular milieux
and institutions: the curriculum changes possible in a particular
school, the repertory possible in a particular theatre and so on.

Taken case by case, the opportunities are likely to seem limited. The
objective possibilities in a particular high school, for instance, are
constrained by many forces outside it: the bureaucratic organization of
the state, the social composition of the school’s catchment, the nature
of the credentials market, as well as the strength of various ideologies
of gender. Yet possibilities for contestation and movement are there,
and some teachers do explore them. This goes beyond clearly labelled
issues of gender. As Lyn Yates argues, the mainstream curriculum is a
key field of implicit sexual politics in schools and has its
possibilities for change. The sense of overwhelming constraints in a
single milieu becomes less dampening when the connections between
milieux come into view. Grass-roots cultural politics does cumulate,
sometimes into social movements. And it provides the base on which the
makers of formal ideologies build.

Recognizing the importance of cultural politics within the sphere of
gender raises the reverse question, the impact of gender relations and
sexual ideology on culture generally. There is every reason to agree
with feminist cultural criticism that this impact is both powerful and
largely unacknowledged. The ‘naturalization’ of gender has extended to
the making of culture itself. Until recently it has not been a question
why most playwrights, physicists or newspaper editors were men. It is
still not a question in the majority of theatres, physics departments
and media corporate offices.

The view that sexual politics is the structural basis of culture in
general – that for instance our culture is patriarchal before it is
anything else – is another matter. The overall analysis in this book
would suggest that this view is wrong, at least as a transhistorical
generalization. The scope of gender relations is historically variable,
and their power to determine cultural processes in general must be
variable too. But a more limited strategic claim may be right. There are
likely to be historical moments where the possibilities of general
change in consciousness and culture depend more crucially on the dynamic
of gender relations than on any other social force. It can be argued
that we are in such a moment now. The case is a long way from being
proved but cannot be disregarded. I will come back to related questions
in the final chapter.

Ideologists and Interests

If the strategic argument is even partly correct, it highlights the
importance of the people who are engaged in remaking cultural forms.
Discussions of sexual ideology have to a remarkable extent ignored the
ideologists. The main exception is Viola Klein in The Feminine
Character. Her approach from Mannheim’s sociology of knowledge led to a
concern with the people who formulated the knowledge, the social
positions they occupied and the interests they articulated. The
resulting study remains, 40 year later, one of the most significant
analyses of sexual ideology.

What Klein’s analysis conspicuously lacked was the concept of gender as
a social structure in its own right. The same is true of more recent
histories of ideas that have dealt with movements in sexual ideology:
Paul Robinson’s The Sexual Radicals; Christopher Lasch’s Haven in a
Heartless World; Michel Foucault’s History of Sexuality. To the extent
that there are structural categories in this research, they are loosely
derived from class analysis. The result is a social analysis of ideas
conducted with a 90-degree twist in the middle. The argument constantly
has to move off the axis of class onto the subject-matter of sex and
gender. It remains a shade mysterious why whole groups of intellectuals
should arise who are concerned with sexual politics.

Nevertheless these studies point up the importance of the intellectuals
who construct accounts of gender relations. In understanding them it
should be possible to draw on existing theories of intellectuals in the
traditions of Mannheim and Gramsci; and perhaps also on ‘new class’
theorists who have focused on intellectuals, such as Gouldner, and
Konrad and Szelenyi. But there can be no simple translation of any of
these ideas, for all of them are constructed within a class framework
and ignore the structure of gender. New questions have to be asked about
intellectuals and gender relations.

In some recent research, strongly influenced by feminism, these
questions are opening up. Ehrenreich and English’s For Her Own Good and
Reiger’s The Disenchantment of the Home are perhaps the best examples.
Both trace the emergence of new forms of domination of women by men, in
which groups of intellectuals are central – professionals rather than
the academics who figure in Klein’s story. It is not only a question of
professional men justifying and exercising new powers. More strikingly,
the historical process surrounding these medical interventions into
women’s health and childcare constitutes groups of intellectuals in
terms of gender relations. An example is the category of ‘medical
authorities on childrearing’, a social category constituted by the
sexual division of labour that makes mothers primary carers for
children, and by the gender structure of power that makes medical
authority masculine.

This work points to a more general issue. From the perspective of a
theory of gender, the question is where and how intellectuals and
intellectual work fit into the structure of gender relations. From the
perspective of a sociology of intellectuals, the question is how and how
far they are constituted as a group by gender relations, and how far the
character and impact of intellectual work is determined by gender
dynamics. Once the questions are posed in these terms, the tools of
ideology–theory and the sociology of intellectuals can be put to work on
new bases.

A case in point is Gramsci’s category of ‘organic’ intellectuals,
meaning people who perform an intellectual function within a class,
giving it self-definition and helping to mobilize it as a political and
social force. There are, I would argue, people who perform that kind of
task in gender relations. A notable example is Harriet Kidd, a clerk at
the Women’s Co-operative Guild head office in Britain in the years
leading up to World War I. She was successively a mill worker, an
unmarried mother after rape by her employer, a local labour and
community organizer and then an administrator. The Guild, founded in the
1880s, was a mass organization of working-class women claiming over
60,000 members between the wars. The combative socialist feminism of
organizers like Kidd was clearly very important in its success.

An organic intellectual of a very different stripe is Marabel Morgan, a
Florida housewife and business woman of the 1970s. The Total Woman has
already been mentioned as a classic presentation of emphasized
femininity. The book grew out of a four-week course in which other wives
were taught the tactics of being a ‘total woman’, with homework
assignments about adapting to their husband’s wishes. Though the
authorities Morgan appeals to are men, mainly Biblical prophets and
psychiatrists, they are not very prominent in the text. Her main
argument is carried by dozens of little anecdotes from the ‘total woman’
classes. Morgan is, in effect, mediating an ideology constructed by
women and circulating among women. Though it is, as Andrea Dworkin
argues in Right-Wing Women, a response to their powerlessness in
relation to their husbands, this does not alter the organic character of
the intellectual work.

A more general formulation is worth attempting, even in a preliminary
way. Groups active in the making of sexual ideology include priests,
journalists, advertisers, politicians, psychiatrists, designers (for
example, of fashion), playwrights and film-makers, actors and actresses,
novelists, musicians, movement activists and academics. When the
activities of these groups are considered in relation to the gender
order, they fall broadly into three categories.

First is the regulation and management of gender regimes. The Catholic
priesthood is a clear example, for its involvement went far beyond papal
declarations on sacred motherhood and unholy contraception. Theology
justified a patriarchal power structure but hardly settled how it was
actually to work. The traditional village priest spent a great deal of
time sorting this out, giving advice, laying down interpretations of
rules and managing the domestic tensions of his parish via the
confessional, visits to homes and so forth. Psychotherapists, family
therapists and counsellors do a lot of the same kind of work now.

Second is the articulation of experiences, fantasies and perspectives
characteristic of particular groups in gender relations. Harriet Kidd
and Marabel Morgan, in different ways, did this. But in other cases the
relationship is anything but organic, as the mass fantasies of Hollywood
show. Clark Gable articulated fantasies for women, Raquel Welch for men.
Third is the theorization of gender relations, a business that implies a
degree of disconnection from daily practice and an effort at reflection
and interpretation. I mean this rather more broadly than just writing
treatises about the sociology of gender. As suggested in chapter 3,
novelists like Nadine Gordimer and Patrick White and autobiographers
like Anja Meulenbelt are engaged in ‘theorization’ in this sense.

Returning to the question of structural location, if a group of
intellectuals is constituted as a clear-cut group in gender relations it
implies a strong patterning of the sexual division of labour.
Intellectual work is work, with a labour process of its own and a demand
for material resources, not the least of them being time. Situations
vary and groups of intellectuals vary in the degree to which they are
formed around the sexual division of labour rather than around some
other structural pattern (for example, class relations).

If we now integrate these two classifications the result is the grid in
table 5, on which I have tentatively placed the groups mentioned above.

This is, obviously, only a beginning in thinking about these groups. It
is perhaps enough to suggest that there are some systematic links
between intellectuals and the structure of gender relations. If so,
further exploration on these lines should yield results of importance
for our understanding of both.

For the theory of gender, the potential dividend is a good deal more
than the deeper understanding of the history of ideas that has been
defined as the value of the sociology of knowledge. In chapter 6 a
definition of ‘interests’ was suggested in terms of inequalities
constructed by gender relations. At that level of definition the
interests are inert, in the sense of Sartre’s ‘practico-inert’. For them
to become active as political forces requires a mobilization, one of
whose conditions is a reflective awareness of the inequalities and the
oppositions of interest they define. The creation of that awareness is
intellectual work. Much of it has in practice been done by specialists,
the intellectuals of the groups just discussed.

Table 5 Intellectuals and the gender order

[Image]

We may say, then, that intellectuals have a historic place in the
translation of structural inequality into sexual politics, at least at
the level of public politics. To say that, however, is not to
circumscribe very much the form of politics that emerges. For the
reflective awareness of inequalities may take very different forms,
depending on the circumstances and character of the reflection. Marabel
Morgan is articulating such an awareness just as much as Andrea Dworkin;
Morgan calls the wife the ‘Executive Vice-President’ of the marriage,
leaving no doubt about who is President.

It matters, then, how the articulation of interests is done. To put it
another way, ideological struggle in gender relations is to be expected
and has effects. It is easy to exaggerate the significance of the
abstract clash of ideas. Some of the wars of academics have remarkably
little relevance to anything in the world outside. But intellectual work
and ideological struggle are scarcely confined to the academy. They
occur to some degree in every institution and setting. And if academic
abstraction has to be discounted from its own estimate, it is not to be
ignored. Generalized formulations of ideas can be important in
crystallizing consciousness, in giving names to things felt but not yet
stated. When the world is ready, ideas can be a revolutionary force. The
problem is to understand the readiness as well as the ideas.

NOTES

Discourse and Practice

(pp. 241–5). Quotations from Goldman (1972b), p. 163; Kristeva (1981),
p. 21.

Ideological Processes

(pp. 245–9). Gancian and Ross (1981) illustrate media research showing
the marginalization of women in news and how it varies over time. The
case of Scottish history, Smout (1969); the case of the London
conference, Cooper (1968). APA guidelines for non-sexist language
published in American Psychologist, (June 1977).

Ideologists and Interests

(pp. 253–8). To Klein’s work we can now add detailed histories of ideas
like Rosenberg (1982), which are an improvement in terms of detail but
still have a less sophisticated social analysis. Harriet Kidd’s brief
biography in Davies (1977).

12

Political Practice

The Scope of Sexual Politics

In ordinary speech ‘politics’ is a narrow and faintly disreputable term,
meaning elections, parliaments, presidents and party antagonisms.
‘Politician’ can be a term of abuse, ‘political’ a label for distrust.
Social science has found the negative overtones unnecessary and the
narrow definition untenable.

In what follows ‘politics’ is assumed to be neither bad nor good, simply
an essential part of social life and a very widespread one. The same
kinds of processes occur in companies, voluntary organizations, and in
stateless societies as occur in and around the state: contests for
power, mechanisms of succession, debates over policy. Sociological
research on families found power structures and power struggles even in
that haven, as soon as it looked. R. D. Laing’s The Politics of
Experience marked another discovery made in the cultural politics of the
1960s. When Kate Millett characterized politics as ‘power-structured
relationships, arrangements whereby one group of persons is controlled
by another’ and by applying the idea to relations between men and women
defined ‘sexual politics’, the term startled many people but her thought
followed a well-marked path.

Millett’s definition now appears too narrow, given the range of overt
social conflicts about sex and gender over the last two decades. It is
worth trying to get these conflicts in some sort of order to arrive at a
definition of the scope of sexual politics.

There is, first, a political process centred on the state, some of whose
dimensions were discussed in chapter 6. Its most visible moments have
been attempts to commit major states to guarantees of equality for
women, such as the Equal Rights Amendment in the United States, and the
United Nations declaration of the International Decade for Women. Of
course ‘sexual politics’ also include the counter-mobilization that
scuppered the Equal Rights Amendment and undermined UN policy, for
instance the repression of women in Pakistan and Iran. Attempts to
introduce equal opportunity policies have contested the sexual division
of labour in the state and provoked widespread, if muted, resistance.
Issues of access have been fought out in political parties, notably in
attempts to get more women endorsed as candidates, and in a few places
like San Francisco and Sydney, gay men too. Resources issues have been
opened with the creation of women’s units in the bureaucracy, and
specific welfare programmes directed towards women, gays, and even
transsexuals. A new resources politics is emerging around the unequal
impact of apparently gender-neutral state policies such as the form of
taxation or welfare-funding cuts. The 1985 ‘Women’s Tax Summit’ which
contested the Australian government’s proposed shift to indirect taxes
is a notable example.

Overlapping all this is a politics of workplaces and markets. Campaigns
to break down prohibitions on women’s employment, or restrictions on
promotion, continue. In 1985, for instance, women’s exclusion from the
steelworks in Wollongong was declared unlawful. Sexual pressure on women
employees by men, especially their bosses, is now defined as sexual
harassment and cases are being taken before tribunals – not always with
progressive results, as Jocelynne Scutt shows for a landmark Australian
case of 1983. The long-standing exclusion of women from power in trade
unions, and the corresponding lack of interest by unions in the
interests of women members, is also being challenged. In 1983 Jenny
George became the first woman elected to the executive of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions; in 1979 the Trade Union Congress in Britain
sponsored a mass demonstration in support of abortion rights. It is more
difficult to get leverage on a whole labour market than a particular
workplace, but the attempt is made. There are for instance programmes to
get girls into apprenticeships, to break down the sharp sexual division
of skilled trades; and to get more girls into professionally oriented
streams in schools and colleges.

The content of schooling, and other areas of cultural work, has become a
focus of struggle. The new feminism sparked the rewriting of sexist
textbooks and attempts to remove discriminatory material from curricula
and libraries; similar issues have been raised by gay liberation though
with less result. Right-wing politicians attempt the opposite: in 1978,
for instance, the Queensland government banned the use of the MACOS
primary curriculum because it was thought to undermine the sanctity of
the family. Mass-media content has come under fire for sexist
advertising and hostile stereotypes of gays, though media-reform groups
have not had much leverage. In book publishing rather more space has
been gained by feminism. Attempts to gain more space in performance
arts, like the ‘Women and Theatre’ project launched in Sydney in 1980,
have provoked remarkably hostile reactions from some of the men in the
same trades.

The politics of families has a public face. Official campaigns to
increase or to limit the number of children are familiar, with the
Catholic Church’s intransigence on contraception a curious counterpoint
to rising concern with world over-population. Negotiation of the
relations between husbands and wives often ends in the courts for
adjudication of terms of divorce and custody of children. A struggle
also surrounds the courts that do this, from parliamentary conflict over
divorce legislation, and feminist criticism of inadequate enforcement of
maintenance payments, to murderous attacks on family court judges by
embittered husbands. The use of force between family members is now a
public issue, with campaigns on domestic violence, child abuse and
incest. An informal political process has developed around the attempts
within parts of the Left to construct egalitarian households, working
through conflict-ridden issues over child-care, sexual relationships and
property ownership.

The politics of contraception raises the question of control over
sexuality. Some of the bitterest conflicts of the last fifteen years
have concerned abortion, with right-wing mobilizations in defence of the
‘unborn child’. Conservatism desires to confine sexuality to marriage,
though conservatives now divide over whether marital sex should
concentrate on procreation (the Pope) or pleasure (Marabel Morgan). Both
versions are homophobic. The control of men’s homosexuality is a
well-established area of state action, with the front-line police and
courts backed by security agencies, discrimination in employment and
exclusion from schools. Control of erotica and pornography is also well
established. In the 1960s a sudden liberalization occurred in the rich
capitalist countries, marked by the ‘Danish Sex Fairs’ of 1969–70. The
rapid growth of a mass-circulation pornography industry provoked bitter
criticism from some tendencies in feminism for its exploitative content;
some unexpected alliances in the politics of control have emerged in the
United States especially.

Finally, the movements addressing these issues have a politics of their
own presence. Quiet campaigns for legal reform on homosexuality were
transformed into a highly visible Gay Liberation movement in the rich
capitalist countries; these have since changed again in the context of
visible gay ‘communities’. The new feminism was divided early between
liberal and radical currents, with radical feminism in turn dividing
between socialist and cultural feminisms. New concerns with violence,
disarmament and ecology have emerged. There have been internal conflicts
over lesbianism, separatism, Marxism, connections with the state and a
range of other issues. There have been attempts to create a
counter-sexist movement among heterosexual men, which have not been very
successful. Nor have the attempts at permanent mobilization of
right-wing sexual politics. Organizations like the anti-feminist Women
Who Want to be Women remain small; parties like the Call to Australia
movement have minor electoral success. For the most part the churches
and conservative parties provide the organizational framework for
reaction. Their potential strength is shown by the fundamentalist
mobilization in the United States over the last ten years. At the time
of writing a television evangelist is making a strong bid for the
Republican nomination as President in succession to Reagan.

The six fields just sketched involve overt politics, with issues
publicly stated and the course of events readily accessible. This is not
the entire scope of politics by any useful definition. Tacit politics,
where conflicts of interest and power struggles are not publicly
articulated, are equally real though less easily documented. Some
examples have been given: the family and the street in chapter 6 and
workplaces in chapters 5 and 11. The difference between the two kinds of
politics is not just a matter of degree of publicity. It has to do with
the way interests are articulated and political movements formed.

The Articulation of Interests

The crucial moment in the social dynamic of politics is the constitution
of interests. In chapter 6 interests were defined in terms of the
inequalities constructed by gender relations. At that level the
interests are inert, and though they structure practice it is only as
the external conditions of practices which are directed to other ends.
In this sense we might speak of latent interests and demobilised
politics.

When practice is, however, directed to these conditions as its object,
the interest is articulated in a collective project. The most obvious
example is a social movement like gay liberation and women’s liberation.
As proposed in chapter 9 a collective project may also take an
institutionalized form. It may be embodied in the functioning of a
bureaucracy or the structure of a labour market, and may be pursued as a
project by the defence of those institutional arrangements. Broadly the
interests of heterosexual men in sexual politics are articulated in this
way. There is no need for an anti-liberation movement to defend
patriarchy.

The constitution of an interest as a collective project requires
awareness of inequalities and the social oppositions they define. While
that awareness may be aroused by any event – a police raid, a beauty
contest or whatever – to clarify and sustain it requires intellectual
work. In practice much of this is done by specialists, the groups
discussed in chapter 11. Thus intellectuals have often played a
strategic role in the constitution of social interests. The notion of
the ‘organic intellectual’ is best understood in these terms.

The classification of intellectuals suggested in chapter 11 is related
to forms of politics. Much of the interplay between social interests is
what Gramsci called for class relations a ‘war of position’, in contrast
to the ‘war of manoeuvre’. The tacit politics of bureaucracies and
families, for instance, seem constant though the conflicts are real.
Both the repetition and the conflict are acknowledged in the folklore of
the ‘battle of the sexes’ where drunken husbands, wives with
rolling-pins, flirtatious ‘girls’ and dim-witted boyfriends perform
their endless ballet.

In such politics the management function of intellectuals is uppermost.
Priests negotiate the tensions of the village; psychotherapists talk out
the tensions of the urban rich and drug or hospitalize the urban poor;
social planners fine-tune the welfare system to mop up the direst
effects of structural inequality. The interests of dominant groups can
be represented simply by providing rationalizations of the structure as
a whole. Such theory takes a degree of naturalization for granted,
suppresses the question of interests and concerns itself with explaining
deviations. Sex role theory is a classic solution to these requirements,
and can be regarded as an organic ideology of the gender regime in the
modern welfare state.

The contrast with the ‘utopias’ discussed in chapter 11, and the crisis
tendencies underlying them, is obvious. The interests of subordinated
groups are capable of articulation as collective projects which break
the bounds of the existing gender order. This may be only in fantasy, as
in the classic literary Utopias. But the crisis tendencies discussed in
chapter 7 create real conditions for transformative practice. Here the
formation of a collective project involves the articulation of some
group’s interest in a changed gender order, defining a historical
trajectory from deprivation or repression in the present to a future of
equality or liberation.

In this context the function of theorization is uppermost in
intellectual work. Simply to formulate such an interest requires some
mental distance from the current gender order, comparing it with
conceivable alternatives. In theorizing the existing order the conflict
of interest moves to the centre of attention. Categoricalism is an
understandable result, as we see in radical feminism. But categoricalism
creates difficulties with the need to grasp processes of transformation
and the construction of political forces. So even when ascendant this
kind of theory is unlikely to be under challenge or constantly modified
in practice.

The broad contrast just drawn has two major qualifications. First, the
interests of groups advantaged in the gender order may also be
articulated in a transcendent project. A case in point is the contest
for hegemony discussed in chapter 6, the displacement of authoritarian
patriarchy in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries by a masculinity
oriented to technical rationality and institutionalized through
bureaucracy and markets. Among other things this involved the creation
of Utopias – social contract theory and political economy – which
articulated the interests of the ascending groups of men. Another case
is masculinity therapy and the ‘men’s liberation’ movement of the 1970s.
Here transcendence was pursued because the existing gender order was
felt to have become unworkable; the modernization of masculinity was
required as a rescue operation.

The second qualification is that the inert interest defined by existing
patterns of inequality can always be articulated in more than one way,
as the history of ideological conflict shows. For instance, a common
response to crisis tendencies is fear of losing what you already have.
Right-wing sexual politics attempts to articulate women’s interests in
this way, with some success; some of the bitterest opposition to
feminism has come from other women. The ‘threat to the family’ is a
threat to the mother where femininity is defined in relation to
childcare and domestic work and where ‘the family’ is the only sphere in
which women have any power.

These possibilities mean that the pattern of sexual politics cannot be
deduced mechanically from structural analysis. The line-up of political
forces is always a question of how interests have been constituted, and
what alliances are constructed between them. Equal opportunity
programmes in the state, to take one example, developed through an
alliance between technocratically oriented men pursuing efficiency and
professional women pursuing women’s interests as articulated in liberal
feminism.

To make this abstract argument concrete, the following sections examine
two patterns of political practice, one demobilized and the other highly
mobilized. The choice is not arbitrary. I would argue that a combination
between the two groupings discussed here is required for a general
transformation of the relations between women and men; though to make it
happen, both forms of politics would themselves have to change.

Working-class Feminism

  In plain language, both in law and in popular morality, the wife is
  still the inferior in the family to the husband. She is first without
  economic independence, and the law therefore gives the man, whether he
  be good or bad, a terrible power over her. Partly for this reason, and
  partly because all sorts of old half-civilized beliefs still cling to
  the flimsy skirts of our civilization, the beginning and end of the
  working woman’s life and duty is still regarded by many as the care of
  the household, the satisfaction of man’s desires, and the bearing of
  children. We do not say that this is the case in every working-class
  home, or that there are not hundreds of husbands who take a higher
  view of married life and practise it. What we do say is that these
  views are widely held, often unconsciously, and are taken advantage of
  by hundreds of men who arc neither good men nor good husbands and that
  even where there is no deliberate evil or viciousness, these views are
  responsible for the overwork and physical suffering among women and
  for that excessive child-bearing, of which more will be said later.

The author of this remarkable passage, written seventy years ago, was
Margaret Llewelyn Davies, general secretary of the Women’s Co-operative
Guild in England and one of the most effective organizers either
feminism or socialism has known. Here she sketched out both the main
arena of mass sexual politics, the working-class household, and some of
its major issues: economic dependence, ideological subordination and the
physical consequences of oppression.

The inequalities in such a setting are clear enough, and therefore the
inert opposition of interests between women and men. In terms of income,
authority, leisure time, prestige, access to organizations and public
life generally, working-class husbands had privileges to defend. Though
some of the details have changed, in broad terms they still do. This has
never gone without challenge, as is clear from the vivid autobiographies
of women in the co-operative movement collected by Davies and published
in Maternity and Life As We Have Known It. The articulation of this
challenge is the political practice I will call working-class feminism.

Power and inequality within the family are the objects of a widespread,
active, often vehement face-to-face politics. Most of it leaves no
record except in the memories of the participants. It therefore goes
undocumented, except for novels like Glen Tomasetti’s Thoroughly Decent
People and academic family research of the scientifically disreputable
kind that actually listens to people talking about themselves. From one
such study comes the following example. The setting is the working-class
Australian suburb in which the Princes (chapter 1) also live.

  Mrs Markham is very much the central person in her family, the hub of
  discussions and decisions, and emotionally the source of strength for
  others. She has been conscious of prejudice against women for a long
  time. She recalls being ‘bitterly disappointed’ when forced to leave
  school early, and thus miss out on her ambition to become a
  journalist, because her mother could see no point in education for
  women. Mrs Markham is determined that her girls will not repeat her
  frustration, and has pushed them hard at school.

  Elaine Markham, the oldest daughter, has taken over this project,
  internalized it, and become highly competitive at school. With
  success: she is in the ‘A’ class and indeed one of its academic stars.
  Like her mother she is contemptuous of ‘the little housewife’ and of
  her schoolmates who are growing up in that image. Though she will not
  go as far as ‘Women’s Libbists’ burning bras and demonstrating in the
  street, she firmly supports ‘the overall idea of women being equal’.
  But all this has not come easily. She sometimes comes home from school
  in tears from tension and frustration. She talks of the school as a
  ‘dead’ place. She is thinking about leaving early despite her academic
  success.

  The corollary of Mrs Markham’s strength is Mr Markham’s marginality.
  He is a storeman, earning below average wages. He came from a poor
  family, left school at 15, has held a range of jobs. He gets pushed
  around a good deal at work. While antagonistic to unions he is also
  angry at his bosses for not giving him recognition and a better wage.
  He finds their pressure for profit erodes the service his unit can
  give, and offends his pride in workmanship. The work situation, in
  short, constantly erodes his self-esteem. He tried to assert
  patiarchal rights in the family, for instance refusing to take on a
  share of housework when his wife took a job. But the main result was
  that he became increasingly marginal in the household. The women have
  concluded that he has failed as a husband and father. He too, rather
  wistfully, now accepts that opinion of himself.

This is only the barest outline of an intricate situation; even so it is
of interest. In the last few years a whole series of problems about
gender relations have been at issue inside the Markham family: ideas
about the proper place of women in the world, access to new resources
for girls, the division of labour in the household, the authority of
men, the character of masculinity.

These issues are not exactly light-years away from the concerns of
organized feminism. But the Markhams have no contact with that movement.
Their only knowledge of it is the media stereotype of ‘Women’s
Libbists’, with whom neither Elaine nor her mother care to identify.
Their sexual politics is developed out of their own experience.

A politics mostly generated in the family and mostly conducted in the
family is unlikely to make an issue of the family. The low level of
women’s wages, and the lack of collective provision for childcare, make
it extremely difficult for women who do not have the capital to buy a
house nor qualifications that would guarantee a good job – but who
usually do have children to be supported – to survive without a husband
and a husband’s wage. In working-class life, accordingly, the family as
an institution is not very much contested. The questions at issue are
the terms on which family relationships work.

Mrs Markham has a job in a factory, Elaine goes to school; both places
have their own gender regimes and surrounding politics. The workplace is
the second main site of working-class feminism, with the inequalities of
wages, power and conditions already discussed. The assembly-line workers
in the plant studied by Ruth Cavendish respond to these inequalities in
a way which I suspect is very general. They are basically disillusioned
with men, and are familiar with feminist arguments about men’s
unjustified privileges. In the daily struggles about work and conditions
in the factory they systematically support each other against the men
who are their supervisors and managers. Since most of them have a
household to run also, with a sharp sexual division of labour and little
help from their husbands, they are chronically tired and have no
leisure. Both facts make it difficult to organize. Men control the
union, which did little for them in ordinary times and undermined them
when they did go on strike. The union, as in the Melbourne factories
where the Centre for Urban Research and Action interviewed immigrant
women in the study But I Wouldn’t Want my Wife to Work Here, tends to be
seen as part of management.

The general picture is a consciousness of sex inequality developing in
an extremely constricting situation which prevents much expression
beyond a practice of face-to-face solidarity. Within those limits the
consciousness of oppression is vivid and the response active. Other
studies have found comparable responses; Judy Wajcman’s study of a group
of women in Britain who took over their failing factory is particularly
interesting. Not all women workers have such a consciousness. Yet there
is enough evidence to say that this is an important form of articulation
of women’s interests in industrial settings.

There is no platform that lists the demands of working-class feminism.
It is nevertheless possible to formulate in outline the issues around
which these family and industrial politics revolve and the direction of
movement implied.

(1) In relation to the division of labour and gender structuring of
production. In the family: control of the household budget; the search
for an independent wage for women and the right to spend it; sometimes,
more equal sharing of housework. In the workplace: more equal wages
between men and women; ending practices that keep women out of
better-paid or easier jobs.

(2) In relation to the structure of power. In the family: control over
decisions about the children, such as schooling and apprenticeship;
personal independence, notably freedom from put-downs and violence by
husbands or de facto husbands. In the workplace: freedom from arbitrary
authority, such as rough treatment by bosses or headmasters; being heard
by the unions that are supposed to represent women workers.

(3) In relation to cathexis and sexuality. In the family: adequate
contraception, including the right to abortion; control of one’s own
sexuality. (For teenagers, the right to be a sexual being and to be
active in initiating and controlling sexual adventures; for married
women, the right to set terms with husbands or leave unsatisfying
marriages.) In the workplace: freedom from sexual harassmemt.

Cavendish argues that the concerns of her factory workers are very
distant from those of middle-class feminism, and this is a reasonably
common view of the issue. I suspect the difference would have seemed
less if she had been able to study the same women in equal detail in
their families. Overall there seems no obvious reason why this kind of
politics should not be called ‘feminist’. It articulates women’s
interests and involves an extensive critique of the power of men. Its
forms and priorities are certainly different from those of ‘movement’
feminism, especially cultural feminism. It is also happening on a larger
scale.

That is, perhaps, the central paradox of working-class feminism. There
is every reason to think it is very widespread. The same kinds of
struggle bubble up in factories and families in different industries,
different countries, and at different times. But in both families and
factories the structures that generate this politics also localize it.
The result is a vast spectrum of small-scale political processes, each
disconnected from the others. They are known about, through folklore,
tradition and conversation; but they do not easily feed into each other.

There have been attempts to mobilize working-class women in a more
collective and public politics. Their high point was in the early
twentieth century, with movements like the Social Democratic women’s
organizations in Germany, the Women’s Co-operative Guild in Britain, and
women’s organizations connected with the Socialist Party in the United
States. More recently there are events like the Working Women’s Charter
campaign and Women Against Pit Closures in Britain; the involvement of
working-class women in refuges and the radicalization of Labor Women’s
conferences in Australia. Most of these mobilizations have been
connected with organizations constructed and dominated by men – parties,
unions, cooperatives – and have therefore involved a politics of
representation and access from a structurally weak position. The Labor
Women’s conferences, for instance, have no formal power at all; as was
shown in NSW in 1986 when the dominant right-wing faction in the party,
which could not control the women’s conference, simply abolished it. At
the national level 76 per cent of the delegates to the 1984 Labor Party
federal conference were men, and among the major power-brokers there
were no women at all.

To recognize the weakness of mobilizations is not to imply that
working-class feminism has been ineffective. Reading the British
accounts of family life in Round About a Pound a Week, Life As We Have
Known It, and Working-class Wives creates a strong impression of the
distance travelled during the twentieth century. Patriarchal authority
has been rolled back some way. Working-class women have won more space
and more resources. There is a cumulation, however modest each step in
it has been.

Liberation Movements: Birth and Transformation

The articulation of interests in the women’s liberation movement differs
from the articulation in working-class feminism in a number of ways. Its
main feature has been the construction of a collective project whose
theme is the generalization of women’s struggles across different
settings, relationships and areas of life. It arose on a much narrower
social base but achieved an intensity of commitment and degree of
self-consciousness unparalleled in sexual politics.

Much has been made of the ‘middle-class’ character of this movement,
which orthodox marxists commonly lumped with liberalism as ‘bourgeois
feminism’. While there always have been working-class activists in
women’s liberation, its major social base is undeniable. Most of the
early activists were white, tertiary-educated, belonged to a particular
generation, lived in big cities and either came from well-off families
or could expect to get well-paid jobs as teachers, journalists, welfare
workers and the like. The movement has continued to recruit more from
students in higher education than from elsewhere, though there is now a
second generation of activists. Broadly it is a movement of the
intelligentsia, if that is taken to include professions and
semi-professions.

To recognize this base is not to discredit the movement, except on the
crudest view of class interests. Rather it raises questions about the
particular kind of articulation of women’s interests accomplished here,
and the particular circumstances that allowed such a project to emerge.

The first point is the more debated. The account of women’s interests
produced in women’s liberation was for the most part based on
categorical theory. As Hester Eisenstein argues, this easily led to a
‘false universalism’ that assimilated the situations of Third World,
black and working-class women to the situation of affluent whites. This
has changed, at least at the level of movement practice. There have been
attempts to address the concerns of migrant and black women in the rich
countries, and to take a less imperialist view of women’s politics in
the Third World. They remain an amendment rather than a reconstitution
of the movement.

The impulse behind the earliest women’s liberation groups was the
contradiction between the radical democracy professed by the men of the
‘New Left’ and their actual exclusion and exploitation of women. Lynne
Segal convincingly argues that 1960s radicalism was more than a target.
Its critique of the family and its liberal attitudes to sex had helped
emancipate younger women despite the alienated sexuality and frequent
selfishness of radical men. The pursuit of personal freedom and attempts
to build a ‘radical self highlighted questions of emotional
relationships and personality, which were shortly to become central
concerns of women’s liberation consciousness-raising groups. The
contrast between student activism and the workers in Cavendish’s factory
highlights the importance of free time and material resources in
shifting the grounds of sexual politics. The movement has survived on a
material base which working-class feminism does not have: the incomes of
professional women (financing journals, films, conferences, women’s
houses etc.), access to the state for the funding of women’s services,
and the unpaid labour of women without young children.

The work of activists in the first half-dozen years created not only
campaigns against injustices but also a political resource. The
collective project was materialized, and to some extent
institutionalized, in definite ways. First and most important was the
allegiance of some thousands of women in each of the major cities of the
rich capitalist countries. ‘Allegiance’ meant practices like CR groups,
turning out for demonstrations, coming to meetings, reading and
sometimes subscribing to feminist publications. It also meant a loyalty
to the movement. Many participants came to define themselves politically
as feminists before anything else, and to identify closely with the
women who had been through the same campaigns and helped each other
change their lives.

The second dimension of the resource was a network of institutions and
enterprises based on feminist ideas or catering for a feminist
clientele. The listings in the New Woman’s Survival Catalog of 1973 are
a measure of what had been established in the United States in a few
years: feminist publishing houses, art galleries, rock bands, clinics,
schools and courses, rape crisis centres, businesses, legal practices,
women’s centres, newsletters and magazines, theatre companies, and
campaign groups of many kinds. Also growing by the mid-1970s was a
feminist presence in the state, notably in the welfare bureaucracy and
universities, and in political parties and unions.

Third, less tangible but also important, was the growing credibility of
feminist ideas and of the movement as a representative of women’s
interests; credibility both among women outside the movement and among
men. Ideas spread despite the lack of mass organization. Thus Elaine
Markham stated a general principle of sex equality in language
undoubtedly derived from feminism, and the workers in Ruth Cavendish’s
factory did much the same. We were surprised to hear, in schools like
Elaine’s, a considerable number of boys also endorsing the principle of
equality. The funding of feminist refuges, with some difficulties but
not intense resistance, illustrates the credibility acquired with men in
the bureaucracy over an issue like domestic violence.

In a sense feminist theory predicted the creation of this resource:
‘sisterhood is powerful’, women together can make things happen. But
categorical theory assumed it was a resource for women at large and had
little to say about which particular women did or should direct it. In
the mid-1970s several developments made this issue acute. The recession
squeezed state expenditure on welfare and made it progressively harder
to fund feminist welfare and education initiatives. It also led to mass
unemployment among younger women and made it harder to open up new
fields of employment. At the same time right-wing mobilizations
developed against feminism on issues like abortion rights and the
American ERA. Though there are no membership figures it seems likely
that in the second half of the 1970s the women’s liberation movement had
either stopped growing, or at best was expanding much more slowly than
the pace of the early 1970s.

In this context differences of opinion and strategy once easily
accommodated were liable to harden into factional conflict. A struggle
for hegemony developed within feminism whose stake was control of the
political resource that the movement had created. None of the major
tendencies proved strong enough to eliminate the others. In Britain for
instance the result of a deepening series of conflicts, over issues of
sexuality especially, was the shipwreck of the movement’s national
conferences, the last of which was held in 1978. In the first half of
the 1980s the public face of women’s liberation was increasingly
presented by the ‘woman-centred’ ethos of cultural feminism, and by the
political priorities of radical feminism (in the narrower sense) with a
focus on ‘male violence’ as the means of oppression, men’s hostility and
power-seeking as the reason, and separatism as the strategic response.
This strategy capitalized on resources generated within the movement and
the possibility of turning it into a community, at the price of making
the movement less accessible to those outside.

At one level this account reinforces a point already made, that there
can be no single articulation of a structurally defined interest. The
projects of socialist feminism, political lesbianism and so forth, have
common ground but also cut across each other. At another level it shows
the power of structural alignments once they are articulated at all. For
the most remarkable feature of these events is the persistence of the
movement despite sharp internal conflicts, changes of circumstance from
boom to recession, changes of practice with the rise and decline of CR
groups, and an increasingly hostile political environment.

In some ways the political history of gay liberation seems very like
that of women’s liberation. It emerged at much the same time and in the
same metropolitan centres, used similar political tactics and rhetoric,
grew rapidly in the same years, developed and factionalized in the
1970s. It too has been characterized by tension between a socialist wing
and another more concerned to build a self-sustaining community and to
develop gay culture. Like women’s liberation it has had a highly
ambivalent relationship with the state, often attacking it for
anti-homosexual laws, police violence against gays and court
discrimination against lesbian mothers, but also wanting to use it for
antidiscrimination legislation and welfare provision.

In other ways the story is very different. Women’s liberation developed
out of a long history of women’s mobilizations, and has operated as the
radical end of a spectrum of women’s organizations in parties, churches,
charities and so on. While there is a history of homosexual rights
groups going back to the turn of the century, among them Magnus
Hirschfeld’s ‘Scientific Humanitarian Committee’ in Germany, the
Mattachine Society and Daughters of Bilitis in the United States, they
had always been small. Modest successes in gaining toleration, for
instance through the 1958 Wolfenden Report in Britain, were achieved by
alliance with liberals in the establishment, not by mass mobilization of
gays. It was assumed that was impossible because of legal repression and
public hostility. The ‘Stonewall riots’ that launched gay liberation
were sparked by a routine piece of policing by New York’s Finest; only
the response was not routine. Within a very short time the mobilization
undoubtedly had brought into political campaigns more people than all
previous homosexual organizations put together. Gay liberation stood
alone to an extent women’s liberation never did, and at least in its
early days was the only significant articulation of the interest of gay
people.

The second difference is that gay liberation, an articulation of
interest based on the structure of cathexis, was built across the major
divide in gender relations. So far as the interests of women and men
diverge, the movement has an inbuilt tendency to divide. In law reform,
for instance, lesbians are more affected by the operation of marital
law, such as custody issues, and homosexual men more affected by the
criminalization of sexual intercourse. What constitutes them as members
of an oppressed group is in some ways different. There is much more
violence against homosexual men than against lesbians, and male
homosexuality has historically aroused more horror among straights. On
their side lesbians suffer not only the stigmatization of homosexuality
but also the social, psychological and economic penalties attached to
being women. Politicized lesbians often have a stronger commitment to
women’s liberation as a movement than to gay liberation. For the most
part ‘gay politics’ has been gay men’s politics; the 1984 conference of
the Campaign for Homosexual Equality (CHE) in Britain, to take one
example, had five women and fifty men. It is understandable that the
political relationship between lesbians and gay men has been complicated
and often tense.

Third, the relationship between politics and community is different from
that in women’s liberation. To some extent a gay community existed
before gay liberation, in clandestine networks and around beats and gay
bars. The movement brought it into the open and gave it a massive
stimulus. The growth of ‘gay capitalism’ since is familiar. There is
some parallel in the growth of entrepreneurial feminism but the balance
of forces is very different. By the late 1970s the proprietors of gay
businesses had emerged in a number of cities as an alternative
leadership. They articulated the interests of gay people in a very
different way, having themselves a strong interest in the consolidation
of gay identities and none at all in revolutionizing sexuality in the
rest of society. The early gay liberation slogan that ‘every straight
man is a target for gay liberation’ meant nothing in this context except
an invitation to trouble. Dennis Altman points to the tendency to
reconstitute gay politics as an interest group on the model of ethnic
communities, seeking accommodations with the state and other interest
groups.

As this tendency has gathered strength, the socially radical thrust of
gay liberation easily becomes pitted against the trends that are giving
social identity and personal self-confidence to homosexual people in
their ‘private’ lives. Gay liberation increasingly was at risk of losing
the base it had created. This strategic dilemma has not been easily
resolved. The deconstructionist debate already discussed is one
consequence. Another is a turn by political activists to electoral
politics and the local state, with some success in San Francisco, Sydney
and London. Thus gay politics have come by a different route from
feminism to the problem of maintaining a radical presence inside the
state.

Movements for a progressive sexual politics among heterosexual men have
been on a very small scale by comparison. The 1970s talk about ‘men’s
liberation’ has already been mentioned. Most of it was based on a
sex-role perspective on gender that ignored questions of power and
exploitation. The group that holds predominant social power cannot be
‘liberated’ The issues about the reconstruction of masculinity raised by
this beginning were real enough and keep coming back, in feminist
writing as well as men’s. The difficulty of constructing a movement of
men to dismantle hegemonic masculinity is that its logic is not the
articulation of collective interest but the attempt to dismantle that
interest. While there are good reasons to do this, some of which I
listed in the Introduction, the chances of a widespread mobilization on
this basis are slim.

The focus of counter-sexist politics among heterosexual men has
therefore been domestic. I would guess that most energy has gone into
the completely private renegotiation of relationships with feminist
women in the context of individual sexual relationships and households.
There has been little exchange of ideas or experience among the men
involved. The exceptions to this are the ‘men’s groups’, modelled on
feminist CR groups, that still exist, and a degree of networking in the
left-wing community politics discussed above.

NOTES

The Scope of Sexual Politics

(pp. 259–62). On conceptions of politics in the social sciences sec
Mackenzie (1967). There is no general survey of sexual politics in and
around the state; for more specific references see chapter 6. For the
sexual politics of labour markets and workplaces see O’Donnell (1984);
Game and Pringle (1983); Eardley et al. (1980). The sexual politics of
culture is formulated in many specific contexts, e.g., Easlea (1983). On
the concept of the politics of the family see Morgan (1975). The
politics of reproduction is explored in O’Brien (1981) and Sayers
(1982); for erotica and the Sex Fairs see Lauret (1970). On the politics
of movements see below

Working-class Feminism

(pp. 265–71). Quotation from Davies (1978), (pp. 7–8); for the other
British evidence see Reeves (1913) and Rice (1939). The Australian
research discussed in the text should be compared with the American
study by Lillian Rubin (1976); which in turn might be compared with the
political mobilization of working-class women in earlier stages of
American history, e.g., in Dancis (1976).

Liberation Movements

(pp. 270–77). ‘Women’s liberation’ means the radical feminism that
adopted this name at the end of the 1960s, partly to distinguish a
revolutionary perspective from the gradualism and compromises of liberal
feminism, partly to distinguish feminist priorities from those of the
‘male Left’. It embraced tendencies later distinguished as socialist
feminism, cultural feminism, eco-feminism. The term ‘radical feminism’
would be better, but during the 1970s was adopted by a specific tendency
in women’s liberation, particularly separatists, to distinguish their
views from those of socialist feminists. Ellen Willis’s argument that
this narrower usage conceals a retreat from the radicalism of early
women’s liberation has force.

        The best general account of a women’s liberation movement I have
seen is Coote and Campbell (1982); on the early stages in the United
States see Willis (1984); on preconditions, Segal (1983). On the history
of gay liberation see Gay Left Collective (1980) for Britain; D’Emilio
(1983) for the United States; Thompson (1985) for Australia. Figures on
the British CHE conference from Lumsden (1984). On the ‘men’s movement’,
Hanisch (1975) – con.; Bristol Anti-Sexist Men’s Conference (1980) –
pro; Lyttleton (1984) – thoughtfully mixed.

13

Present and Future

The Present Moment

Hegel invented, and Marx made popular, a way of schematizing history in
which there is an origin, a dialectic of necessary stages and a
culmination – the ethical state, the classless society. It is tempting
to schematize the history of gender relations the same way. Thus the
story of primitive matriarchy, disrupted by men who seized power and set
up a patriarchal society, which has now matured a feminist revolution in
its turn. Or the idea that the social subordination of women flowed from
their place in biological reproduction, was therefore technically
necessary while fertility was high, productivity low and life short, and
is now able to be abolished because technological change has freed women
from the need to spend their lives around babies.

In such thinking the present moment is one of culmination, or perhaps
the dark just before the dawn, and previous history was a kind of
preparation for the present. Interim oppressions and injustices may have
been nasty but they were in some sense historically necessary; they
allowed the maturing of the good society in the end. Indeed quite a lot
of nastiness in the present may also be justified to allow the good
society to emerge from the womb of history.

Hegelian thinking is seductive: it gives dignity to present oppressions,
a sense of connectedness to the past and a vision of the future
transfigured. But it is also slightly paranoid. The present we live in
was no more a historically necessary development than any of our
possible futures is. Human practice produced it, not the operation of a
mechanism, whether cosmic, logical or biological. That means that
patriarchy, sexism and sexual oppression have never been necessary.
Every society has been able to abolish it, whatever the level of
technological development; just as class inequality could be abolished
at any stage of history. What is changed by the level of technology is
not the possibility of altering gender relations but the consequences of
doing so. For example sharing childcare between women and men in an
agricultural society without scientific medicine means a different set
of arrangements from shared childcare in modern low-fertility cities.

So we live in a world shaped by the collective failure of our forebears
to abolish gender inequalities. The corollary is that our children may
also live in such a world. An end of gender inequality is by no means
inevitable now. This has been seen by some feminist critics of the idea
of revolution by bottle-babies, the idea that technologizing
reproduction will liberate women from the imperatives of the body and
social subordination, or will end the oppression of homosexuals by
abolishing distinctions of sex. There is no guarantee that the new
technology of reproduction will be under women’s control, or under any
kind of democratic influence at all. Indeed there is reason to expect
the opposite, given the current rapid development of genetic engineering
by big business and the state, and techniques like in vitro
fertilization by technocratic medical specialists. Our future could be
one of rejuvenated high-technology patriarchy.

The present moment, then, is not a culmination but a point of choice.
The purpose of analysis is to understand better the structure of the
choice and the collective projects that are feasible responses to it.

The emergence of women’s liberation and gay liberation reflect crisis
tendencies of a general kind, and are historically novel in the depth of
their critique of the gender order and the scope of the transformation
they propose. This surge in the pace and depth of sexual politics and
the power of theory opens the possibility of conscious social and
personal transformation in a degree unthinkable before. Yet the
liberation movements have nothing like the social power needed to push
this transformation through, except in limited milieux. And in some
respects their internal evolution has led them away from the project of
general structural reform, to focus on problems of survival rather than
on the fault-lines marking general crisis tendencies.

Other components of a larger transformative project, notably
working-class feminism and counter-sexist politics among heterosexual
men, exist in a dispersed state. The hegemony of an authoritative
masculinity, guaranteed by science if not religion, has been disrupted.
But the weakened integration of the gender order has led to a
fragmentation of opposition as well. In the absence of a unifying
practice this fragmentation could increase.

If some combination of social forces around a progressive programme were
achieved, contemporary social and physical technologies would allow a
collective choice of the following kind, at least in the richer
capitalist and Soviet-bloc countries. Childbearing can be made a fairly
short episode in any woman’s life, and can be made socially equivalent
to conception, pregnancy-support and infant care in men’s lives. We have
the knowledge and resources to share childcare and domestic work among
adults to any extent desired in a balance between efficiency and
privacy. Large numbers of men and women can choose to be childless
without any danger of depopulation; a free choice of forms of cathexis
becomes a general possibility. No average physical or psychological
difference between the sexes has the slightest bearing on the efficiency
of production in an age of numerically controlled machine tools,
automatic data-processing and mechanized agriculture. Thus there is no
economic sacrifice in a total abolition of the sexual division of
labour. Hegemonic masculinity is no collective asset in a struggle for
survival, in fact it is now a general menace. The social hierarchy of
masculinities can be abandoned, and with it the definition of an
emphasized femininity.

The situation in the rest of the world is different, and there is no
reason to expect that Western patterns of gender relations must provide
their model. I know so little about Third World situations that I
hesitate to say anything about feasible futures. But one thing is clear,
that the world has become an interconnected social order and this is
true of the dynamic of gender as well as other structures. Global
reconstructions of the sexual division of labour show this already. It
is not impossible that low-technology methods of equalizing gender
relations could emerge mainly from the poor countries. Such a
development could be powerfully reinforced by a transfer of resources
made possible by the pacification of gender relations in the rich
countries.

Strategies

If this is a practicable world, what are practicable ways of getting
there? The recent history of sexual politics offers two general
strategies, which might be called intensive and extensive.

I have mentioned the attempts to construct, in the social networks
involved in radical politics over the last two decades, households and
sexual relationships based on thoroughgoing equality. This involves,
first, finding ways of equalizing economic resources and decision-making
power. This is often difficult in a mixed household given men’s greater
earning capacity in a gender-structured labour market. Sometimes the
best that can be achieved is some guarantee of an economic ‘floor’ for
women, for instance by having property in a wife’s name rather than a
husband’s. Second, it involves the reorganization of relations between
children and adults, in the teeth of a vast array of institutional and
cultural arrangements that presuppose all early childcare is done by
women. Third, it involves a reworking of sexual character and sexuality,
on the run and often in the context of attachments to third parties and
terrible doubts about loyalty and personal worth. The process sometimes
feels like tearing out one’s hair, clump by clump, with a badly adjusted
mechanical harvester. It is no wonder that a good many people have
abandoned the attempt and that those who stick with it can be reluctant
to talk about it. It is perhaps important to make the experience more
public and cumulative. It is also important to find ways of expressing
its positive side: the generation of energy, the joys of being with
children, the pleasures of love between equals.

The attempt to create ‘liberated zones’, as this kind of practice is
sometimes called, may literally mean a physical space. A common demand
of feminist groups in institutions has been a room for women. Refuges,
rape crisis centres and women’s centres have often operated on the
principle of keeping all men out. More generally, however, a liberated
zone is a social ‘space’, a particular institution or part of one, a
network of relationships or simply a group of people, where a degree of
sex equality has been achieved, heterosexism eliminated, or
counter-sexist practice sustained.

The problems of sustaining such a ‘zone’ have something in common with
the problems of other enclaves. They require a constant expenditure of
energy to keep up. When it is a question of a radical departure from
common social practice, as a serious effort at sex equality is, the
energy level required is fairly high. People get tired of constant
meetings, monitoring and mutual criticism. Egalitarian practices
constantly confront hierarchical intrusions from outside the zone. An
example is the radical health collective whose one qualified doctor is
treated by the funding authorities, and many of the patients, as the
head of a conventional medical practice. Such matters can be worked on,
but at a further cost in energy, time and friction. Trade-offs have to
be made, things let slide. One of the things most often let slide is the
cleaning; liberated zones tend to be grubby.

Offsetting these costs are three kinds of gains. Bases are established
for politics of wider scope. Marches and rallies, for instance, do not
just happen; there have to be people who call them, people who get on
the phone and spread the word, people who paint banners and provide
places to store them. Next, liberated zones can generate energy by
giving a taste of the social world to come, what Sheila Rowbotham called
‘prefigurative’ politics in Beyond the Fragments. The sisterhood of
feminist activists, the solidarity generated in gay liberation
campaigns, the sense of sharing in collective households, are real
experiences and do matter in showing that the goals are practical ones.

Finally there is the personal dimension. Radical politics often
presuppose superhuman energy and result in burnout, or presuppose
superhuman virtue and result in disillusion. Critics of feminism rejoice
in claiming that feminists with power behave as crassly as patriarchal
men; and of course some do. Likewise some gay liberationists are
self-interested or insensitive, and some anti-sexist heterosexual men
fail dismally to love vegetables and babies. A relatively liberated zone
provides some chance of working on these issues, taking up the politics
of personality outlined in chapter 10. It may also provide an essential
kind of support. The main resource of radical politics is its activists.
Political practice can be personally demanding, wearing and damaging to
a high degree. Daily confrontation with sexist business men or
bureaucrats is no life for the thin-skinned. It matters to find ways of
conserving the human resources and repairing damage.

This issue is common to all radicalism, but sexual politics has a unique
personal dimension. Breaking down the gender system means, to some
extent, tearing down what is most constitutive of one’s own emotions,
and occupying strange and ill-explained places in social space. The
oldest jibe against feminists is that they are trying to turn women into
men and men into women. In one sense this is right; reform of the
division of labour must mean women doing things conventionally thought
masculine. Yet ‘role-reversal’ of the kind often advocated in the early
seventies has proved inadequate as a strategy. Feminism has attempted,
not just for tactical reasons, to hold on to qualities and practices
traditionally thought feminine too. Thus the movement has found itself
weaving across the conventional gender boundaries of sexual character
and the division of labour, and to the extent that bisexuality has
commended itself as a sexual practice, across the boundaries of the
structure of cathexis too.

To some theorists the occupation of what might be called ‘border
country’ has seemed a basic strategy. Fernbach and Mieli both insist on
the gender ambiguities of gayness. Chodorow and Dinnerstein derive
psychoanalytic arguments for the importance of men taking an equal part
in early childcare. The counter-sexist men’s movement, at least its more
radical wing, sought to purge masculinity of its connection with
hierarchy and easily tipped towards ‘effeminism’, attaching a male
tail-end to radical feminism.

‘Border’ like ‘zone’ is a spatial metaphor and perhaps too rigid for a
dynamic process. The point may be better made by saying that practice on
many questions of sexual politics requires living in and through
contradictions about gender. Sometimes it is necessary to intensify the
contradiction rather than try to resolve it. The problem with the
‘androgyny’ model discussed in chapter 8 is not with the idea that
feminine and masculine qualities can be combined in the same person, a
helpful if not wholly new insight. It is with the idea that combining
them somehow resolves the tension between them. It may do just the
reverse.

The domestic politics of the Left, the partly ‘liberated zone’ sketched
above, has another strategic significance. The attempt to create
egalitarian households and a non-sexist environment for children to grow
up in is the only form of progressive sexual politics in which
significant numbers of heterosexual men have become involved in a
continuing and active way. It is therefore something of a laboratory for
the possibility of alliance between groups normally divided by sexual
politics.

Gay liberation is another. The tensions between women and men in
homosexual politics mentioned in chapter 12 are real and continuing.
Given these pressures the continued existence of the movement over
fifteen years of fluctuating fortunes is a considerable achievement. Its
experience of discussion and compromise, joint and parallel action and
collective celebration is perhaps the most sophisticated practice of
cooperation between women and men that has yet been developed in the
radical reconstruction of gender relations.

These two cases raise the more general strategy of alliance, the
‘extensive’ side of sexual politics. Many, perhaps most, of the
campaigns waged by feminists and gay activists have involved acting in
alliance with people outside their ranks. Numbers, access, money or
technical skills may be needed from outside. Movement rhetoric usually
ignores this, stressing opposition from the rest of the world and
attributing all gains to women’s or gays’ own determination and
strength. The political reasons for talking this way are obvious enough;
but the habit does make it difficult to discuss what is actually going
on in sexual politics, and often creates an impression that alliance or
support is not wanted.

Homosexual law reform, as one example, involves lobbying ministers and
members of parliament, working on party platform committees, discussions
with police, liaison with civil liberties groups, detail work with
sympathetic lawyers, academics and journalists. Most of them are not gay
or are not admitting it. As another example, setting up women’s studies
courses in universities involves working with curriculum committees,
getting support from authorities who have money or staff to allocate,
co-operation from other teaching staff in the reallocation of labour,
organizing rooms, furniture, equipment, secretarial help, library
facilities and so on. Most of this requires the co-operation and labour
of people who are not feminists, a good many of them not even women.

These alliances are usually temporary affairs. The public side of sexual
politics in the last two decades has mainly been a patchwork of
campaigns. Local movements and alliances developed around particular
issues: setting up a health centre here, demonstrating on Anzac Day
there, organizing a lobbying day at Parliament House and so on. Each
grouping was liable to disband as soon as some resolution of the
particular matter was reached. There have been attempts to set up
permanent formal organizations, the National Organisation of Women in
the United States and the Campaign for Homosexual Equality in Britain
among the most successful. Both of these have provided a framework for
alliance in the context of pressure-group politics, for law reform and
like purposes. Across the wider spectrum of sexual politics, however,
permanent organization has been uncharacteristic. The continuity of
women’s liberation and gay liberation, considerable in both cases, is
due to overlapping membership of many different campaigns and networks
and to endless internal talk rather than to formal structures.

In the liberal capitalist countries this kind of politics could continue
indefinitely. There is enough tolerance and enough intermittent support.
It will sustain a feminist and gay political presence at the level of
pressure-group politics. But to pursue the project of transforming the
gender order something more formidable is required. This is a question
of putting together radical majorities in sexual politics, and keeping
them together for considerable periods of time.

This is an old aspiration, though it is one from which leading
tendencies in both gay and feminist politics have now retreated.
Majorities matter, if the process of social change is to come under
conscious human control. On the argument of this book, structures cannot
be levered into new shapes without mutations of grassroots practice. But
majorities do not fall from heaven. They have to be constructed; and if
they are to be constructed against the ruling powers, around a radical
program of equality, then we need a clear understanding of the social
dynamic that might make it possible.

The crisis tendencies discussed in chapter 7, which make radical
majorities conceivable, also give some leverage on the main structural
obstacle. The lion in the path is the calculus of interests. In a gender
order where men are advantaged and women are disadvantaged, major
structural reform is, on the face of it, against men’s interests. Even
subordinated masculinities share to some degree in this advantage – as
Mike Broker puts it, ‘I may be a queer, but at least I am a man’. With
the considerable number of women who gain wealth, prestige or other
advantage through their marriages or kin relationships, or through
applying an emphasized femininity, there would seem to be a permanent
majority for patriarchy.

For two reasons this calculation is not conclusive. First, ‘interests’
are relational as well as egocentric. A father, for instance, has an
interest defined by the advantages of men, but also has an interest in
the welfare of his children, and half of all children are girls. The
practices that articulate interest may be organized around these
relationships rather than around the gender category. The crisis of the
sexual division of labour in childcare invites this. Second, even
egocentric interests are liable to be ambiguous or divided. The ‘men’s
movement’ literature was wrong in thinking men had the same interest in
liberation as women but was right in pointing to tensions, costs and
unease with hegemonic masculinity as a fairly widespread experience. The
crisis tendencies in structures of power and cathexis are likely to
increase such internal divisions of interest.

Whether the gender order’s tendencies towards crisis have gone far
enough to provide a basis for majorities committed to major structural
reform, is perhaps the key strategic question radical politics now
faces. It involves, in some sense, a combination of intensive and
extensive strategies; the former to define directions and feasibility,
the latter to provide the muscle. That kind of combination has not so
far been realized. Tendencies towards it seem stronger in relation to
the sexual division of labour than elsewhere: one thinks of the
breakdown of the ‘family wage’ concept, the crisis of childcare and
changing views about fathering, the inability of the liberal politics of
equal opportunity to deal with mass youth unemployment. Yet the main
energies of movement radicalism are focused elsewhere. If radical
majorities are to materialize it is not just a matter of the masses
flocking to the banners already embroidered and raised. Some painful
reorientations of present radicalism will also have to happen.

Concluding Notes on the World to which a Social Theory of Gender Might Lead

For the ultimate goal of the transformation of gender relations there
are two logical candidates. One is the abolition of gender, the other
its reconstitution on new bases.

Along the first track some bold spirits have proposed the abolition of
sexual reproduction. David Fernbach, in a recent and sophisticated
version of this argument, goes so far as to suggest that this
transcendence of internal nature, modernizing our ‘palaeolithic’ system
of reproduction, would be the equivalent of the human transcendence of
external nature. Apart from the doubtful politics of reproductive
technology already discussed, this vision is based – like the
celebration of ‘woman and nature’ that is its mirror-opposite – on a
misunderstanding of how the social world of gender is constructed. The
gender order is not and never has been immanent in biology. Rather it
represents a particular historical response to human reproductive
biology. It is possible to make other collective responses. Attempting
to abolish biological sex is certainly one among them. But this would
not be a liberating transcendence of nature, because our existing gender
order is not given in nature. It would be a collective mutilation, that
would certainly reduce the diversity of human experience and very
possibly reinforce existing structures of power.

If the abolition of gender is a worthwhile goal, then, it must be the
abolition of gender as a social structure that is at issue. As defined
in chapter 6 gender is ultimately the linking of fields of social
practice to the reproductive division, the creation of a relevance. Its
abolition would be, logically, a matter of disconnecting those fields.
This implies no denigration or denial of biological difference; equally
no celebration of it. Difference between sexes would be simply a
complementarity of function in reproduction, not a cosmic division or a
social fate. There would be no reason for this to structure emotional
relationships, so the categories heterosexual and homosexual would
become insignificant. There would be no reason for it to structure
character, so femininity and masculinity would depart.

Such a future is implied in the deconstructionist wing of gay liberation
theory, and as an ultimate goal is more convincing than as an immediate
strategy. Its great virtue is that it eliminates the basis for gender
inequalities. The way biological difference and similarity have got
incorporated into structures of social inequality creates our dilemmas
about ‘nature’, not nature itself. Inequality is the basis of the social
constitution of interests, which generate the practices that
institutionalize injustices, the politics that defend them, the
ideologies that justify them. The concept of liberation is not about
freedom, in the sense of lack of constraint on personal behaviour, so
much as about equality.

That is easy to say, but as many details canvassed in this book show,
more than a little difficult to achieve, even in narrow settings.
Equality is an absolute concept. It allows of no qualifications however
well intentioned. Equality would be wholly unrealistic as a criterion
for practice if it required complete equality to be an immediately
achievable state. The arguments on the stability of personality
traversed in Part III are sufficient to demolish any idea of general
deconstruction as an immediate option. A strong concept of equality can,
however, be a practical criterion without being compromised, if it is
taken as a direction of movement which is never given up. That is, the
equality criterion of all practices is that they produce more equality
than the conditions they started from, with no intention of stopping at
the conditions produced. In that sense deconstructing gender is a
feasible ethical programme. The criterion of political practice becomes
the disconnection of some further area of social practice from the
reproduction complex.

The standard argument against the abolition of gender, like the
traditional argument against the abolition of class, is that it would
result in sameness. Without sex difference we must have grey uniformity
– we will all wear boiler suits and have hair just covering the ears.
The claim is perhaps effective as rhetoric, but as analysis it is simply
misconceived. The logical consequence of deconstruction is open-ended
variety. Marcuse’s discussion of ‘polymorphous perversity’ in Eros and
Civilization is not a bad summary of this conception, though with rules
dismantled nothing can be defined as normative and hence nothing as
‘perverse’. Polymorphous eroticism, perhaps; and also polymorphous
labour and polymorphous structures of decision-making.

The cost of the abolition of gender, then, is not sameness, but the loss
of certain kinds of structure. A judgement of this conception of
liberation turns on whether gender structures have any value. What would
be our loss if they went down the gurgle-hole of history?

It has to be said that a great deal of our culture’s energy and beauty,
as well as its barbarism, has been created through and around gender
relations. A gender-structured culture, and quite specifically sexist
sensibilities, have given us Othello, the Ring of the Nibelung and
Rubens portraits, to go no further. Much of the fine texture of everyday
life, from the feel of our own bodies, through the lore of running a
household, to popular songs and everyday humour, are predicated on
gender. Our eroticism and our imagination seem to be both limited and
fuelled by gender. To discard the whole pattern does seem to imply a way
of life that would be seriously impoverished by comparison with the one
we know. At best it would be so different from the world of our
experience that we can hardly know whether it would be desirable or not.

Yet the constraints that produce this experience, this richness of
culture, also produce the massive inequalities, bitter oppressions,
violence and potential disaster that are the reasons for the critiques
of gender discussed in this book. This raises the question whether the
cultural energy can be disconnected from the structure of inequality,
gender not abolished but reconstituted in unmurderous forms.

This implies restructuring rather than destructuring. It presupposes
that the elements of gender orders can be reshuffled in some sense. The
historical argument of Part II certainly supports this idea, though how
far it can be pushed remains open. It implies a process at the
collective level like what Piaget calls ‘assimilation’ in the psychology
of intelligence, in which the existing materials of a sexist culture are
taken up and made over to new purposes. A clear example on a small scale
is the appropriation of punk styles by girls mentioned in chapter 6.
Piaget defines play as almost pure assimilation, and it might be said
that what is involved is a qualitative growth of our collective ability
to play.

Playing with gender is not unknown at present. Elements of sexual
character, gender practice or sexual ideology are often disconnected and
recombined for enjoyment, erotic tension, subversion or convenience.
Such games are most developed, perhaps, in sexual subcultures. Peter
Ackroyd argues a historical connection between drag and the subversion
of everyday custom in ‘carnival’. Pat Califia describes how lesbian
sado-masochism disconnects power from masculinity for erotic purposes.
The erotica of fetishism – rubber, leather and others – systematically
ring the changes on gender symbols and relationships. But the same kind
of thing happens in less exotic contexts. Mass fashion began playing
with gender recombination in the 1930s, and more vigorously in the
‘unisex’ styles of the 1960s. Gender ambiguity has been a theme of rock
music presentation from David Bowie and the New York Dolls to Grace
Jones and Boy George. In a different vein, the Soviets’ creation of
women cosmonauts as media figures is also a game with
femininity/masculinity and the sexual division of labour, played for
political effect.

However the implication of restructuring is more than the reshuffling of
existing practices and symbols, more than the turning of a kaleidoscope;
and the ‘game’ analogy only goes so far. When the relations between
cultural elements change, new conditions for practice are created and
new patterns of practice become possible. Deconstruction implies that
the biology of sex would become a minimal presence in social life, a
kind of sexual cuisine minceur. The restructuring conception would admit
a cultural elaboration of difference and similarity in reproduction,
though with the weight of power, divisions of labour and rules about
cathexis lifted off it. The culture could attend to, and celebrate, the
nuances and variations of conception, gestation, birth and suckling,
growth and ageing.

More, it would be possible to explore and invent many different ways for
people to become involved in the process. We have for the most part
stuck at two sexes. But early gay theory conceived of a ‘third sex’, and
Olaf Stapledon, in one of the first classics of science fiction,
imagined human species in the far future with multiple sexes or
sub-sexes. These were imagined as biological types; the real
possibilities are social. While the ‘third sex’ concept is obsolete, it
would be quite possible for gay women and men who do not have children
of their own to be routinely involved in the raising of children. This
would construct specific patterns of relationship between children and
adults, able to complement and enrich the relationships constructed by
heterosexual adults. Gary Dowsett points to historical examples of
relationships between young children and adults who are not their
parents, such as aunts and uncles in the nineteenth-century bourgeois
family, as models that could be revived and given new meanings. The
symbolic participation of men in birth through the ‘couvade’ is another
historical experience that could be given a new meaning. If the
inequalities of the sexual division of labour are to be dismantled, men
must obviously take up much of the domestic work created by pregnancy,
birth and early childcare. The somewhat fragile industrial concept of
‘paternity leave’ is a small beginning with a shift that needs to be
given a much stronger social definition.

What would be lost in the restructuring conception of liberation is the
necessary connection of the elements of gender relations to
institutionalized inequality on one side and biological difference on
the other. The depth of this change should not be underestimated. It
would be a fundamental departure from a key condition of our present
culture, which might be summarized as the sense that gender is fatality.

At present this sense runs through every area of gender practice,
penetrating imagination and action alike. The naturalization of gender
is the basic mechanism of sexual ideology. A leaden fatality invests the
division of labour: ‘woman’s work’, ‘a man’s responsibilities’. A
sharper-edged fatality of cathexis is central to Western culture’s
treatment of the theme of love, from the Medea to Casablanca. A sense of
the psychological fatality of gender is expressed in the doctrine of
sexual character.

Given this, a society that eliminated sex inequality by the
recomposition of gender must have a different structure of feeling. Much
of the cultural inheritance will then only be recoverable as history, by
a shift back into alien frames of thought. Not wholly alien, of course;
there will still be love, hatred, jealousy and divided loyalties to keep
life interesting. But they will be experienced as relationships between
personal projects rather than as fatality. This may mean they have less
cultural power. The sense of fatality is not a passive consciousness but
a lever on experience and action, a generator (to change the metaphor)
of tragedy and exhilaration. If it narrows the world it also makes parts
of it more intense.

At that cost, a recomposed human society will gain a degree of practical
equality never yet achieved, and an enormous enrichment of its cultural
resources. This enrichment is worth spelling out. First there are more
players in the game. The ‘equal opportunity’ argument that sex
discrimination wastes human resources is, with all its limitations,
correct – and can be extended far beyond the issue of employment.
Second, the free reworking of gender relations which are at present
strongly constrained, and psychological and cultural patterns at present
strongly stylized, geometrically increases the possibilities of
experience and invention. Hermaphroditism or androgyny is hardly even a
beginning. Third, and perhaps most important, the emotional dimensions
of life that are opened up for exploration in a sexually equal society
are more complex than those of our own society because of the greater
possibilities of creation and diversity. Love between equals is no less
passionate than love under the star of gender inequality. It will be
differently passionate as the business of protection and dependence is
dispensed with. These themes in relationships will perhaps be replaced
by the excitement of the unknown and unpredictable, and of constructing
futures that are genuinely without preordained limits. Love will also
have new difficulties, such as problems of constructing new forms of
reciprocity and of balancing commitment with personal invention.

These possibilities, though argued here on the basis of change in the
structure of gender relations, have other presuppositions. Notably they
presuppose a move towards a society free of class and racial
inequalities, and a world free of imperialism and the obscene
inequalities of global living standards that we have today.

The analysis in this book rejects both the idea that gender is the basic
oppression from which these others spring, so sexual politics must take
priority, and the idea that gender inequalities are secondary, so sexual
politics can be sidelined while the main event proceeds. The main event,
the historic struggle for human equality which is now also a struggle
for human survival, is a complex of these constituents. Global
inequality is a composed structure in the sense of my argument about
gender, on a larger scale again.

This implies that the constituents react on each other. It is therefore
not possible to accept the arguments, which seem increasingly popular
with radical intellectuals, that fragment radical politics into a
plurality of struggles in different sites with no systematic connection
to each other. These arguments reflect a well-justified discontent with
attempts, for instance by orthodox Marxism, to hegemonize other groups,
campaigns and social struggles. But they leave us with no way of making
rational choices of strategy based on concepts like crisis tendencies.
Movements for social change need strategies if their priorities are not
to be set for them by the opposition.

It is possible to imagine a society with sex equality in which other
kinds of inequality are far from dead. One thinks of the guardians in
Plato’s Republic, or the aristocracy and bureaucracy of Ursula LeGuin’s
The Left Hand of Darkness. Conversely there are socialist Utopias with a
highly conventional idea of the naturalness of sexual character, like
Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward. The connection between structures of
inequality is not a logical connection: theorists who have assumed that
have been seduced by another kind of Hegelianism. The connection is
empirical and practical. As a matter of fact, the core institutions of
the contemporary structure of gender power cannot be torn down without a
class politics, because those institutions fuse gender and class
domination. As a matter of practice, equality is difficult to contain;
the origins of modern feminist radicalism in the New Left show that. The
historic association between socialism and feminism, however tense and
ragged it has been, expresses a basic truth about the global structure
of inequality and what social forces might dismantle it. For all its
resistances the British Trades Union Congress did march in support of
women’s abortion rights; the Confederation of British Industry did not.

There are other conceivable futures that are a great deal less
attractive. Margaret Atwood’s novel about a repressive future, The
Handmaid’s Tale, is a satire but not wildly implausible. A recomposition
of gender might well be undertaken as part of an authoritarian politics;
the current development of birth technology points in that direction. A
recomposition of gender that realizes the possibilities I have
discussed, constructing an egalitarian form of life, is only a
historical possibility and not a necessary future. If it is to happen
then its practice, the projects in which we undertake recomposition,
must be part of a politics that addresses oppression in all its forms,
that sets no limit to the principle of human equality. In undertaking
that we would be shifting the internal limits to our collective ability
to shape a future that is physically and environmentally safe, rich in
experience and historically open.

