* Tan ae
The Archaeological Process




                             CARNEGIE
                             LIBRARY OF
                             PITTSBURGH
lo
                        Social Sciences Department
                                                 DEMCO
To Kyle and Nicky
The Archaeological Process
An Introduction
lan Hodder




                                 es    =




                                   HEC
                                   fTGG:




fy  BLACKWELL
meee Pp blue hete cs

                         ‘Social sca
                                          GH
              ARNEGIE LIBRARY OF PITTSBUR
Copyright © Ian Hodder 1999

The right of Ian Hodder to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

First published 1999

ZAIG 8 TOMOKO) Syl

Blackwell Publishers Ltd
108 Cowley Road
Oxford OX4      1 JF
UK

Blackwell Publishers Inc.
350 Main Street
Malden, Massachusetts 02148
USA

All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of criticism and
review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without the prior permission of the publisher.

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent
purchaser.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hodder, Jan.
     The archaeological process: an introduction / Ian Hodder.
         p. cm.
     Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
     ISBN 0-631-19884-9 (hb: alk. paper)—ISBN 0-631—19885-7             (pbk. : alk. paper)
      1. Archaeology—Methodology.       2. Archaeology—Philosophy.
  I. Title.
  CC75.H56       1999
  930.1/028—de21                                                                 98-24008
                                                                                     CIP
Commissioning Editor: Tessa Harvey
Desk Editor: Tony Grahame

Typeset in Baskerville on 11/13 pt
by PureTech India Ltd, Pondicherry
http://www.puretech.com
Printed in Great Britain by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall

This book is printed on acid-free paper
Contents




List of Illustrations
Preface: Digging Outside the Shelter
Acknowledgements

   Crises in Global Archaeology
   One archaeology or many?
   What is the ‘object’ of archaeology?
   What ts the archaeological ‘object’?
   Conclusion

   Archaeology - Bridging Humanity and Science
   The contribution ofphilosophy
   Conclusion

   How Do Archaeologists Reason?
   Conclusion

   Interpreting Material Culture
   Conclusion

   Towards a Reflexive Method
   Archaeological data
   Interpretation at the trowel’s edge
vi   CONTENTS

      Recurswe archaeology                                                  98
      Conclusion                                                            99

      The Natural Sciences in Archaeology                                  105
      Conclusion                                                           116

      Using the New Information Technologies                               117
      Conclusion                                                           L227

      Windows into Deep Time: Towards a
      Multiscalar Approach                                                 129
      The archaeology ofpractice in British prehistory                     132
      The Ice Man                                                          138
      Conclusion                                                           146

      Archaeology and Globalism                                            148
      The modern and the post-modern in ‘heritage’                         161i
      Global processes versus local heritage: the example of Catalhéyiik   165
      Cultural and archaeological resource management                      170
      Other implications of dwersity in archaeology                        173
      Conclusion                                                           176

      Can the New Digital Technologies Deliver a Reflexive
      Methodology?                                                         178
      The spatio-temporalization of archaeology                            178
      Theory and technology: a benign view                                 180
      Theory and technology: a critical response                           185
      Conclusion                                                           187

      Conclusion: Towards Non-Dichotomous
      Thinking in Archaeology                                              188
      A method with flows                                                  193
      Global information flows                                             200
      Mapping global heritage                                              202
      Mapping global archaeology                                           205
      Conclusion: going with the flow                                      208

Bibliography                                                               210
Index                                                                      227
Illustrations




Figures

11    David Clarke’s (1968) general model for archaeological
      procedure, described as ‘for the organisation and relation
      of archaeological activities within a disciplined procedure’
      (ibid., 36).
=     The ditch sections (A to P) excavated in different years at the
      Haddenham causewayed enclosure.                                   34

a4    Lengths of the Haddenham enclosure ditch segments in
      relation to nature of deposits, numbers of finds and recuts.      38

3:0   The hermeneutic spiral and the Haddenham causewayed
      enclosure.                                                        39

ook   Plan of Building    | in the North area of excavation        at
      Catalhoyiik East.                                                 at

i     Section (profile) showing relationships between Wall C and
      floors B in Building | (see figure 3.4).                          42

3.6   Cross-sections (profiles) through Haddenham long barrow,
      and two interpretations (A and B) of the sequence of events.      o4
Vii   ILLUSTRATIONS

Sel    The supposed separation of theory and data in archaeology
       (compare figure 5.2).                                           81

m2     The relation between data and theory in archaeology.            84

550    One of many possible hierarchies of relationship between
       objects (lower level categories) and contexts (higher level
       categories).                                                    85

a      A simplified example of the fluid relations between objects
       and contexts in archaeology.                                    87

D0     Circulating knowledge at the trowel’s edge at Gatalhoyiik.
       Those discussing the interpretation of a layer in Building 2
       include the excavator (in trench), excavators from other
       parts of the site, archaeobotanists, micromorphologist, fau-
       nal specialist, lithic specialist, and a member of the video
       documentation crew.                                             98

5.6    The linear process used by the Museum of London once a
       context (deposit or locus) has been identified during an
       excavation (right), and the record sheet used (below)
       (Renfrew and Bahn 1996, 106).                                   100

Dif    A recursive excavation process.                                 102

6.1    The illustration used by Harris (1989) to show how the
       stratigraphic sequence of a site may be gradually con-
       structed from all the stratigraphic evidence. A stratigraphic
       sequence is made from each side of a trench (A, B, C, D)
       and then combined to form the overall sequence.                 109

6.2    Electro-magnetic radiation wavelengths utilized by techni-
       ques commonly applied to archaeological sediment context
       recording, micro-analysis and site geoprospection (Barham
       [9951 48):                                                      110

TA     Video documentation taking place at Catalhéyiik and an
       example of the digitized database entry.                        122

dae    Still from a Catalhoyiik CD-Rom. In the upper picture the
       user Can use a mouse to move around a Virtual Reality
                                                         ILLUSTRATIONS _ ix

        model of a Neolithic building. By clicking the mouse on
        features such as the bulls’ horns, original photographs from
        the database appear below to allow comparison between
        the virtual model and the archaeological evidence.             125

 8.1    The discovery of an ‘ice man’ trapped in a glacier in the
        Otzaler Alps on the Austrian-Italian border. The 5300
        year old body was discovered by hikers, in September
        1991. Photo: Popperfoto/Reuter.                                139

 8.2    Long-term processes in which the Ice Man’s life was
        embedded. (a) Sherratt’s (1982) model for population move-
        ment into lowland areas and gradual expansion into upland
        areas, followed by interaction and exchange between
        upland and lowland. This process happens at different
        times between the 6th and 4th millennia in different parts
        of Europe. (b) Sherratt’s (1993, 16) overall chronology for
        the spread of various characteristics including Secondary
        Products and individual burial with daggers and battle axes
        (Corded Ware and Bell Beaker) in Europe. The relative
        position of the Ice Man at a major transition is marked by
        a triangle. (c) The overall shift from domus to agrios in
        European prehistory (Hodder 1990, 96). ‘The central loca-
        tion of the Ice Man is again marked by a triangle.          ae o

 9.1    The linear process of archaeological project assessment as
        suggested by English Heritage (Adams and Brooke 1995,
        O 7).                                                          172

        The conflicting components of globalism.                       201

        The conflicting components of global heritage.                 204

        The conflicting components of global archaeology.              207


Table

 6.1    Preliminary guide to microstratigraphic attributes diagnos-
        tic of different types of uses of space within buildings at
        Catalhéyiik (Matthews et al. 1996).                            113
Preface: Digging Outside the Shelter




Archaeological fieldwork remains relatively untheorized. By this I
mean that the practice of archaeology in the field has not, despite a
few articles to be discussed in this volume, been subjected to the
reflexive scrutiny experienced in recent decades in ethnography.
   Archaeologists sometimes dig in caves and shelters. But many of us
have come to dig ‘sheltered’ from outside criticism and untroubled by
reflexive analysis. In our shelters we use techniques that appear to us to
be self-evident and unquestionable. We take them for granted. The
commercial pressures of contract archaeology have further forced a
standardization and a routine.
   Reflexivity in ethnography has in part been forced by engagement
with ‘other’ voices and by the processes of postcolonialism. Archae-
ological data, on the other hand, can be thought of as objects which
cannot ‘talk back’ (see chapter 3). However, in many parts of the world,
contemporary communities have increasingly made claims for, and
spoken on behalf of, archaeological data. As archaeology becomes
ever more disseminated through global information networks, new
communities form with varied interests in the archaeological past.
   In the world of heritage and museums there has for some time been a
critical discussion of how the past is presented, how reflexivity can be
incorporated into displays, how multiple voices can be engaged in
dialogue. Merriman (1991) has discussed the need for museum curators
to move ‘beyond the glass case’.
                                PREFACE: DIGGING OUTSIDE THE SHELTER      xi

    So, increasingly, it becomes difficult for archaeologists to resist mov-
ing ‘beyond their shelters’. It becomes necessary to deal with plurality
and interaction with diverse constituencies. In the process, reflexive (by
which I mean self-critical) thought is engendered. Reflexivity needs to
extend down into the trench, to the trowel’s edge, and down onto the
laboratory bench, if it is to respond adequately to the world outside the
shelter.
   This engagement with other voices forces a reconsideration of the
way in which archaeologists ‘collect data’. It forces a critical analysis of
the degree to which archaeologists in the western academy have con-
structed the past within their specific historical perspectives. Indeed, it
could be argued that the archaeological case forces a more thorough
reappraisal than in ethnography. In the latter case, the focus has been
on the ‘textualization’ of ‘the other’ — that is on the strategies by which
other groups are ‘written into’ a western discourse (Clifford and Marcus
 1986). But in the emphasis on writing, perhaps less attention has been
paid to what happens before pen hits paper. Ethnographic ‘data collec-
tion’ is perhaps too readily seen as dialogical since it involves dealing
with people. But in archaeology, before or alongside writing, there is
the need to handle large amounts of ‘objective’ data, and to deal with
the problems of ‘data construction’, leading to reflexive critique of even
the most mundane and direct processes of observation. The methodo-
logical challenges are perhaps greater and more severe in archaeology.
Perhaps this is why archaeological fieldwork has resisted and largely
avoided the critical re-evaluation seen in other areas of the discipline
and in ethnography.
   This book then, is an attempt, from a particular perspective, to
encourage debate about archaeological field method, ‘data collection’,
and archaeological reasoning in general. I am painfully aware that it
makes only an initial foray and that it is an inadequate response to the
overall task of theorizing method in archaeology. It results from many
years of thought and trial, but the more progress is made the more
appears that needs to be done. This book describes a problem and a
project; it is an account of progress made so far, and a statement of
intent about future directions.
   In this faltering and tentative process I wish to thank all those who
have with such good will and patient humour entered into these
debates within the CGatalhéyiik team. There are too many to name
individually, but I hope they sense the deep gratitude I feel. I also wish
to thank Randy McGuire and Matthew Johnson for their comments on
xii   PREFACE: DIGGING OUTSIDE THE SHELTER

an earlier draft, Garol McDavid for introducing me to the reading used
in chapter 10, and Julia Shaw, Lynn Meskell and Ayfer Bartu for other
references and ideas. A version of chapter 11 appeared in Spanish in
Trabaos de Prehistoria (1998).
Acknowledgements




The author and publisher gratefully acknowledge the following for
permission to reproduce copyright material:

Fig. 1.1 from D. Clark, Analytical Archaeology, 1968, by permission of
Methuen & Co.;

figs 3.1—3.3 from I. Hodder, Theory and Practice in Archaeology, 1992, by
permission of Routledge;
fig. 5.6 from A. C. Renfrew and P. Bahn, Archaeology, 1991 (second
edition 1996), by permission of Thames and Hudson;
fig. 6.1 from E. C. Harris, Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy, second
edition 1989, by permission of Academic Press;
fig. 6.2 from A. J. Barham, Methodological approaches to arch-
aeological context recording: X-radiography as an example of a
supportive assessment and interpretive technique. In A. J. Barham
and R. L. Macphail (eds), Archaeological Sediments and Soils, 1995, 145—-
82, by permission of the Institute of Archaeology, University College,
London;

fig. 8.2 from A. Sherratt, Plough and Pastoralism. In I. Hodder, G.
Isaac and N. Hammond (eds), Pattern of the Past, 1981, by permission of
Cambridge University Press; and A. Sherratt, What would a Bronze
xiv   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Age world system look like? Journal of European Archaeology, 1993, 1.2,
1-58; and I. Hodder, The Domestication of Europe, 1990, by permission of
Blackwell Publishers;

fig. 9.1 from M. Adams and C. Brooke, Managing the past: truth, data
and the human being, Norwegian Archaeological Review, 1995, 28, 93-104;

table 6.1 from W. Matthews, C. French, T. Lawrence and D. Cutler,
Multiple surfaces: the Micromorphology. In I. Hodder (ed.), On the
Surface, 1996, pp. 301-42, by permission of the McDonald Archaeolo-
gical Institute and the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara.

The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions in the above list
and would be grateful to be notified of any corrections that should be
incorporated in the next edition or reprint of this book.
 |      Crises in Global Archaeology




One Archaeology or Many?

Perhaps it never was straightforward. But in retrospect it seems to have
been. Traditionally, the object of archaeology was to obtain better
scientific knowledge of human activities in the past, on the basis of
material remains. The aim was to get closer to the truth. In its infancy,
archaeology opposed itself to myth and folklore and to antiquarianism.
In the eighteenth century it developed a clear identity for itself by
opposing science to non-science. The beginning of the first volume of
Archaeologia, published by the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1770,
opposed a historical science dealing with truth and evidence to an
unscientific archaeology trading falsehoods, tradition and the vanity
of inventors and propagators. “The arrangement and proper use of
facts is history; — not a mere narrative taken up at random and
embellished with a poetic diction, but a regular and elaborate inquiry
into every ancient record and proof’ (Archaeologia 1 (1770), 2). The
primary underlying theme here was empiricism — the separation of
facts and theories. In order to be scientific it was assumed that beliefs
and ideas needed to be separated from data. One had to stay as close as
possible to the facts themselves, and distinguish well-grounded state-
ments from flights of imagination. As Pitt-Rivers (1894) enjoined, to be
a scientist the archaeologist had to record meticulously and publish
facts from which conclusions could then be drawn.
2   CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   There was also a social identity to archaeology, within the upper and
the upper middle classes. The association between archaeology and
these social milieux in the nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries has
been demonstrated for Scandinavia by Kristiansen (1981), for Britain
by Hudson (1981), and for North America by Patterson (1995).
   Belief in the possibilities of science, when allied with a limited
western social focus, often led to a unified and global perspective. As
Wheeler claimed in Archaeology from the Earth (1956, 36), ‘there is no
method proper to the excavation of a British site which is not
applicable — nay, must be applied — to a site in Africa or Asia’. But
the colonial context did not always lead to such views. Seton
Lloyd (1963, 30) suggested that British and Near Eastern sites were so
different that different methods of excavation should be used. In the
United States, Hole and Heizer (1973, 187) argued that ‘there are no
rules for digging a particular site’. Variation in method was linked to
the type of site being excavated and to the archaeologist. Use of a
bulldozer differs substantially from the use of a fine dental pick. But
such variation was encompassed within an empiricist position — appro-
priate methods were to be used at specific sites, but the overall method
of objective recording of layers, artifacts and their superimposition was
seen as general.
   The height of this confidence in universal methods was perhaps
reached by David Clarke when he declared in 1968 that ‘archaeology
is archaeology is archaeology’. The New Archaeology generally exuded
confidence. Binford (1962) argued that all aspects of past sociocultural
systems are available to us. This optimism remained based on a belief
in science and objective methods. It was also based, in USA at least, on
a supreme conviction that the object of archaeology was to be anthro-
pological. But the positivist separation of facts from theories under-
pinned the scientific claims for a general methodology. There was only
one way to do science (Schiffer 1976). Other factors played a role in the
development of this new confident science. For example, the expansion
of Cultural Resource Management led to the need for systematic
control and monitoring on a far greater scale of archaeological enquiry.
The result, allied with the widespread use of computers, was a strong
emphasis on codification and rigorous management systems (Adams
and Brooke 1995). Standardized and repeatable procedures were
espoused both because of the commitment to positivism and because
of the need to cope with and publically account for an expanding but
limited archaeological resource.
                                      CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY       3

   It is widely recognized that early processual archaeology embraced
the notion of universals and global theory. But it is important to
recognize that in parallel with this stance towards theory, method too
was seen as universal. Gradually (e.g. Binford 1977; Schiffer 1976) a
general Middle Range Theory was espoused dealing with the forma-
tion of the archaeological record. Processual archaeology coupled with
the rise of contract archaeology also had an impact on field methods.
The following changes can be discerned: the development of field
projects with well-defined research objectives; the development of a
regional (ecological) approach to sites in their settlement systems and
environments; new techniques of intensive survey, sampling and
screening (sieving). In an introductory textbook, Renfrew and Bahn
(1996) have recently argued that the widespread application of these
points ‘has begun to create for the first time a true world discipline: an
archaeology that reaches geographically right round the globe, and an
archaeology that reaches back in time to the beginnings of human
existence and right up to the modern period’ (pp. 39-40).
   Many people since the 1970s have written about the philosophy of
archaeology. These authors often commented on the discipline from a
position at least partially external to it (Salmon 1982; Bell 1994; Watson
1991). While they held different positions they all talked about the
reasoning process in archaeology, the philosophy of archaeology. Per-
haps because they came in from the outside, they saw archaeology as
an entity, an object for their study which had coherence. This is also
true of those like Courbin (1988) and Gardin (1980) who tried to
analyse archaeological procedures from the inside. Clarke (1968) devel-
oped a systems view of the archaeological process (figure 1.1). In all
cases there is an overall description for archaeology as a whole.

                                            iy jie



_ Processual, postp ekbal and post-postprocessual
                ,    rchaeologies —


  Stale oy Ae (1962: 1989). a view held fae there was one
  right wa to doee       aeScience, involving the—      of

- Hae inka) «eve utionaryassumptions were made.
                                                     ARCHAEOLOGICAL
                                                    SEGMENT OF THE
                                                       REAL WORLD




                                                   SAMPLE OBSERVED BY
                                                      EXCAVATION AND
  OBSERVATION                                        DATA COLLECTION



              SPHERE OF                                                                 SPHERE OF.
         CONTEXTUAL ANALYSIS                                                       SPECIFIC ANALYSIS
 EXPERIMENT


                   Experimentally                                                        Experimentally
                controlled contextual                                                 controlled      specific
               observations, a sample                                              observations, a sample
               based on excavation and                                             based on the artefacts,
               data     collection    in the                                       assemblages, and their
               field.     The recovery        of                                   intrinsic attributes
                      the contextual     or                                         revealed by physical,
                        environmental                                               chemical, statistical or
                         attributes                                                        other analyses




                           SPHERE        OF        SYNTHESIS      AND      GENERAL        THEORY
      HYPOTHESIS           Central    store for model     and hypothesis       operations,    model
      —                    building, modification,       and testing    by continuous     comparative
                                                           analysis



                  Iconic models                        Analogue   models                       Symbolic      models

            Scaled or coded                         Formulation of                       Mathematical analogue
          isomorphic record of                    7 historic,                           (a) deterministic model
          observations as                       A   anthropological               A     (b) statistical model
          graphs, histograms,                  7    or abstract analogue                (c) stochastic model
          maps, etc                                 simulation           ?              (d) canonical model
                                                                           A                             i
                                                                                        Logical mathematical
                 Generalising /                         Generalising                     consequences of the
                  observations                          observations                             model




      INTERPRETATION             |TEST MODEL/HYPOTHESIS AGAINST                              THE
                                     LATEST OBSERVATION SAMPLES                              FOR
                                            GOODNESS OF FIT


      THEORY                                  SYNTHESIZING         PROPOSITIONS
                                                ABOUT THE         REAL WORLD



Figure |.1 David Clarke’s (1968) general model for archaeological procedure,
described as ‘for the organisation and relation of archaeological activities within a
disciplined procedure’ (ibid., 36).
                                       CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY     5

       By postprocessual archaeology | mean a group of views based on a
   critique of processual archaeology (Hodder |982b; Shanks and Tilley _
    1987). These views could crudely be described as interpretive and
   self-reflexive as opposed to processual archaeology’s emphasis on
   science and the objective. Emphasis was often placed on the indivi-
   dual, agency, historical contexts and meaning. However, a wide range _
   of very different perspectives could be described as postprocessual. _
   These include Marxist and dialectical Marxist positions (Leone 1984; _
   McGuire 1992), feminist perspectives (e.g. Gero and Conkey 1991),
   interpretive positions (Tilley 1993), structurationist theories (Bar.
                                                                       re
   rett 1994) and phenomenological approaches (T homas 1996; Gos-
   den 1994). | will try to use the term in this volume to refer to a
   limited set of authors in the 1980s for whom the view that ‘material
   culture is meaningfully and historically gelato is key (Hodder
    1982a; Shanks and Tilley 1987).
      What is post postprocessual archaeology? One of the main feecons
   for using the term ‘post’ in postprocessual archaeology was that a
   diversity of views was to be espoused, with no singular and unified
   perspective imposed on the discipline. This emphasis on diversity
   has continued on into the 1990s. Even processual archaeology has—
   seen its splits, as in the emergence of cognitive processual archae-
   ology (Renfrew and Zubrow 1994) and neo-Darwinian archaeology —
   (e.g. Dunnell 1989). The end of grand narratives, regionalism and the
   embrace of multivocality are characteristics of archaeology in this
   period. There is greater personal choice and eclecticism in the
   putting ——         of theoretical —


    The theories of postprocessual archaeologists such as Shanks and
Tilley (1987) and Hodder (1986) claimed to be open to a wider set of
influences (Hodder 1992) and yet they undoubtedly assumed some
coherence and universality when they argued, for instance, for archae-
ology as a social practice (Shanks and Tilley 1987). It has also been
objected that the theories espoused were those of an intellectual elite
and that they failed to be inclusive in both the areas of heritage (Smith
 1994) and feminist archaeology (Engelstad 1991). Certainly there has
been a limited impact of postprocessual archaeology outside the centres
of western academe.
   On the other hand, postprocessual archaeology was much less uni-
fied than processual archaeology (Trigger 1995). In questioning the
separation between observer and observed it opened up doubt and
6   CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

uncertainty. It undermined the notion of a universal science and a
universal methodology. Adams and Brooke (1995, 94) argue that ‘it is
essential to ask why the rise of postprocessualism has not given rise to
an archaeological methodology’. Certainly, apart from a few studies
such as Tilley (1989a; see also Carver 1989; 1990; Shanks and
McGuire 1996; Chadwick 1998; Bender et al. 1997) there has been
little attempt to discuss field methods. This was partly because of the
focus on textuality in some types of postprocessual work (e.g. Tilley
1990). But there has been little argument for a unified analytical
methodology in any area of postprocessual research. This is because
the separation of a general method from interpretation, or description
from explanation, was suspect within any approach which links the
observer to the observed. It might be expected that each archaeologist
would approach each site with an appropriate, rather than with a
universal, methodology.
    I shall argue in chapters 9 and 11 that the embrace of theoretical and
methodological diversity by many archaeologists is parallel to a wider
introduction of multivocality and pluralism in the area of heritage. ‘This
concern to open up the past to ‘other’ voices has been seen as threaten-
ing to many western archaeologists (e.g. Renfrew 1989; Binford 1989;
Kohl and Fawcett 1995; Kohl 1993; Yoffee and Sherratt 1993; Binthff
1993; Trigger 1998).
   Policing the boundaries of the discipline has become a major pre-
occupation for many. Because the past, and specifically the material
past, plays such an important role in forming the identities of groups
and individuals, archaeology has a large public ‘margin’ which extends
well beyond the disciplinary core. And yet groups in the margin do not
see themselves as marginal. They often wish to appropriate some of the
terrain of archaeological science itself. Over the past 20 to 30 years,
establishment archaeologists have had running battles with metal
detector users (Treasure Hunting 1982), ley line hunters (Williamson
and Bellamy 1983), believers in von Daniken, Mother Goddess cults
(Meskell 1995; Conkey and Tringham 1996), Druids (Chippindale
1990), Creationists (see http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Delphi/
4881/frameset.html), readers of Jean Auel (1980) and so on (for a
broad ranging view of ‘popular archaeology’ see http://www.unm.
edu/rleonard/230.html). In all such cases, the problem has been to
establish a disciplinary authority. It might be thought that the end result
of this process is greater coherence about the discipline itself, a clari-
fication of its boundaries. But I suspect that in fact the opposite has also
                                        CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY        7

happened. The discipline has had to open up and accept greater
diversity. After all, the debate with metal detector users ended up
favouring closer integration and mutual understanding.
    Examples of the new openness to alternative perspectives is provided
in the now numerous cases of archaeologists and Native American
groups working together in the United States and Canada. As one
such instance, in 1994 the Arizona Archaeological Council held a
workshop in order to bring together a diverse group of archaeologists
and Native Americans so that they could share in a dialogue dealing
with three issues: consultation between Native Americans and federal
agencies; Native Americans’ role in archaeology; oral tradition and
archaeology. In the last of these areas, it was noted that cultural
anthropologists and archaeologists had long discounted the historical
value of Native American oral traditions (Anyon et al. 1996). Yet
recently there has been a renewal of interest in linking Native American
oral traditions and archaeological evidence. This working together has
produced statements as radical as any from the post-processual theor-
ists. ‘Scientific knowledge does not constitute a privileged view of the
past that in and of itself makes it better than oral traditions. It is simply
another way of knowing the past’ (ibid., 15). There has been accom-
modation and transformation on both sides of the reburial debate in
North America and Australia.
    Of course, the internal critique of western culture and western
science as seen in the above comments of Anyon et al. is a more general
characteristic of high- or postmodern society. I shall return in chapter 9
to the links between modernity and processual archaeology and
between postmodernism and postprocessual archaeology. For the
moment it is possible to recognize a number of ways in which western
academia is being confronted by alternative perspectives. One of the
distinctive characteristics of the postmodern trend is the blurring of
‘high’ and ‘popular’ culture. Archaeology is inevitably involved in this
process where heritage is commercialized into ‘theme parks’ and where
popularization erodes ‘serious’ in-depth coverage of debates in prehis-
tory. “The postmodernization of culture is of course a profound chal-
lenge to the monopolistic hold over high culture and elite values which
has traditionally been enjoyed by the intellectual within the Academy’
(Turner 1994, 18).
   Clarke’s claim that ‘archaeology is archaeology is archaeology’ seems
increasingly anachronistic in the 1990s; there is too much diversity and
dissent for a global view on theory and method to be sustained. Schiffer
8     CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

(1988, 479) has argued that archaeological theory appears to have
fragmented into ‘a thousand archaeologies’. For example, feminists
often argue in the following terms: ‘we see an increasing recognition
that knowledge-making is a pluralistic enterprise with, for example,
more recognition and institutional rewards for collaborative multiper-
spective research, teaching and writing, and increased recruitment of
the still-silenced (ethnic, gender, racial) voices that should be integral to
archaeological discourse’ (Conkey and Gero 1997, 430). Another per-
spective on diversity is the following: ‘archaeology has lost its former
hegemonic identity as a discipline, which has been replaced by a
conglomerate of different, sometimes separate, sometimes overlapping
functions and identities’ (Kristiansen, personal communication). I sus-
pect now that both the object (aim) and objective method of archae-
ology are under threat — this constitutes the double crisis of archaeology.


                    The example of‘prehistory
                                                 e




    Speei            a: are content, even proud, oosealPe
    prehistorians. In Europe the term creates links to the great tradition _
 _ of writers such as Montelius and Childe and to all the knowl dge :
    that has been amassed of European prehistory. The term is a good _
    description of the interests of many European archaeologists. But
   there are now diffi culties in using the term. In a global context th
  _ term, taken for granted for so long in Europe, becomes politica
incorrect. For example, when used in Australia the term implies that
     aboriginal groups had no history (see Wolf. 1982).    This is because -
     ‘history’ in the word ‘prehistory’ means ©
_ course, non-western and ‘non-literate peoples did have a vibrar
    _ history, even without written records of it. There is no such thing
  as a time before history unless we privilege the written over the
  unwritten, the western over‘the non-western, which is ¢              ’
ceptable.                                       :     a
    Archaeologists in the West who are ‘sensitive to such iissue may
  no longer call themselves prehistorians but they may‘be uncertain as
     to which label to use instead. Even the term. irchaeologist’t’ can be
    “seen as problematic in its logocentric assumptions of an origin, an
  ‘arche’ which can be reached through analytical pr cedures (
 _and Yates 1990). The game of origins is always. contested (Conkey
~ with Williams 199 asa os — egies arche mays exclude:
                                         CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY       9

   7 Perhaps to be without a labelispar xfthe o
                                             openness and fluidityof :
 _ Bigh-orpostmodern society. Per aps anylabel would make global_
  and aos claims. Perhaps we can           define alee ay locally.


What is the ‘Object’ of Archaeology?

The aims and methods of archaeology have now diversified within the
discipline and been challenged from without. Internal diversification is
linked to the expansion and specialization of the discipline. The term
 ‘archaeology’ now provides a broad umbrella for an enormous variety
of activities, goals and interests. It encompasses the collection and study
of modern refuse in landfills in the USA (Rathje and Murphy 1992;
Rathje and Thompson 1981) and the collection and study of industrial
machinery (‘industrial archaeology’, see Jones 1996). It incorporates
experiments with ancient farming tools (Coles 1979) and the study of
modern beer cans (Shanks and Tilley 1987). It involves studying con-
temporary peoples from Africa to Scandinavia (Orme 1981; Yates
 1989). ‘The term ‘archaeology’ can be used to refer to modern material
culture studies which have no reference to the past (Miller 1997) or to
the study of the earliest hominid traces.
    The different specialisms within the discipline have increasingly
developed their own perspectives and methods — their own ways of
talking about things; that is their own discourses. For example, in much
classical archaeology in Britain or the Mediterranean, excavation
methods have been developed which include limited wet or dry screen-
ing (sieving), which only record 3D proveniences for ‘special’ or ‘small’
finds, and which focus on architectural reconstruction. In many Palaeo-
lithic cave excavations, on the other hand, excavation proceeds at the
micro-level, all deposits are carefully screened, all finds are ‘small’ finds,
and the emphasis is placed on understanding the sedimentary and site
formation processes.
   There are also important regional traditions in methods and aims. ‘The
distinctive Japanese approach has been described by Barnes (1990). In
Europe and the Near East, it is widely recognized that German archae-
ologists dig with a different method. Such regional differences are often
brought out most acutely when international field projects are under-
taken. At one such project recently in Turkey, British and Greek teams
found themselves working side by side on a prehistoric tell excavation
(Hodder 1996). Both sides were surprised at the extent of the differences.
10   CRISES INGLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

The Greek prehistorians identified an important aim as the recording of
their own excavation process. Thus they would dig in trenches, they kept
a detailed day book and changed recording units every day, they were
willing to dig several phases at the same time, and they made plans of
whole horizons of activity. The British, on the other hand, used a ‘single
context recording’ technique which involved digging strictly in phase,
planning one context or unit at a time, and placing sections or ‘trenches’
only where a specific question had to be answered. These radical differ-
ences are based on different histories and contexts of research — in
Greece, some prehistoric archaeologists have reacted against the techni-
ques used in Classical archaeology and they work within a largely state-
funded framework. In Britain, on the other hand, the system widely used
today came about as a reaction to the Wheeler (1956) box method of
trench excavation and in the context of developer-funded archaeology.
   If the differences between Palaeolithic archaeologist and Classical
archaeologist have increased, and if the contrasts between regional
traditions have deepened, so too have the special expertises proliferated
and diverged. Lithic analysts have increasingly developed a discourse
and a body of knowledge which is entirely their own — and which is itself
subdivided into sub-areas such as use-wear, or replication studies, pro-
duction versus typology, and so on. They have their own conferences,
meetings, books and journals. The same can be said for ceramic study
groups, faunal specialists, micro-faunal specialists, archaeobotanists.
The list of specialists today is endless. There are those who provide
special services in ground stone, residue analysis, phosphate analysis,
geophysical survey, magnetic susceptibility, phytolith analysis, pollen
analysis, diatom analysis, the study of human remains, taphonomy,
bead analysis, DNA analysis, optically stimulated thermoluminescence
dating, micromorphology, dendrochronology, and so on.
                                        CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY


_ process was a physical one. It is true that this archaeologist often
  said ‘you can feel that..’. His reasoning seemed diametrically
  opposed to the more coebrer laboratory specialists. Indeed empha-
  sis on feel was one of the reasons he preferred to dig in plan rather
 than in section — he could ‘feel’ which layer he was on and trusted             _
  this knowledge more than what he could ‘see’ in      es sections
  (profiles). He did not trust sections.           _
     The micromorphologist on site, however, spent fitch of her life
. ‘looking’. She could not —         the bees in her glass slides. Her

  as a result, she ae hae we should dig in section rather then:in
 plan. She did not trust digging in plan. After all,ae could not see
 what you had dug through.                                                   :
      But there were differences too in ine:way ee laboratory ae
  ists worked. | watched the animal bone specialist working at her
  desk. Her head was up. She would take a bone and start flipping
  through books that lay open in front of her. She was comparing the
  archaeological bones with drawings of the bones of sheep, cattle and
  so on. She had little need for anything else at this identification stage.
  Of course, she said, you have to learn what sheep look like at this
particular site. But the basic biology and anatomy     of sheep were the
  main things. Her identification work seemed comparative and uni-
  versal and relatively secure. She was working from the outside in,
  deductively, perhaps in a positivist mode.
| looked over at the ceramics specialist. Even his body |position
  looked different. He had his head down. He was having a hard time.
  There were no reference books he could flip through No one had
  developed a proper type series for this region, and even      if they had, —
  he would have had to convince himself first that the site fitted intoa
  regional sequence. He had to get absorbed in this particular set of
  pottery, to get to know it well. He sought for internal patterns and
  covariations in order to work out what attributes of the pots were
 - significant in determining chronological and social variation. He was
  working from the inside out i in a more inductive, even hermeneutic
  procedure.
     | thought, ‘These are all cand but I’m not sure they are al
doing the same thing’ Evans (1998) discusses a related point in the
_ history of archaeology, noting that Bersu in his excavation in Britain
  in the 1930s and 1940s thoughtin terms sonia ofaA vista record
             an a textual record.
12    CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

   One of the clearest examples of specialism and fragmentation within
the discipline is the growth of ‘archaeological theory’. Archaeologists
have always discussed the theoretical aspects of their work, such as
theories of stratigraphy, typology, inference (e.g. Pitt Rivers 1896;
Childe 1949; Collingwood 1946). In the period of the New Archae-
ology in USA and UK, theory came to be foregrounded. The objective
scientific process required a transparency in the construction and test-
ing of theories. This reflexivity was described by Clarke (1973) as a ‘loss
of innocence’. One product in Britain was the emergence of a series of
conferences organized by the Theoretical Archaeology Group (“TAG’).
One effect of this emphasis on theory was that it allowed young
archaeologists to specialize in theory. Quite understandably, such spe-
cialization led to the opening up of the domain to include radical
alternatives, Continental Philosophy and current social theory (Shanks
and Tilley 1987). Indeed, the level of knowledge needed to understand
the debates quickly surpassed the resources, time or interest of most
archaeologists. In recent reviews, Thomas (1995) and Champion (1991)
noted that only a small proportion of archaeologists in Britain were
likely to list ‘theory’ as within their area of interest. Archaeological
theory, which could and perhaps should be a central component of all
archaeological work has become so specialized that few can participate.
Theory could provide a central coherence and definition of objects and
objectives of study. In fact, theoretical debate has become factional and
divisive and exclusionary.
     It could be argued that the different theoretical perspectives in
archaeology are not contradictory but complementary. For example,
the overall division between processual and postprocessual archaeolo-
gies can be interpreted in terms of different objects of study. Postpro-
cessual approaches (Shanks and Tilley 1987; Hodder 1986) focus on
interpretation, multivocality, meaning, agency, history. It can be
argued that such themes are best followed in areas of heritage and in
areas of archaeology dealing with complex historical societies about
which there is a considerable amount of fine-grained information. It is
indeed in such areas that postprocessual archaeology has had most
impact. Processual archaeology (Binford 1989) might appear more
appropriate in the study of long-term constraints and large-scale struc-
tures. It has been most widely applied in relation to hunter-gatherers
and their settlement systems, economies and technologies. Much the
same point can be made for the social sciences generally. Individual
agency and thick description of particular events are central to those
                                      CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY       13

approaches such as phenomenology, symbolic interactionism and eth-
nomethodology which eschew a positivist stance. On the other hand,
large scale trends in economies and societies lend themselves more
easily to a distanced and quantified analysis.
    We are, however, very far from being able to write a ‘grand nar-
rative’ or ‘grand unified theory’ which incorporates all perspectives.
While it may be true that different theories are appropriate for different
objects of study, there are many examples of attempts to break out of
any rigid categorization that might be made. Thus processual archae-
ology has made a foray into the study of cognition (as in Renfrew’s
(1989) ‘cognitive processual’ archaeology), and into the study of indi-
vidual agency and mind (Mithen 1996). There is little consensus that
the different theories are relevant at different scales. Specialists in the
realm of archaeological theory tend to want their perspectives to be
generalized rather than localized.
    These few examples indicate the burgeoning of the specialisms in
archaeology. On the one hand the specialisms are central to the
expansion of the discipline and they offer an enormous potential
today for gaining new information about past activities from material
remains. Never before has there been so much opportunity to get a
handle on some of the major mysteries which still confront us, whether
these be the origins of our species, the development of human culture,
the origins of agriculture or the formation of complex or modern ways
of life. No one can deny the great achievements of modern archae-
ology, from the understanding of the antiquity of European cultures
(Renfrew 1973) to debates about the behaviour and cognitive capacities
of our earliest ancestors (Binford 1989; Foley 1987), from the discovery
of early agricultural systems in Papua New Guinea (Golson and Gard-
ner 1990) to the detailed reconstruction of the last moments alive of the
Alpine ‘Ice Man’ (Spindler 1993). All archaeologists will have their own
list of the most important advances that the discipline has made. And
few would argue that the gradual development of an archaeological
science cannot claim great successes.
    On the other hand, the growth of specialisms and diversity of
approach have resulted in a loss of confidence about the objectives of
the discipline (Watson 1986). Despite the diversity of their specific aims
and methods, it might be thought that most archaeologists would argue
that their prime focus is to recover information about the past, espe-
cially where survival of that information is being threatened by devel-
opment,   looting, erosion or whatever.     The   aim should be to use
14   CRISES INGLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

modern scientific techniques in order to obtain information about, and
to protect, the archaeological resource.
   It might at least be argued that there was a consensus on this overall
aim of archaeology. Surely the overall aim is to understand what
happened in the past and to preserve that information wherever poss-
ible. But this is no longer the case. Some modern material culture
studies are concerned more with contributing to an understanding of
the present. Indeed, this focus on the present is now widely found.
Many archaeologists would now say that we study the past in order
better to understand ourselves. Thus the aim of archaeology for Leone
et al. (1987) might be seen as to expose taken-for-granteds in the
present. For Shanks and Tilley (1987) it might be to be active and
relevant and to transform contemporary inequalities.
    I have noticed a subtle shift in conferences and written papers in the
UK over the past 20 years. Whereas the primary aim used to be to say
something about the past which was ‘true’, the emphasis has shifted
towards saying something interesting or meaningful. What I mean by
this is that authors used to gauge the success of their work in terms of its
contribution to knowledge. More recently, the central issue has become
whether the work resonates with contemporary concerns and issues,
particularly with reference to understanding of the self. Certainly
archaeologists have always related their work to current issues. Gra-
hame Clark in 1934 was concerned about the relationship between
archaeology and the state; he also wrote (1939) about ‘archaeology and
society’. Childe, too, wrote books intended for a general audience (e.g.
1936) and was concerned, from a Marxist position, about the relation-
ship between archaeology and society (1949). Social relevance was also
a theme of the early New Archaeology; the aim of building general laws
was to find a way of using the past that would contribute to planning
the present and predicting the future (Watson, Leblanc and Redman
1971). But in all these examples the social contribution was always to be
achieved through the construction of secure knowledge about the past.
More recently, there has been an explosion of interest in the ‘past as self
discovery’. For example, many New Age groups use the past in this way
(Meskell 1995). Spector (1993) and Tringham (1991) have, with other
feminists, made calls for a more ‘peopled’ past. Shanks (1992) has
written about ‘experiencing’ the past. More generally, many writers
today (Gosden 1994; Thomas 1996; Tilley 1994) focus on being,
phenomenology and ontology. They are concerned with how people
in the present and the past experience monuments and landscapes
                                       CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY         15

through their bodily movements. Ultimately the justification of such
work seems to be less about constructing secure knowledge and more
about whether it opens up new understanding of the self. Such con-
cerns resonate with the aims of heritage organizations to reach a wider
and more popular audience, to provide virtual experiences for a wide
range of people, to involve and engage. Generally the objects and aims
of archaeology have shifted or at least diversified.
   Even the consensus on preservation is under threat. Conservation
and preservation can come into conflict with the goals of development
corporations (which in some countries like the USA and UK now
increasingly fund archaeology). The aim of preservation also runs
into difficulties when it is asked ‘preservation for and by whom?’ It is
often the nation state that legislates and defines conservation and
preservation goals. National museums and central institutions regulate
the survival of the past. But increasingly, across the globe and at various
scales and levels, marginal, subordinate or disadvantaged groups are
claiming an interpretation of the past which is their own.
   Rather than preserving or protecting the past behind iron fences or
glass cases, these social movements are concerned with engaging the
past in the activities of daily life. A living past is opposed to a dead past.
Interpretive centre is opposed to museum. Knowledge about self is
opposed to intellectual knowledge about the past.


What is the Archaeological ‘Object’?

All this diversity not only undermines the sense of a coherent aim or
objective for archaeology. It also undermines any sense of unanimity
about what it is we are studying. Surely, you might argue, ‘it is obvious
that archaeologists dig up material objects. At least that is a sure ground
on which to base the discipline’.
   But it is not as simple as that. In the sixteenth century in
Europe, people thought that Neolithic axes were thunderbolts
(Daniel 1962). The objects could not be seen as archaeological until
they had been thought about and constructed in a certain way. A
similar point can be made today. Objects only exist within traditions
of inquiry. For example, whether small bones or lithics exist within an
archaeological domain depends entirely on the methods used. ‘Thus, at
a site where there is wet sieving and then sorting of heavy residues
down to 1 mm, a wide range of small artifacts will exist which will not
16   CRISES INGLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

occur at all in the universe of a site which does not sieve, or which
sieves selectively, or which sieves down to a different mesh size. So,
whether an object in the ground has any chance of becoming an
‘archaeological object’ depends on the perspectives and methods of
the recovery process.
   Well, you might counter, ‘surely archaeological entities such as
“layers” are examples of archaeological units of study which have
great clarity’. To some degree perhaps. But note that at many sites
there are layers which are natural rather than human products. This
is especially true in early sites and cave sites. Here the layer is a
sedimentological or geological rather than an archaeological object
of study. Even with layers deposited by human actions there are
difficulties in definition. The identification of a layer depends very
much on the scale or resolution of observation. Anyone who has tried
to dig the fine lenses of a midden will know the ‘lumping versus
splitting’ problem. It becomes impossible to excavate separately
each lens, and so interpretive judgements have to be made in the
field about what constitutes a ‘layer’. How can very small lenses be
lumped to produce layers? The problem is exacerbated when soil
deposition is subjected to micromorphological analysis (e.g. Matthews
et al. 1996). Here the focus is on the deposition of particles and their
treatment (such as trampling) after deposition. At the microscopic level
there are only minerals and organic particles being deposited and
transformed in a sequence. The ‘layers’ are summary interpretations
of these micro-actions. Their self-evident nature as objects of study is
questioned.
    Similar effects are found in other examples of ‘going micro’. For
example, at less than 2 mm few lithic flakes, ceramic or bone fragments
can be identified typologically. Few specialists will include such frag-
ments in their data base. The ‘objects’ such as lithics, ceramics or
animal bone thus only ‘exist’ at a certain scale. At smaller scales, the
fragments still have a use — for example, in the study of formation
processes or activity areas — but they become different ‘objects’. Indeed,
at this small scale the objects might change their nature. For example,
very small lithic flakes may get incorporated into the fabric of pottery as
filler or temper. The lithics have become ceramics. Another example is
the archaeological object ‘ground stone’. When it becomes very small it
becomes a bead (which may not be studied by the ground stone
specialist). There are many such examples which demonstrate that as
artifacts come to be studied at the micro-scale, new definitions of these
                                       CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY       17

artifacts become necessary. The effect is perhaps parallel to physics
where, in microphysics, uncertainty increases as scale decreases (Lyo-
tard 1984, 56).
   Increasingly there are calls in archaeology for detailed sampling at
the micro level. For example, study of ceramic residues involves sam-
pling soil from around the sherds (Evershed et al. 1992). Phosphate
analysis increasingly involves detailed micro-sampling in order to
evaluate post-depositional processes (Jenkins 1994). The study of
microdebitage in order to reconstruct activity areas on prehistoric
floors is increasingly a routine part of archaeological enquiry (e.g.
Hull 1987; Metcalfe and Heath 1990), and chemical analysis of house
floor samples also has proved successful in differentiating activities (e.g.
Barba 1985; Middleton and Price 1997). Certainly more information is
obtained but in a research excavation context so much detailed sam-
pling may be required that excavation is impeded.
   Indeed the pressures from specialist sampling may be so great that
one is sometimes led to ask whether modern archaeology is possible.
The costs of laboratory analysis and specialist equipment are them-
selves very high. And the time and resources needed to undertake the
sampling in the field may not be supported by the available funding
agencies. Indeed, archaeology is increasingly supported by public
bodies (commercial sponsors, development corporations etc.) which
may have limited interest in the detailed results of micro-sampling
and may be more interested in fulfilling legal obligations or in specta-
cular headline stories.


Conclusion

The objects and aims of archaeology are thus becoming very diverse
(Shanks and McGuire 1996). It is no longer even clear that consensus
exists on what an archaeological object (artifact) is. This diversity
undermines any attempt to specify a unified description of archaeology
itself.
    It will be objected that I am focusing on and celebrating diversity at
the expense of the obvious unity that exists. ‘Surely’, it might be said,
‘when push comes to shove, archaeologists know the limits which
define the discipline. Surely, for example, all archaeologists will agree
on the absolute necessity to record artifacts from different layers separ-
ately. Surely they will all accept that lower layers are earlier than layers
18    CRISES INGLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY

superimposed on them. Surely they will all come out in unified protest
when sites are wantonly dug up and destroyed’.
     In fact, none of these rules are held to without exception, even within
the canonical discipline. The law of superposition holds in general
terms, but it does not uniquely define the discipline since the same
law occurs in geology. In any case, a theoretical emphasis on stratigra-
phy does not produce a unity of approach to layering during excava-
tion. For example, digging by arbitrary level or ‘spit’ may contradict
the aim of separating artifacts from different layers. Some archae-
ological traditions, as we have seen above, involve digging strictly ‘in
phase’ (stratigraphically) whereas others involve digging ‘out of phase’.
Post-depositional micro-partical movement can disturb the relationship
between artifacts and depositional units (Schiffer 1987). As regards the
destruction of sites, archaeologists frequently sit on opposite sides of the
court when it comes to legal action on development and planning
proposals.
   ‘Surely’, the objection comes again, ‘at least there is one distinctive
thing which makes archaeology archaeology. Archaeologists dig; what-
ever the variation in methodology, at least archaeology involves dig-
ging’. The trouble here is that historically there have been many people
who have dug in order to find out about the past; and we do not
necessarily call all these archaeologists. In a ground-breaking volume,
Schnapp (1993) has written a new type of history of archaeology. He
shows that we cannot assume that archaeological excavation began in
the Enlightenment era. He argues that even Sumerians and Egyptians
dug ~ in order to destroy, or alternatively to gain power from, artifacts
in the tombs of ancestors or powerful leaders. Schnapp also shows a
sixteenth century European painting of the excavation in 181 Bc of the
tomb of Numa, a seventh-century Bc philosopher. The aim here was to
gain access to the philosopher’s books. Schnapp provides accounts of
the excavation of the bones of saints, such as those of St Etienne in the
eleventh century. These historical examples disturb the notion that
the discipline can be defined in terms of excavation. Much the same
can be said of the modern era in which archaeological excavation
might be defined by a particular type of rigorous methodology. How-
ever, detailed and scientific digging may take place as part of forensic
police work — such excavation may or may not include self-styled
archaeologists.
   In any case, many ‘archaeologists’ do not dig. Indeed, in Britain the
recent government advice has often been towards conservation and
                                     CRISES IN GLOBAL ARCHAEOLOGY       19

non-destructive ‘landscape archaeology’ (Hunter and Ralston 1993),
indicating a clear move away from the centrality of digging within
archaeological practice. Once one moves out of the arena of excavation
it becomes even more difficult to identify unifying themes. After all,
what does an archaeologist reconstructing the climate at 40,000 Ba
have in common with an archaeologist studying gravestones in nine-
teenth-century aD New York State? I suspect very little.
   The apparent ‘discipline’ of archaeology thus appears very undisci-
plined (Clarke 1973). It would seem that any apparent unity results
from a contingent negotiation between a great variety of interests. Any
resulting coherence is provisional, contested and temporary. The aims
and goals and boundaries of the discipline are in a continual state of
flux.
   Rather than celebrating this diversity, many archaeologists decry the
lack of authority and control (Renfrew 1989; Binford 1989). Many feel
threatened by the loss of scientific unity (Bintliff 1993; Kohl and
Fawcett 1995). However, in this book I will argue that the diversity is
appropriate in an increasingly fragmented and multiple world. In the
practices of our lives as archaeologists we increasingly have to work
with this diversity. Anyone who has directed the excavation of a site will
know of the need to write different reports for different audiences
(funders, developers, government     agencies, academic colleagues, the
general public, schoolchildren and so on). Conclusions are always being
reinterpreted for different constituencies. Archaeology begins to look
less like a well-defined discipline with clear boundaries and more like a
fluid set of negotiated interactions. Less a thing than a process.
   It is necessary in the following chapters to explore and understand
the diversity more fully, and to place it within a wider context. I have
emphasized the diversity of current archaeology in this chapter because
it is diversity which creates the need for the reflexivity which is the
theme of this volume. After all, within a diverse and multivocal arena, it
becomes difficult to justify the imposition of unified perspectives with-
out a consideration of their impact on different communities. We need
to move towards the recognition that there is not only one nght way to
do archaeology. There are many right ways. This statement does not
deny that there are also many wrong ways. It is the focus on singularity
which is dangerous. In the next chapter I wish to consider the claims
that have been made for a unified epistemological position within
archaeology.
2      Archaeology — Bridging Humanity and
       Science




It is remarkable that there is almost no literature available on how
archaeologists come to their conclusions (but see Courbin 1988 and
Gardin 1980). Of course, much has been written on method — how
archaeologists dig, label, analyse. But little has been published on how
archaeologists decide that they have reached a satisfactory interpreta-
tion.
   Certainly archaeologists have written a lot about the testing of
theories, and on the need to ask testable questions rather than imagin-
ative reconstruction. But what is it that makes a test satisfactory? I
intend to explore this question in chapter 4. For the moment, it is worth
pointing out that several of the classic examples of testing in archae-
ology proved to be unsuccessful. A good example is the matrilocal
residence hypothesis, which was used early in the New Archaeology
as a prime indicator of the way forward (Binford and Binford 1968).
Later, it was recognized that residence patterns could not be read from
ceramic style distributions on archaeological sites (e.g. Stanislawski
 1978; Lathrap 1983) and that the processes of sherd fragmentation,
deposition and dispersal needed to be taken into account. In another
classic example, the use of rigorous testing procedures did not seem
immediately to resolve the controversy of whether pits excavated in the
Mississippi valley were used for smoking hides (Binford 1967) or smud-
ging pottery (Munsen 1969). Courbin (1988), perhaps overly mischiev-
ously, argues that it is difficult to identify any examples of successful
                    ARCHAEOLOGY — BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE           21

testing in processual archaeology. Certainly some pessimism emerged.
Binford and Sabloff (1982) admitted that, properly, it was only possible
to test propositions in the present, rather than in the past. Given all this,
Watson (1986) was led to comment on the general pessimism and
scepticism apparent in various archaeologies of the 1980s and 1990s
~ she called this the period of “Terminal Skeptical Crisis’ (ibid., 450).
   During excavation, unexpected lines of enquiry are opened up and
any rigid adherence to the testing of initial hypotheses (as in some of the
work of the Cambridge Palaeoeconomy School — Higgs 1972; Higgs
and Jarman 1975) would involve ignoring evidence that may be relevant
to the question in hand or that might be of interest to other archae-
ologists. In fieldwork, the questions are always changing and new lines
of argument become available. In both rescue and research contexts a
good excavator is not a rigid hypothesis-tester (see Barker 1982).
   It does not seem that ‘testing’ can provide a unity and coherence to
archaeological epistemology. The underlying reason for this is that
testing and the experimental approach seem more successful in non-
cultural domains — for example, with taphonomy and use-wear. They
seem less useful in regard to cultural areas — for example, the social and
symbolic reasons involved in depositing artifacts in burials or on house
floors. This difference between n- and c-transforms (Schiffer 1987) is
the underlying reason behind the ‘ladder of inference’ identified by
Hawkes (1954). As one moves up the ladder from technology and
economy to society and religion, there are fewer non-cultural universals
on which testing can be based. Universal understanding of matter-
matter interactions may allow testing of theories about how pots were
made   and metal artifacts used, but theories about social behaviour
cannot be so easily supported by theories about matter-culture inter-
actions. It has been less easy to develop universals in this latter area.
Any emphasis on testing thus tends to exacerbate the conflict between
the science and humanism sides of the discipline and does not create
unity (Shanks and McGuire 1996).
   To what extent can the archaeological record be seen as independent
and objective, a testing ground for archaeological theory (Patrik 1985)?
Carver (1990) argues that two different approaches to the archaeologi-
cal record can be discerned since the inception of rigorous archaeolo-
gical excavation. On the one hand, there stands perhaps the first truly
scientific field archaeologist, General Pitt-Rivers. ‘Excavators, as a rule,
record only those things which appear to them important at the time,
but fresh problems in archaeology and anthropology are constantly
22   ARCHAEOLOGY — BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE

arising, and it can hardly have failed to escape the notice that on turning
back to old accounts in search of evidence, the points that would have
been most valuable have been passed over from being thought unin-
teresting at the time. Every detail should therefore be recorded in the
manner most conducive to facility of reference, and it ought at all times
to be the chief object of an excavator to reduce his own personal
equation to a minimum’ (Pitt-Rivers 1887). Flinders Petrie, on the
other hand, starting from similar observations, reached different con-
clusions. He was less convinced of the data as independent arbiters of
hypotheses. ‘The old saying that a man finds what he is looking for in a
subject is too true; or, if he has not enough insight to ensure finding what
he looks for, it is at least sadly true that he does not find anything he does
not look for’ (Petrie 1904, 49). Carver (1990) notes that these two
attitudes to the past are present in archaeology today. ‘In the State
Archaeological Services we find mainly empiricists, protecting a
national archive of buried data for the future or organizing its ‘preserva-
tion by record’ before destruction. But in the Universities lurk the heirs
of Petrie and Wheeler, for whom data are all in the mind’ (ibid., 257).


The Contribution of Philosophy

Given these basic and long-held disagreements about how archaeolo-
gists work, from where did the impetus come for a unity of reasoning
process in the discipline? Apart from the functional needs already
described, an important influence has been the type of philosophy
which was, through various mechanisms, attracted to the discipline
during the 1970s and 1980s. Archaeologists became very dependent
on philosophy-led accounts which prescribed what archaeologists
should do. In practice, archaeologists found it difficult to follow these
schemes (some of the failures have been described above). In theory
too, problems emerged since many of the philosophy-led accounts
assumed that all the sciences used the same set of logical procedures,
a position which is now largely discredited. Minimally, the philosophers
who have commented on archaeology (e.g. Salmon 1982; Bell 1994
and Watson 1991) have tended to come (though see Hesse 1995) from
within one particular branch of philosophy often termed Analytic
Philosophy (Frodeman 1995). It was also within this branch that the
New Archaeologists found themselves when they turned to Hempel
(Fritz and Plog 1970; Watson, Leblanc and Redman 1971). It is
                     ARCHAEOLOGY -— BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE               23

important to emphasize the varying positions of the different philoso-
phical commentators on archaeology, and many of them would resist
categorization in these terms. The position of Wylie is described in the
following box. But despite this variety, archaeology would have fol-
lowed a very different path if it had absorbed greater influence from the
Continental Philosophy tradition.



       Mediating between objectivism and relativism |

   Many writers have argued recently that archasslowy needs to move
   beyond the debilitating split between a belief in the objectivity and
   independence of positivist science on the one hand, and on the other —
   hand, the view that the past is entirely constructed iin the present so
   that all views are equally valid and ‘anything goes’ (e.g. Wylie 1989).
   For Trigger (1989, 777) the social sciences as a whole are marked by
   ‘an increasingly vociferous confrontation...between, on the one
   hand, an old-fashioned positivist certainty that, given enough data _
   and an adherence to “scientific” canons of iinterpretation, something
   approximating an objective understanding of human behaviour can
   be achieved ...and on the other hand, a growing relativist scepticism
   that the understanding of human behaviour can ever be disentangled
   from the interests, prejudices, and stereotypes of the researcher’.
      Wylie (1989; 1992; 1994) has argued that a medium way between
   extreme positivism and end            a can be found. She claims that
   archaeologists need to ‘recognise, without contradiction, both that
   knowledge is constructed and bears the marks of its makers, and
   that it is constrained, to a greater or lesser degree, by conditions
   that we confront as external “realities” not of our own making’
  (1992, 21). The move from either/or dichotomous thought to
   both/and inclusive thought in archaeology will become a key theme
  in later parts of this volume.
    ‘Wylie argues that a ‘mitigated objectivism’ occurs in gender archae-
  ology. Fotiadis (see also Little 1994), however, judges that Wylie’s
  attempt at a middle way never escapes either/or dichotomous think-
 _ ing. Itis certainly the case that Wylie writes that evidential constraints
  can challenge political and theoretical presuppositions (1992, 16). She
  seems to suggest that independence  and truth survive. She appears to
treat the production of truth inarchaeology as essentially intellectual,
  maintaining a distinction between truth and politics.
24    ARCHAEOLOGY — BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE

       _ While | would agree with Fotiadis’ critique of Wylie, it isin my
     view extremely difficult to write about a middle way of ‘guarded
     objectivity’ (Hodder 1991) which accepts objectivity and subjectivity
     at one and the same time, and Wylie should be commended in her
     attempt. But the debate too quickly becomes a matter of emphasis
     and language. In my view it is not possible to resolve the identity of,
     and tensions between, object and subject except in practice. What
     matters is whether we can develop archaeological techniques, as_
     ae arerpae later in this book, which are adeauately eo


   Analytic Philosophy includes a range of specific positions including
the Vienna School and later versions of logical positivism. It takes as a
starting point the view that the scientific method differs from other
types of thought. The scientific method has three characteristics (Frode-
man 1995). First, it is objective, that is separate from personal, cultural,
political or metaphysical commitments. Thus the facts discovered by
science are distinct from the values held by the scientist. Equally, and
this is a point I shall return to, the process of discovery is thought to be
distinguishable from the process of explanation. Where insight comes
from and the workings of the imagination are thought to be less
significant than the logical procedures used to justify a scientific
claim. It does not matter where an idea comes from. What is important
is how testable the theory is. Observations and theories are seen to
be distinct. Facts are not themselves theory-dependent. There is an
unproblematic distinction between description and evaluation.
   Second, in at least some forms of positivism, it is argued that
scientists can only fruitfully talk about observables. Thus, before
space travel became possible, one could not usefully talk about the
other side of the moon since it was not observable (Dunnell 1992; cf.
Smith 1955). Wylie (1982) has remarked on the irony of this — that a
discipline which cannot ‘see’ past societal systems should embrace a
philosophy so devoted to observables. Third, science is thought to
consist of a single set of procedures applicable to all fields of study.
There is only one way to do science.
   While I would argue that most of the philosophers who have com-
mented on archaeology derive ultimately from the tradition of Analytic
Philosophy, few would agree with all these three points. This is because
Analytic Philosophy has been challenged from within by writers such as
Quine (1992) and Popper (1992) and has undergone much internal
                   ARCHAEOLOGY - BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE           25

change and debate. In addition, there have increasingly been attempts
to deal with the tradition of Continental Philosophy, especially after the
impact of Kuhn in 1970.
   Within the 200 years (for example since Hegel) of Continental
Philosophy, it has been argued that science is not unified and that the
scientific method (as described above) is not the only or even the best
way to know about the world. It has tried to identify other ways of
knowing (such as dialectics, phenomenology, hermeneutics, existential-
ism). For much of its history Continental Philosophy has been less
concerned with the natural sciences and more with society, culture
and the personal. But since Kuhn, there has been wider discussion in
the natural sciences too of the notion that knowledge is not value-free
but is embedded     within human    interests, and there has been more
general acceptance of the existence of a plurality of scientific
approaches.
   Another way of looking at the distinction between Analytic and
Continental philosophies, and between the natural and cultural disci-
plines, is to describe a difference between those sciences which use a
single and a double hermeneutic. The natural sciences are said to use a
single hermeneutic. They work within the single framework or per-
spective provided by the questions and knowledge of the scientist. This
framework of understanding confronts a physical world; so the problem
is one of testing against data. In the social and cultural sciences on the
other hand, the framework of the scientist confronts a world that can
talk back. There are two frameworks of meaning and the problem is
one of translation between them, of interpreting one framework of
meaning in terms of another. Shanks and Tilley (1987) have argued
that archaeologists work within a fourfold hermeneutic and in this they
emphasize the extent to which archaeology involves translating and
interpreting across cultural boundaries and across vast distances in
time. The overall difference between the single and double hermen-
eutic supports the distinction between objective Analytic and inter-
pretive Continental traditions. It emphasizes the fact that each has
grown up in response to different sets of questions, anchored in either
the natural or sociocultural and historical sciences.
   Because of the philosophy-led approaches identified above, archae-
ologists may know what they should be doing. But in practice they may
be overwhelmed by the conflicting advice from philosophers of differ-
ent traditions and they may come to suspect that philosophy in archae-
ology, far from being prescriptive, is parasitical. Indeed, perhaps that is
26   ARCHAEOLOGY - BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE

as it should be. Philosophers are realizing that different scientists work
differently, dependent on the different types of question asked, the
different types of criteria used, and the different goals of research
(Frodeman 1995, 962). It may thus be the case that archaeologists,
and perhaps even different types of archaeologist, use distinctive meth-
ods. Perhaps, for example, archaeology, because it uses the methods of
both the natural and cultural sciences, straddles the divide between the
single and double hermeneutic methods. Perhaps we should not be led
by what philosophers tell us we should be doing and should concentrate
on what we do (Shanks and McGuire 1996). But I would argue that as
archaeologists we have rarely explored what we DO do. We may
realize that in practice the traditional accounts do not work, but
there is very little evaluation of how archaeologists DO come to con-
clusions they are happy with.
   Another way of looking at the questions of whether archaeology is
like other sciences and whether it is internally homogeneous is to
consider whether it is an experimental science. One of the most
distinctive aspects of the discipline — at least of excavation itself — is
that it is destructive. Of course there are many techniques today which
are non-destructive, such as geophysical prospection (magnetometer
survey etc.), infra-red or X-ray photography. But excavation itself
involves the removal of deposits in order to record them. As a result
it becomes impossible to repeat the procedure. Digging is thus not like a
laboratory experiment which can be repeated at different times and in
different laboratories.
    Perhaps the differences here are not as great as they might seem. It is
widely recognized in the natural sciences that observation can trans-
form what is being measured or observed. Archaeological observation
and measurement provide just an extreme case of the same process —
the process of observation destroys what is being recorded. And in any
case, it might be argued, many aspects of archaeology do allow experi-
ment. Take experimental archaeology (e.g. Coles 1979) itself. Ancient
kilns can be reconstructed and the effects of different firing tempera-
tures can be monitored. Bones and sherds can be abraded and
trampled in environments simulating varied depositional and postde-
positional contexts in order to monitor their effects on artifacts. Cer-
tainly, there are difficulties here in knowing whether the past and the
experimental situations are concordant. But at least archaeology is in
these cases following an experimental procedure. The same could
perhaps be said of ethnoarchaeology.
                  ARCHAEOLOGY - BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE         27

   As noted above, it has been argued that if archaeologists cannot test
theories in the past, they can at least test theories in the present.
Certainly ethnoarchaeological research burgeoned under the positiv-
ism of processual archaeology. It was thought possible to use ethno-
graphic information to test theories about the relationships between
material culture and society, and these bridging arguments were
termed Middle Range Theory. For Binford (1977), Middle Range
Theories are the statements which link the static archaeological record
in the present with interpretation of the dynamics of what went on in
the past. The present material remains act as evidence for claims made
about past dynamics. Middle Range Theory provides the link between
statics and dynamics because it describes and understands the forma-
tion of the archaeological record, using general theories about use,
discard and post-depositional processes. For Binford, the record is
seen as in a continual process of change (1981), and Middle Range
Theories are not seen as being of a particular type; any theory can
function as a Middle Range Theory depending on the question being
asked. Schiffer (1987), on the other hand, is more concerned with
defining types of Middle Range Theory, such as c- and n-transforms
(cultural and natural transformation processes). In a persuasive argu-
ment, Tschauner (1996) suggests that both processual and postproces-
sual archaeology use general bridging principles and both in practice
give some emphasis to the use of independent sets of information in
building accounts of the past.
   Kosso (1991, 624-5) argues that the use of Middle Range Theory in
archaeology is parallelled in the natural sciences. He uses the example
of observing the interior of the sun. The detector-clicks caused by beta
emissions from radioactive argon produced by neutrino interactions
provide evidence for solar processes. The neutrinos or clicks tell us
about the sun’s interior only because of a theoretical linking argument.
These Middle Range Theories are built from theoretical neutrino
physics, radiochemistry, etc.
   However, rather than concluding that archaeology uses positivist,
natural science procedures, Kosso (ibid., 625) suggests that Middle
Range Theory and the natural sciences on which it is based use
hermeneutic procedures in which data are themselves influenced by
theories. Middle Range Theories are tested and justified by appeals to
observational evidence. But there is a circularity here, for Binford as
well as for the astro-physics example. Theories in general (including
Middle Range Theories) are confirmed by appeal to observations, and
28   ARCHAEOLOGY - BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE

observations in general are understood and verified with the support of
theories. Observations are theoretically influenced claims about specific
situations. Theories are claims which go beyond particular perceptions
of observations. Individual observations are interpreted by appeal to
theories which are themselves put together and supported by observa-
tions. ‘This is exactly the structure of the hermeneutic circle... Middle
Range Theories are hermeneutic tools’ (ibid., 625).
   So, if all the sciences, including archaeology, use some form of
hermeneutic procedure (see further chapter 3), what is the basis for
the common-sense realization that there is a difference between the
humanities and the natural sciences? Why is it easier to build Middle
Range Theories about n- rather than c-transforms? For ‘natural’ pro-
cesses we assume that variables interact in universal ways. ‘Thus,
regardless of cultural and historical context, wear marks made by
material x on material y will remain constant. It is more difficult to
say the same for cultural transforms. How material x is deposited in
culture y will vary according to, and will be manipulated by, human
agency.
   The differences being described here can be seen in one of two ways
—as qualitative or quantitative. We have already seen the qualitative
argument. The difference between the single hermeneutic (natural
science) and double hermeneutic (humanity) approaches is seen as
qualitative in that something radically different occurs when human
agency is involved. We cannot generalize easily nor can we construct
universal c-transforms about human behaviour because human inten-
tionality intervenes. Culture limits the applicability of the natural
sciences to human behaviour, because of the ability of humans creat-
ively to transform their worlds. ‘And so,’ the qualitative argument goes
‘there is a qualitative difference between the humanities (including the
social sciences) and the natural sciences.’ ‘But,’ counters the quantit-
ative protagonist, ‘you are just creating a mystique around human
behaviour. The differences between the humanities and natural
sciences are just a matter of degree of complexity.’ According to this
complexity argument, as systems become more complex they become
less easy to predict. As more variables are considered, so their complex
interaction creates behaviour which seems chaotic or non-linear
(McGlade and van der Leeuw 1997). This is true of both physical
systems and human systems. The difficulty of generalization in the
humanities is not, according to the quantitative view, a product of the
special character of human    culture, but results from the enormous
                  ARCHAEOLOGY — BRIDGING HUMANITY AND SCIENCE         29

amounts of variables involved — from the physical and genetic to the
social, psychological, aesthetic and so on.
   Whatever the underlying reasons, it is clear that archaeology incor-
porates a wide range of forms of argumentation. For simpler, mainly
natural processes, some form of general Middle Range Theory does
often seem applicable, and it does seem possible to test theories in
ethnographic and experimental contexts. For more complex, natural
and cultural processes, the argumentation involves greater uncertainty
and more of an emphasis on fitting together bits of evidence in order to
comprehend specific situations. This latter process will be explored in
the following chapters.


Conclusion

For some time now it has been clear in archaeology that Analytical
Philosophy, positivism and experimental science can no longer act as
banners behind which a unified discipline can be assembled.
   Many of the activities within archaeology can be described as using
hermeneutic procedures. But, as we will see in chapter 3, hermeneutics
accepts an interaction between pre-understandings, method and result.
Research develops in a dialectic manner and there is thus little support
for the notion of a unifying methodology or body of theory. While
hermeneutic thought might itself offer a unifying theme, any such move
is undermined both by the fact that some aspects of archaeological
research do have strong experimental components and by the fact that
hermeneutic procedures are not restricted to archaeology or to science
in any general sense. They also form a part of daily practice and of
‘non-scientific’ thought. There is little here of substance to create a
unified method and theory for archaeology.
3.     How Do Archaeologists Reason?




In the previous chapter it was shown that many of the descriptions of a
universal scientific method, based on hypothesis testing, demonstrate
fundamental weaknesses. Much of archaeology appears to use methods
not well described as positivist, and even those that do such as experi-
mental archaeology and ethnoarchaeology also have hermeneutic or
interpretive components. It is necessary at this point then to outline in
greater detail what is meant by a hermeneutic procedure. The main
principles of hermeneutics are outlined in the box on p. 32. But it is
perhaps more helpful to explore how interpretation in archaeology
really works through a series of examples. We have already begun to
see how it works by looking at what is missing in self-styled hypothesis-
testing examples. But I now want to consider more detailed examples of
what happens when archaeologists reason.
   The problem is — and this is a point to which I will return in chapter
5 — it is extremely difficult to document archaeological reasoning
processes. This is because the empiricism and positivism espoused by
archaeologists have tended to encourage an apparent separation
between fact and theory. There is supposed to be a controlled and
linear process from hypothesis to test to conclusion. Data are supposed
to confront theory in a direct and verifiable manner. There is little
room here for the description of subjective thought processes, hunches
and mistakes — the serendipitous processes of the practice of archae-
ology. Most reports of excavations have been ‘cleaned up’ — the debates
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         31

and intuitions condemned to the margins, present if at all in acknow-
ledgements, asides, or in diaries lost in archives.
   This inability to see ‘what really went on’ in the ‘shelter’ of archae-
ology (see Preface) is one of the most important critiques of the legacy
of processual archaeology and early contract archaeology. The archives
produced over recent decades have increasingly become problematic
since they are not sufficiently contextualized within a reasoning pro-
cess. Many are extremely difficult to use. Diaries are often not present
and unless one can talk to the individuals who were involved in the
original excavation it is often difficult to make sense of large amounts of
highly formalized data. The provision of a reflexive context must
become one of the main aims of methodology so that it is possible to
make sense of archaeological fieldwork after the event.
   Another way of making the same point is to say that archaeological
method has become highly ‘textualized’. This has always to some
extent been the case, but in recent decades it often seems as if the
recording process has come to determine the digging process. Of
course, as so many have pointed out, a badly recorded excavation is
worse than no excavation at all. Since excavation is destruction, the
record has to be as accurate as possible. The site becomes the text. But
as recording systems have become more formalized, excavation often
seems to proceed as if the ground was being looked at through the
recording system. Rather than the recording system serving the inter-
ests of knowledge acquisition, the relationship is reversed and we dig in
order to record. Thus we may dig rigidly in single contexts because we
are using a ‘single context recording system’ (see p. 93 below) or we
leave sections or baulks in certain locations so that we can produce the
necessary cross-profiles at the required points. With the standardization
of recording at all levels of analysis, we tend only to record what the
forms (the recording system) require us to record. We tend, therefore, —
not to express worries, doubts, impressions, debates, inconsistencies.
   The problem with any text is that it is difficult to understand when
severed from its context of production. Because of the constraints of
early computers, and because of changes in the work practices of
contract archaeology, recording systems have had to be highly formal-
ized. Within such systems little information was provided on the wider
context within which data are produced. The site had become a text,
but one without its context of knowledge production. So, in order to
understand how archaeologists reason in practice and in order to try
and penetrate the positivist screen of silence to find out ‘what really
32   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

goes on’ it will be necessary to turn to some examples of archaeological
enquiry either from those known personally to me or from those which
have emerged in the interstices of field reports and discussions of field
methodology.
   In considering examples of actual archaeological field reasoning, I
wish to argue that rather than testing hypotheses against data, in many
field contexts archaeologists are engaged in processes of inference
which have the nine characteristics discussed below. I do not wish to
imply that the examples used are good or ideal. Rather, they are I
believe fairly typical of what goes on routinely in both field and
laboratory contexts. It is only by establishing in this and the next
chapter what archaeologists actually do, that we can begin to move
on and consider some of the ways in which the diversity of archae-
ological practices can be recognized and built upon.


                           Hermeneutics —
Hermeneutics dealswith the thes            interpreta on, particu y




                                                     exts’ to ‘be read
   aie 1971),“ this it is meantt that in all areas of discovery,
   the data are never entirely objective or simply ‘given’. Rather, we
   always have to ‘read’ the object of study in terms of our tools,
   concepts, expectations and value        is does not mean that ob
  are completely determined by our reconceptions; objects ass
 their own independence (Ricoeur 1971; Hodder 1991). Thr
   important components of hermeneutic understanding are the her-_
   meneutic circle, pre-understandings, and the historical nature of know-
   ledge (Frodeman 1995). According to the hermeneutic circle, the
   mening of a part poe from its relationship to a hole, while
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?            33

   the whole is understood from the relationship between the parts.
   This dialectic process occurs at many levels so that a whole at one
   level becomes a part at another. Thus in archaeology the whole of a
   site is understoodin relation to its parts (the pits, ditches, houses)
   but the site is itself a part within a region or the whole of a
   settlement system. This circle of part-whole relationships is not —
   vicious — we do not just impose a whole from our a priori assump-
   tions. Rather, the objects of study can cause us to change our ideas
   about the whole or about the relationship between the parts. The ~
   circle can best be described as a spiral (Hodder 1992). The second
   point is thus essential —we have to come to the data, and always do,
   with a set of pre-judgements. These are the means by which science
   progresses because they lead to enquiry and to a perspective from
   which to look at the evidence. It is only by asking questions that the _
   data can correct us and lead us to discover new knowledge. Our
   prejudgements typically consist of definitions of terms (e.g. type
   series), criteria to identify which facts are significant, goals and —
   expected answers, tools (from trowels to mass spectrometers),
   methods and skills (such as floating procedures for recovery of
   charred seeds), and the social and political structure of the discipline,
   excavation team etc. The historical nature of knowledge derives in part _
   from the view that our pre-judgements have a lasting effect. Our
 _ starting point influences our conclusions and the future trajectory of
 ~ research. But many sciences are also historical in another sense:
   rather than building universal laws, the primary concern is with the
   specific causal circumstances surrounding a particular event.


   First, archaeological reasoning often seems to work by integrating
parts into a whole. It is based on whole-part relationships, on coherence
and on ‘fitting’. As Barker (1982, 217) argued, ‘the ultimate aim of
excavation is to draw together the very varied strands of evidence into
a coherent whole’ and he gave several examples (ibid., 180). Quoting
E. M. Forster’s dictum ‘only connect’, Barker argued (ibid., 146)
that the most important need in archaeological excavation is to
establish relationships, including features and finds, from sculpture
to pollen. There seem to be two strands to such claims. The first is
that an argument has to be presented that is not internally contra-
dictory — all the different parts fit into a coherent whole. ‘The second
strand is that all the different types of data have to be accounted for by
the argument.
34.   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

   Collingwood (1946) used to make a distinction between coherence of
argument and correspondence with data. Both these strands of
research and analysis are part of ‘wholeness’ but in practice they are
difficult to distinguish from each other. As an example of this I will
reconsider the interpretation of the Haddenham causewayed enclosure
(Hodder 1992) in the southern Cambridgeshire Fens in Britain and
dated to the earlier Neolithic.
   As soon as the site was identified on air photographs it was categor-
ized as a causewayed enclosure (figure 3.1). ‘This immediately meant
that when we approached excavation in 1981, we came with a large
amount of pre-understandings (see box on p. 32). ‘The data which we
found were initially perceived and interpreted into the whole with
which we began. The pre-understandings with which we began con-
cerned, first, a debate about the ritual nature of such monuments in the
British Neolithic. While it is recognized that some such enclosures may
have had occupation, stock management or defensive functions, they
were also used for burial and other rituals involving feasting and
‘special’ activities. The notion of ‘structured deposition’ had come

                   A       1981
                                                        S   Se       .


                                                                         S
                                                                               \
                                                                                   q




                                                                    A
                                                            a
                                                                0                       100
                                                                ey       ere   eet =: Pen
                                                                           metres




Figure 3.1 The ditch sections (A to P) excavated in different years at the Hadden-
ham causewayed enclosure.
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         35

to be discussed in relation to deposits of pottery, axes, human bone and
skulls in the ditches (Edmonds 1993).
    A second set of pre-understandings concerned archaeological the-
ories about social evolution. It had generally been accepted that in the
earlier Neolithic one was dealing with relatively non-complex societies
— those with segmented, decentralized organization (e.g. Renfrew
 1973). ‘Thus we expected that the segmented ditches (interrupted by
gaps or causeways) somehow reflected a segmentary society. In general
terms, we expected a low degree of social complexity but a lot of
variability between different segments of the enclosure.
    These pre-understandings predetermined how we ‘saw’ the data in
the first year of excavation in 1981. The air photographs suggested that
in the area of excavation we should find two parallel ditches. We found
the northernmost of the two ditches fairly easily on stripping off the
ploughsoil. It was peat-filled and very clearly cut into the light grey
prehistoric soil. It did not matter at that stage that a double ditch could
not be identified on the air photograph to run all the way around the
circuit of the enclosure. After all, one of our starting assumptions had
been that there should be variability between the different parts of the
enclosure because of the presumed segmentary nature of society.
    We interpreted other aspects of the data from the northern ditch in
relation to our pre-understandings. For example, in the deepest part of
the ditch a concentration of large animal bones appeared above a
quantity of waterlogged wood. Skull, mandible, pelvis and scapula
were the main body parts represented and there was little pottery or
flint associated. This seemed to us clear evidence of ritual — structured
or placed deposition (cf. Hill 1995).
    Our belief that we were digging a ditch of the causewayed enclosure
was supported by intersubjective agreement amongst those with the
highest credentials. Several eminent Neolithic specialists visited the
excavations during this period and pronounced their verdict. The
deeper part of the ditch with the animal bone concentration was a
typical ditch end, and the narrowing of the ditch beyond was evidence
of the existence at some point of a causeway. A small undiagnostic
sherd found in the ditch was probably Neolithic. Emboldened by this
external support we felt justified and content that a whole had been
reached which made sense of all the data in terms of current under-
standing of this class of enclosure.
   There were however, some niggling doubts. The main problem
which became more and more acute was ‘where was the other, internal
36   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

ditch?’ However much we carefully cleaned the subsoil and checked
the air photographs, it was not where it should be. The northern ditch
had been so easy to see. Why could we not see the other one? Further
trouble emerged in the shape of a small hearth. This was not visible at
the top of the prehistoric soil, but it was visible a few centimetres down.
This implied that the surface of the prehistoric soil had been heavily
leached and discoloured, probably during peat coverage. Indeed acid-
ity tests showed that pH levels increased from 4 to 6 with increasing
depth through the prehistoric soil.
    Something clearly was not right. The whole which we had con-
structed could not explain all the evidence that was emerging. Why
was the northern ditch so clearly visible on the surface of the prehistoric
soil, filled with peaty soil, while other prehistoric features had been
heavily leached during their coverage by peat? Why could we not in all
honesty really identify clear causeways in the northern ditch? Further
problems emerged. Some of the animal bones from the ditch turned
out to be horse — and yet horse was not supposed to occur in the earlier
Neolithic in northwestern Europe. And we still could not see the
southern of the two parallel ditches. We dug deep soundings by
machine to try and pick up the line of the other ditch. But we could
not see it in these trenches.
   It turned out that we could not see it because we did not know
what we were looking for. This is an excellent example of the limita-
tions of the view that archaeologists just observe what is there. To a
certain extent you cannot see ‘what is there’ until you know how to
look for it. This was the view of Flinders Petrie discussed in chapter 2.
In fact the southern ditch was clear in the sides of the machine-cut
trenches. But it contained no peat, and it was much bigger than our
train of thought, which had understood the shallow northern ditch to
be the causewayed enclosure, had led us to expect. So we could not
‘see’ the ditch. But once the contradictory evidence had become so
compelling that an alternative was demanded, we searched until
we found another ‘whole’ which would make more sense of the
bits of evidence we had collected. We realized that there may have
been leached features not visible at the surface of the prehistoric soil.
We looked more carefully where the southern ditch should have been
on the air photographs. And we at last ‘saw’ the evidence — an
enormous ditch filled with gravel and lenses of clays and silts as in
the surrounding gravels but leached and invisible at the top of the
prehistoric soil.
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?          37

   The new whole could now be put together. The northern ditch
was not, except in the area of our excavation, fully parallel with the
southern ditch. In fact its location by the Neolithic enclosure was by
chance. We later obtained a radiocarbon date indicating a late Iron
Age to Roman date. The horse was thus explained, the undiagnostic
sherd redated, and there really were no causeways. The concentration
of animal bone was interpreted as butchery waste rather than ritual
deposition (though see Hill 1995 for a further counter argument on
ritual deposition in late pits and ditches). As for the southern ditch, this
was much more the size that was common on other causewayed
enclosures. And there were clear causeways this time. Much other
evidence began to fit in too. For example, environmental reconstruc-
tion was beginning to suggest that peat growth and the onset of a
fenland had started very late in this part of the Fens. Thus it was
impossible that a Neolithic ditch of any type, never mind a shallow
one, could have been waterlogged at this location.
   But the main way that the new whole came to be put together was
through further excavation around the circuit of the enclosure. The
details of this process of interpretation can be found elsewhere (Hodder
1992). Suffice it to say in this context that what gradually emerged in
excavations of the ditch circuit in 1982, 1984 and 1987 was a coherent
interpretation which made sense of increasingly large amounts of
diverse data. Ditch segments A to P were excavated (figures 3.1 and
3.2). The new interpretation held onto the idea of ritual in the early
phases of use since only ritual seemed to make sense of repeated and
deliberate recuttings of the ditch segments, and of apparently placed
deposits of human bone and polished axes in relation to those recut-
tings. The new whole also held onto the idea of variability but recast it
in terms of social differentiation. As more ditch segments were excav-
ated it became clear that some were much more elaborate than others.
Variation occurred on a number of dimensions. The longer ditch
segments, and those segments adjacent to the longest ditch segments,
tended to have more recuts, more special placements and a higher
density of finds (figure 3.2).
   This type of variation recurred across different data sets. For example,
a palisade was found to run round the enclosure inside the causewayed
ditch. The degree of elaboration and recutting of the palisade kept in step
with the variation around the ditches of the enclosure, as did variation in
the density of finds. The same could be said of the interior itself —
variation in intensity of use seemed to occur in zones or sectors which
38     HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

       30       +0
                           x    placed deposit
                           © more than 70finds                     AQ
       25
                           A    5 or more recuts

 3= 20                                           A
 E
 £
 2 15
 no]
 re)
 <=
 & 10
 <
 te
        5   &
            ?          ?

        0: SeriDLe             F-2G    sae 3)          K   LM      NO     P
                1982                  1984                      1987


Figure 3.2 Lengths of the Haddenham enclosure ditch segments in relation to
nature of deposits, numbers of finds and recuts.

correlated with variation in the residues in the palisade and ditches.
The pattern even extended to the analysis of the finds from the ditches.
For example, the more elaborate and longer ditch segments turned out
to have higher percentages of cattle bones (Hodder and Evans 1999).
   More and more evidence seemed to fit together in terms of the idea
of variability around the enclosure. What were the causes of this
variation? One idea suggests social competition. The main difference
between ditch segments is in terms of the amount of soil that has been
removed, and in terms of the amount of maintenance and recutting of
the ditch. Perhaps social groups competed with each other in terms of
the amount of labour that could be mobilized and called upon over
periods of time. More successful groups could also deposit more pres-
tigious artifacts and perhaps also gain more access to cattle for feasting.
Other evidence which fits into this new whole which was constructed
concerns through-time variation. Gaps between ditches were continu-
ally narrowed, closed, widened or opened. The overall process seemed
to involve the varying fortunes of groups in their abilities to mobilize
labour and resources. As one moved round and round the different
types of data, pre-understandings came to be reworked in terms of new
frameworks or wholes (figure 3.3).
   I believe this is a typical example of how archaeologists work. It is
difficult for me to substantiate the claim since few publications report
                                         HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?                   39



                                                            Wider interpretation of
                                                           other sites and material



                                                           Overall interpretation of
                                                           Haddenham enclosure




      Shift in                                                  Data analysis
   interpretation



                                                          Haddenham excavations




                                                      Previous excavations, knowledge,
                                                           assumptions, questions




Figure 3.3       The hermeneutic spiral and the Haddenham causewayed enclosure.


on the mistakes and blind alleys down which they went. As already
noted, it is difficult to discern how archaeologists do reason. But it is my
impression from informal accounts of fieldwork that the type of process
outlined at Haddenham is common. In general I would claim that most
archaeology is heavily dependent on these types of accommodative
arguments (despite Binford’s 1989 criticisms of the limitations of such
ad hoc procedures). In general, we contextualize and fit together all the
bits of evidence available. When bits do not fit we worry at them and
try to reduce the inconsistencies. Sometimes the individual parts of an
argument seem to work but the whole does not fit together. An example
of this from the Haddenham case might be when all the bits (such as
the date of the pottery and the ritual deposit in the northern ‘Neolithic’
ditch) seemed to work individually but the argument as a whole could
not explain the lack of a southern parallel ditch.
   Perhaps the search for coherence and wholeness is best illustrated by
a further field example, one which concentrates on stratigraphical
40   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

relations. Here again the distinction between coherence and corre-
spondence is difficult to make. In the Haddenham case the whole
embraces both argument and data. People said they could ‘see’ cause-
ways which were not there. They could ‘see’ Neolithic pottery which
was Iron Age or Roman. They could not ‘see’ a ditch which was clearly
visible in the sides of a trench because they were expecting the wrong
sort of ditch. So we cannot separate the coherence of theoretical
argument from correspondence with the data. The latter is constructed
within the former. But equally the theoretical argument can be con-
fronted by data that does not fit. The relation between theory and data
is thus dialectical. Theory and data depend on but can contradict each
other.
   In the following case taken from Catalhdyiik (see box on p. 119), we
again see the link between coherence and correspondence within the
whole of an argument. We also see the attempt to reduce inconsisten-
cies in perspective. To set the scene, we need to look at the plan of
Building | in figure 3.4. During the excavation of this building in 1996
we came down onto a series of floors at B within the walls C, D, etc.
Our first impression was that the floors at B ran up to and were later
than (and used contemporary with) wall C. We were fortunate in that a
later pit F had cut though wall C and floors B. This meant that we
could ‘test’ the idea that the floors were later than the wall. Observation
showed that the test could be verified. The C floors did indeed run up
to the wall as suggested in inset L (figure 3.4).
   But as more evidence was put together, it did not ‘fit’. We came to
realize that the floor at B’ was earlier than rubble beneath D. Wall C
clearly abutted and was later than wall D. Thus, as we understood the
building, the B floors were later than wall C which was later than wall
D. And at the same time the B’ floors, which were the same floors as the
B floors, were earlier than wall D. The evidence did not make sense. It
did not fit together into a coherent whole. How could floor B be both
later than (used contemporary with) wall C and earlier than it?
   The breakthrough came when we realized that all the evidence
would fit together if we just made one move and argued that wall C
had been cut into and was later than the B floors. We went back to look
at the section (profile) in the side of the F pit. With new eyes we could
see what we had missed before. There was indeed a break between the
B floors and the C wall. Our mistake had been to assume that the floors
on either side of wall C were contemporary. But in fact they were not.
Floors were added in to the north side of wall C after the south side had
Figure 3.4   Plan of Building | in the North area of excavation at Catalhéyiik East.
42,    HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?




                                                                  — Base of excavation

  N                                                               S



Figure 3.5 Section (profile) showing relationships between Wall C and floors B in
Building | (see figure 3.4).

gone out of use. We redrew the section in F to show the break between
the B floors and wall C, and to show the evidence which we could now
see of a wall-slot cut through the B floors (figure 3.5 and inset M in
figure 3.4). The evidence had changed and a coherent whole had been
produced. There is correspondence and coherence to the new argu-
ment, but it is difficult to separate the two since the data (the relation-
ships in the profile at F) were themselves constructed within the whole.
   I have focused here on field examples, but the same can be said of
non-fieldwork examples. On p. 90 I describe examples of work on
burial interpretation that follow part-whole procedures. A further
example of work on gender amongst the Hohokam is provided in the
box on p. 44.
      It is often said that the whole is more than the sum of its parts. In my
view this is often because of the interdependence of correspondence
and coherence. It is not enough to bring all the data into line, make
them all correspond, and then say ‘that’s it’. What is clearly also needed
is an argument which links the data together into a coherent whole.
There is always the need to go beyond summing the parts and create an
understanding. There is thus a need for creativity and this will be
discussed further below. Some other general characteristics too will
                                    HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?          43

be explored below. These derive from the fact that the whole that is
constructed will of course vary with the parts that are included in the
analysis. The whole will depend on the parts that are brought into
relation with each other. As a larger area is searched for comparisons
and influences so a larger scale of analysis is undertaken; the same is
true for different time scales. Archaeologists are able to approach the
data in a multiscalar way, searching for different wholes that might
make sense of the data at different spatial and temporal scales. Equally,
different types of context or whole can be produced by including
different types of data — for example, subsistence, social or ritual data.
 So the discussion of wholes must involve multiple types of context. And
clearly, how these decisions are made about how to link data together
and at what scale will vary with the interpreter. Different people will see
different relations as significant. Thus archaeological research is also
multivocal.
   Another aspect of the interpretive process that will be examined
below derives from the emphasis on multiple scales, contexts and
voices. If there is so much variation and if interpretation is thus
historically embedded (Trigger 1984), the implication is that interpre-
tation can only ever be momentary. This is why in figure 3.3 I have
indicated a spiral rather than a closed circle — we do accommodate
our arguments and move on. This vision might be disturbing for
some in that it implies that there is little stability in our interpretations.
The ‘conclusions’ we reach at the end of fieldwork would always
have been changed if we could have gone on to consider more data
or more ideas. Where we stop in the excavation process will also be an
arbitrary point in our interpretive process. I know that if I had spent
another year at Haddenham new discoveries would have forced a
change of interpretation. Most archaeologists recognize that if they
could have spent another day, week, month on the site, they would
have come to different answers. The ‘wholes’ we describe are both final
(they account for known theories and for the data so far collected) and
provisional (they will be altered as new data and new theories are
considered).
   In searching for ‘coherent wholes’ in interpretations of the past, it is
important not to confuse methodological and substantive coherence.
By this I mean that when we fit parts into a whole we are using a
method. That method does not imply that the whole we construct
for the past need be of any particular type. The substantive nature of
the whole we construct may involve systemness and integration. But
44     HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

other theoretical positions will expect the substantive whole to be
societies with internal conflicts and contradictions. It may often be
the case that as more data are collected for complex societies in the
past, the wholes that are constructed need to be nuanced and non-
systemic. An example is given in the box below. Here the method
involves constructing an argument which makes a coherent whole.
The argument is constructed and made plausible by considering
more and more types of evidence which all seem to fit together to
make a coherent case. But beyond this methodological point the con-
tent of the argument itself involves tensions, contrasts and contradic-
tions. This is not a holistic or systemic view of society. A comparable
example of identifying a whole which has contradiction as its main
focus is provided by McGuire and Saitta’s (1996) analysis of South-
western puebloan societies in North America.



                   Gender among the Hohokam

  Crown id Fish (1996) argue that there is svidende from bolt and
  settlement data of iincreasing social differentiation in the shift from
  pre-Classic to Classic amongst the Hohokam. In order to assess the
  impact of the emergence of an elite on women, ~ look ata      ay        .
 _of different classes of data.                 =.

     Production
     Crown and Fish assign specific tasks to Lala men and women _
     on the basis of cross-cultural analogy and burial associations. The
     appearance of comales (griddles used to make tortillas) in the Classic
     period suggests an increased workload for women in corn prepara- _
     tion. At least part-time specialists may have been involved suggesting
     increased aie rereaden ied women. |

     Domestic architecture

     During the Classic percd there was increased walling of domestic
     compounds and ‘groups of houses. The increased seclusion and
     internal integration produced by the walling allowed greater differ-
     entiation among women within the compounds but cut themoff
     from — ce hg of pte and knowledge.                           2
                                     HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS        REASON?   45


   Ritual space
   Platform mounds appear in the Classic period. They have evidence of
   both ritual and domestic use on the tops. Evidence of female activ-_
   ities also occurs here and again supports the notion of increasing _
   differentiation among women.


   Burial goods
   Hohokam women were not buried with the same degree of energy
   expenditure as men; they were more often buried with utilitarian
   objects than the men. The calculated ‘values’ of the artifacts in
 _ female graves show increasing differentiatio from
                                                  n pre-Classic to _
   Classic.

      Putting all these strands of evidence together suggests a coherent
   whole — that there was a simple increase indifferentiation among
   women from pre-Classic to Classic. So at one level, the influence of
   women diversified alongside that of males. But one bit of evidence.
   above does not fit — the increased segregation and seclusion of
   women behind walls. Thus rather than a simple systemic whole,
   Crown and Fish construct a more complex argument about a con-
   tested society. They argue as follows. (a) The influence of most
   women within the public sphere declined. The walls suggest that
   they were unable to gain access to knowledge and community
activities. (b) An increased role of women in production resulted
    in an increased and more diverse status within the corporate groups
    indicated by walled compounds. These contrasting processes (a and
    b) are argued to be inter-dependent in that the emergence of an elite
    was based on women’s production. The control and seclusion of the
 _ increased importance of women became of greater concern.


    The second aspect of archaeological reasoning to be described here
is that it works by analogy and companson. In a sense this is just saying that
the wholes put together at one level or in one sphere have to cohere
with larger and more inclusive wholes and with disciplinary knowledge
and cross-disciplinary knowledge. Archaeologists tend to restrict their
discussion of the use of analogical argument to consideration of ethno-
graphic analogy (Orme 1981; but see Wylie 1982). Wylie (1985) has
made the distinction between formal and relational analogies, the
46   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

first based on comparisons of form and the second based on an
understanding of the causal relationships between variables (see also
Hodder 1982c). Ethnographic analogies are generally used in archae-
ology for three purposes. First, as a source of ideas in order to broaden
the horizon of possibilities about how the past might be interpreted. For
example, a broad anthropological reading suggests how kinship,
exchange or ritual can be organized in pre-capitalist societies. Second,
as a buttress to an argument about what happened in the past in a
particular case. Thus it might be suggested that women in the past were
probably central to the domestication of plants because in a large
proportion of foraging societies today, plant gathering and processing
are carried out by women (Watson and Kennedy 1991). Third, the
ethnographic present may be used to ‘test’ ideas about the past. ‘Thus it
might be claimed that hunter-gatherer settlement systems can be
divided into ‘foraging’ and ‘collecting’ systems (Binford 1980). In the
former, hunter-gatherers adopt a seasonal round, moving to resources
and leaving once the resources are consumed. In the latter, hunter-
gatherers make use of central places where they store food and from
which they plan task-oriented forays into the landscape. In a cross-
cultural survey Binford demonstrated that the different settlement
systems correlated with the seasonal availability of resources. ‘Foraging’
systems were found in environmental contexts with high productivity
and year-round resource availability. ‘Collecting’ systems were found
where productivity is low and resources are only seasonally available.
    I would argue that the apparent ‘test’ in this example is false because
we cannot be sure that the societies being grouped together are really
comparable. All that is really happening, in this and in all types of
ethnographic parallel, is that information is being transferred from
society to society on the basis of similarities and differences. Making
comparisons and drawing conclusions on the basis of similarities and
differences is more robust in experimental archaeology. Here, it is more
possible to hold variables constant and conduct experiments in labora-
tory-like conditions. A wide range of examples is given by Coles (1979)
and the success of this approach has been apparent in studies of site-
formation processes. In such cases, information is transferred from one
context to another because it can be assumed that the physical and
biological laws of nature hold constant across time and place. The
movement of artifacts of different sizes down slopes of different degrees
can be assumed to be the same 10,000 years ago as today (e.g. Rosen
 1986).
                                  HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         47

   But it is not only in ethnoarchaeology and experimental archaeology
that we see arguments based on analogy and comparison. In fact,
argument using such means is pervasive in archaeology, and every-
where the problem is: when we move beyond the natural properties of
the record, how can we decide whether different cultural contexts are
similar enough to allow transfer of knowledge from the one to the
other? ‘Take, for example, the traditional culture-historical approach
which describes cultural similarities and differences in terms of invasion
or diffusion. Clearly here the argument is built up from analogy and
comparison ~ if the pottery or architecture in places a and b are similar,
then we can transfer information from one to the other, and we do so
by saying that both a and b were produced by the same people or by
people in close contact with each other. But, always, the argument has
to evaluate whether the contexts are similar enough to allow the
transfer. Perhaps the temporal and spatial distances between a and b
make contact implausible; perhaps there are local continuities which
suggest indigenous rather than exogenous development.
   The same emphasis on analogy and comparison is seen in systems
analysis. The notion that a cultural system is like an ecological or
biological system involves transferring information from one domain
to another on the basis of perceived similarities and differences. It
might be assumed that the different components of cultural systems
function in relation to each other in the same way that the organs of the
body regulate each other; indeed, this analogy is the basis for many
functionalist perspectives in archaeology and the social sciences (Hod-
der 1982b). Analogical arguments are also used within systems analysis.
For example, it is often argued that the ritual subsystem functions in
relation to the social or subsistence subsystems. A change in one
subsystem relates to changes in another. In other words, information
can be transferred from one subsystem to another on the basis of some
claimed similarity (that both are in the same system, or changes are
contemporaneous, etc.). But, as ever, the problem is whether the
objects being compared are similar enough to allow transfers of infor-
mation across context. The same problem dogs the application of
Darwinian theories in archaeology (e.g. Dunnell 1989). Is it relevant
to use analogies with genetics in order to understand cultural transmis-
sion (Shennan 1989)? Can the two contexts really be compared?
   Most, if not all archaeological argument from artifact typology to
evolutionary theory, is based on analogy and comparison. In all such
cases, information is transferred from context a to b on the basis of
48   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

similarities and differences. But an underlying problem is that we
cannot be sure, in the realm of cultural behaviour, that contexts are
sufficiently similar for the transfer of information. We know that the
same thing can have different meanings in different contexts. In lan-
guage, we work out the different meanings for the sound ‘saw’ from
contextual clues. In bodily signalling, the same gesture (two fingers held
up, palm to face) can mean different things in different contexts
(‘victory’ on the European continent, a ‘sexual insult’ in Britain). The
same straw hat means very different things when worn in a butcher’s
shop, in a punt on a river, or on the stage with cane and spats. ‘The
evaluation of similarities and differences has to be balanced against the
interpretation of context.
   At all stages from the identification of classes and attributes of objects
to the understanding of high level social processes, the archaeological
interpreter has to deal simultaneously with two areas of evaluation.
First, the interpreter has to identify the contexts within which things
had similar meaning. The boundaries of the context are never ‘given’;
they have to be interpreted by the archaeologist. Of course, physical
traces and separations might assist the definition of contextual bound-
aries, such as the boundaries around a village or the separation in time
between sets of events. Ritual contexts might be more formalized than
or may invert mundane contexts. But despite such clues there is an
infinity of possible contexts that might have been constructed by
indigenous actors. The notion of context is always relevant when
different sets of data are being compared and where a primary question
is whether the different examples are comparable; whether the appar-
ent similarities are real.
   Second, in conjunction with and inseparable from the identification
of context is the recognition of similarities and differences. The inter-
preter argues for a context by showing that things are done similarly,
that people respond similarly to similar situations, within its bound-
aries. The assumption is made that within the context similar events or
things had similar meaning. But this is true only if the boundaries of the
context have been correctly identified and are stable. Many artifacts
initially identified as ritual or cultic have later been shown to come
from entirely utilitarian contexts, and vice versa (Hill 1995). The inter-
pretations of context and of meaningful similarities and differences are
mutually dependent.
   It is important to emphasize that the identification of contexts,
similarities and differences is not a matter simply of describing ‘object-
                                    HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?           49

ive’ data such as artifact similarities or boundaries around settlements.
The identification of contexts, similarities and differences is itself an
interpretation based both on the patterned remains and on the beha-
vioural and material culture theories deemed appropriate by the
archaeologist. Applying general theory to particular cases is itself a
matter of analogy and comparison. It involves the transfer of informa-
tion within and across contexts on the basis of similarities and differ-
ences. But our expectations and pre-understandings play a central role
in the recognition of pattern.
   A third aspect of archaeological reasoning is that it depends very
much on pre-understandings. The importance of these was clear in the field
examples from Haddenham and Catalhéyiik given above. At Hadden-
ham these pre-understandings meant that we initially misunderstood
the date and function of the northern ditch. At Catalhéyiik one signific-
ant pre-understanding was that a building such as Building 1 would be
occupied as an entity — we did not expect that floors in different parts of
the building would be of different dates. This led us initially to assume
that the floors on both sides of wall C were contemporary and in use
with (later than the construction of) wall C. It took a long time to
overcome these initial taken-for-granteds.
   In trying to identify the types of pre-understanding that are common
in archaeology, the following might be suggested.

1   Our initial definition of the object of study. We might start with a
    definition of complexity, or social structure, or settlement. Or the
    origins of agriculture — these act as themes which pull apparently
    unrelated bits of evidence (seeds, bones, ceramics etc.) into relation-
    ship with each other.
2   Criteria to identify which facts are significant and which are not.
    These are often general ideas about what causes change (e.g. we may
    only look at subsistence data) — or the very category ‘subsistence’
    data itself. In looking at a section/profile we are trained to ‘read’ it in
    a particular way, noticing some things (e.g. major soil colour
    changes) but not others (minor lenses or differential drying out).
3   Our idea of the goal of the enquiry and our notions of what will
    count as an answer. We tend to know what we are looking for, and
    we need to be able to recognize it when we find it. For example, we
    may have the goal of understanding past subsistence behaviour and
    only accept answers based on economic or environmental variables.
    And we might assume that such information will be gained by
50   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

     particular types of analysis of animal bones, carbonized seeds,
     sediments and soils.
     Tools. These very much determine what we can find. For example,
     different types of trowel are used in the USA, UK and Japan. In
     different traditions, different types of sieving techniques and differ-
     ent types of seed machine are used. In some traditions only dry
     sieving may occur, and then only selectively or not at all. As well as
     field tools there are computers, microscopes, chemicals etc. Differ-
     ent tools allow and promote the gathering of different types of data.
     Methods and skills. These include the ability to make a plan or
     map, collect samples, how to hold and use the trowel or shovel, how
     to use statistics. In archaeology, many of the field skills are not
     thought to be teachable except in practice — they have to be learnt
     as part of practical knowledge.
     Social structure. This includes the relations between participants in
     the research team. It includes gender issues and more particular
     instances such as the domination, distance and respect expected by
     certain East European professors. It includes situations such as the
     dependence of a US graduate student on the support of his or her
     professor. Networks of colleagues in the academy, professional
     institutes, unions etc. are also relevant.
     The wider social, political and funding context. Projects have to be
     Justified in terms of wider issues and these may include destruction
     of the heritage, increasing tourism through heritage, the reclaiming
     of traditional knowledge (e.g. Erickson 1988) or even global warm-
     ing. The funding context particularly affects the types of question
     that can be asked. At a global scale it is apparent that some regions
     are unable to participate in research and debate because of lack of
     institutional support and funding. Many regions feel marginalized
     from debate because of this global context (e.g. Olsen 1991).

   In a sense this emphasis on pre-understandings is closely related to
the processual archaeology emphasis on asking questions and testing
theories and on problem-orientation. But there the emphasis was
placed on testing theories (chapter 2). Where the ideas came from,
their wider context, was deemed less relevant. Within the view pres-
ented here, where the ideas come from does matter because the pre-
judgements and the questions asked have a lasting effect on the con-
clusions reached. In order to understand the answers you have to
understand the questions asked and the methods used.
                                    HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?           51

   A fourth aspect of archaeological reasoning which derives from the
third is that it is often, at least partly, data-led. This may seem opposed to
the emphasis on questions and pre-understandings. In both the Had-
denham and Catalhéyiik field examples above, it was problems that
emerged within the consideration of the data which led to a search for
alternative interpretations. This does not contradict the importance of
pre-understandings and of the questions asked. Rather, it suggests that
the pre-understandings do not determine what is discovered. After
travelling round the hermeneutic spiral (figure 3.3), the excavator
ends up in a different place — led there at least in part by the data
that have been encountered.
   The data-led emphasis also derives from the fact that, on the whole,
archaeologists have learned that they can only ask certain questions of
certain types of data. As discussed in chapter 1, different types of site
are approached with very different sets of theoretical baggage. It would
be considered folly to try and point provenience all sherds from an
urban site in northwestern Europe. The task would be too enormous.
On the other hand, it is considered acceptable and even necessary to
point provenience all struck flint from a Palaeolithic living floor. Cli-
mate change is a major issue in Palaeolithic studies but is rarely an issue
in Romano-British archaeology. Investigators ask very different types of
question in different contexts. Their research is often data-led rather
than being problem-oriented.
   There may be some occasions in which research is entirely question
led. Some of the research conducted by the palaeoeconomy team led
by Eric Higgs (1972; Higgs and Jarman 1975) was sometimes so
focused on subsistence data and site catchments that it paid scant
attention to lithic or ceramic data or to the sites in a social setting. In
some highly controlled laboratory experiments, or in field surveys in
virgin areas, it may be possible to follow an almost entirely problem-
oriented approach. But this is rare. In most cases, archaeologists try to
be sensitive to the problem at hand in creating holistic arguments.
   This emphasis on date-led inquiry differs from the notion that data
offer ‘resistances’ to theories (Shanks and Tilley 1987). In my view this
latter notion gives too much attention to pre-understandings. It implies
that, with some resistance, archaeologists impose their subjectivity on
the object world discovered through excavation. The problem with all
such discussions is that they oppose subject and object in a Cartesian
fashion (Knapp and Meskell 1997; Rowlands 1984). In this volume
I wish to get away from the dichotomous view that the past is either
52   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

subjective or objective. Analysis of actual archaeological field-work
suggests that it is both subjective and objective. By this I mean that we
construct the past from our own perspectives (pre-understandings), but
we are also led by our experience of the data to new understandings.
I will argue that we try to escape dichotomous thinking.
   Fifth, method is interpretation dependent. From the above points it is clear
that archaeologists approach the survey or excavation of different types
of site in different ways. If they interpret the site as a Romano-British
villa they will use a different methodology and call in different special-
ists from a Palaeolithic open site. In the example of Higgs’ palaeoeco-
nomists too, the methods used derived from pre-understandings which
interpreted all sites in economic terms.
    In general terms, the methods used by archaeologists vary from site to
site and from problem to problem. In deciding how to dig and sample a
pit we tend to make assumptions about whether it is a refuse pit or a
burial, for example. A specific example is provided by recent work at
Catalhéyiik. In Space 107 a layer was discovered with a cluster of large
animal bones, obsidian, pottery, shell, burned brick and stone etc. — and
a lot of charcoal. Depending on our interpretation of this we would treat
it very differently. If it is an activity area then we would plot everything
very carefully and take a lot of chemical and micromorphology samples
to identify a ‘floor’ etc. If it is a midden dump we would only plan and
dry sieve and do flotation and take one archive sample. The specialists
from their different perspectives agreed that it was probably dump —
there were no signs of obsidian production or use, and no signs of bone
breakage or special activity patterns. The wide range of types of mater-
ial, some burned and some not all fitted into a dump picture. On this
basis we followed a less intensive sampling method.
    No archaeologist can claim to dig a site entirely or to obtain all the
information from it. Sampling is an essential characteristic of archae-
ological research. But what should we sample for, and how intensively?
These fundamental questions underlie many aspects of method. For
example, they underlie issues to do with sieving (screening), flotation,
sectioning, quadrat excavation, scientific analysis, recording of finds
and so on. Once the excavation of a particular block of soil has taken
place, it cannot be repeated. The sampling must therefore be carefully
constructed. And the sampling strategy depends on what it is that the
 archaeologists think they are excavating.
    One of the problems with many sampling strategies is that they are
largely pre-set or a priori. By this I mean that they are worked out in
                                  HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         53

advance according to general guidelines such as that x per cent of sites
should be excavated, or x per cent of floor deposits and x per cent of
midden deposits. I will discuss in chapter 11 alternative sampling
strategies that are more sensitive to the specific data and their inter-
pretation.
   A sixth aspect of reasoning in archaeology is that it is very dependent
on narrate. This is closely related to the part-whole idea — that a theme
has to be provided which makes sense of the data and which serves to
provide a coherent ‘story-line’. It is also related closely to pre-under-
standings — a perspective has to be found from which to make sense of
the data at the beginning.
   Spector (1993) has argued that even a catalogue list may contain
hidden narratives which need to be open to critique. She discusses data
from a historic site at the nineteenth century Little Rapids site in
Minnesota at which there is evidence for contact between colonial
and Native American (Eastern Dakota) groups. She argues that a
typical catalogue of such material would divide metal from bone
artifacts and place metal and other trade items linked to European
contact in front of Native American and local products. So even a
catalogue contains a narrative. Spector argues that alternative narrat-
ives need to be constructed which are more inclusive of the Native
American voice. Indeed, the need to include Native American          oral
traditions in archaeological interpretations is now widely argued
(Cohen and Swidler 1997; Nicholas 1997). Many feminist writers
have suggested that more emphasis should be placed on narratives
which place people into the past and which are more sensitive to
alternative perspectives (Iringham 1991; Joyce 1994; Kus 1992). For
a wider discussion of narratives in archaeology see Hodder (1989) and
Tilley (1989b).
   My concern here, however, is more to concentrate on the way in
which narratives are a routine, if largely unrecognized, aspect of
archaeological inquiry. A clear example is provided by the way in
which archaeologists draw sections or profiles. If an untrained crew
member or student is placed in front of a section and told ‘draw what
you see’, the product is often gobbledygook! There are limitless num-
bers of lines, lenses, changes in colour and texture than can be observed
on any complex section. The untrained eye has no way of discerning
the relevant patterning in the soil. A section drawing acceptable to the
discipline will result only when the draughtsperson has in mind some
sequence of events — that ‘here is a layer which was cut by a ditch which
"sqUaAa JO aduaNbes au Jo (g pue y) suONeIe1duezU! OM} puke ‘Moeg BUC] WeYUEPPeH Y8No.Y? (sajyoud) suoMres-ssouD   =-gg BaNSIG
                                                              |
                        Bung                                      sanau
                                   www
                                                                                                    HON
                                                      7
                           qinog
                                                                  {tt pure asdeyod
                                                   ( punow,
                                                                          Z pnoWw
                                                              sgoqueyo     Asenyow
                                                                                     sdwung
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?          55

later filled up and then became filled with peat before the whole lot was
finally sealed by alluvium’. In other words, the section or profile can
only be drawn by simultaneously constructing a narrative of the unfold-
ing of events through time.
    Figure 3.6 provides alternative narratives for sections cut through a
Neolithic long barrow at Haddenham in the Cambridgeshire Fens
 (Hodder and Shand 1988). The prehistoric soils in this area became
very leached after coverage by peat and water. Since draining, the sites
have been rediscovered but it is often difficult to discern the interfaces
between layers in the discoloured soils as they are excavated and
recorded. In the field, it was possible to see different things in the
sections. The differences related to two different narratives (for a fuller
account of which see Hodder and Evans 1999). On the one hand
(interpretation A in figure 3.6), it could be argued that the mound
was built around and over the wooden burial chamber as one drawn
out event. According to this view the banks around the burial chamber
were just the first phase of the dumping of soil for the mound as a
whole. The burial chamber was open from the top in a complete
mound. On the other hand (interpretation B in figure 3.6), it could
be argued that the burial chamber was initially located within earthen
banks. This small construction was then destroyed and filled in before
the overall mound was constructed. So rather than a single event we
have a sequence of events. This second narrative accords better with
existing hypotheses about Neolithic burial ritual in similar monuments
(Kinnes 1992). But it could not be denied on site that the first narrative
made perfect sense of the data — the whole was equally persuasive.
   The above example indicates clearly the central role of story-telling
in archaeology. Having a story in mind is necessary to help us think
while we dig, think of alternatives. On many archaeological excava-
tions, the director or area supervisors will give site talks or tours,
perhaps on a weekly basis. These often function to create a sense of
community and achievement, but they are also opportunities to put
varied pieces of the excavation into a narrative. Having stories or
narratives in mind helps participants on a field project put their parts
into a whole. Having stories in mind also leads us to raise questions. It is
an essential part of the archaeological process. It has to take place at the
time of digging. This is because archaeological excavation is destructive
and non-experimental — we cannot repeat the experiment of the
excavation. How we dig depends on the stories we are telling ourselves
at the time of digging (see point 5 above).
56   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

   It might be argued that I am just being provocative. ‘Why use
words such as narrative and story-telling when you are simply
talking about the need for hypotheses and research questions — a
need with which everyone would agree. What is the difference
between a hypothesis and a narrative or story?’ In my view, the
answer to this takes us back to the notion of part-whole. A hypothesis
is simply a proposition — it may be taken from anywhere and has no
necessary relation to the wider contextual understanding of the site
being investigated. Indeed, one of the critiques of ‘hypothesis-testing’ as
a strategy for archaeology (see the Higgs example given as part of point
3 above) is that it can lead to the use of a narrow perspective inap-
propriate to the particular data at hand. Narratives are also proposi-
tions, but the emphasis on story-line implies a need to situate the
particular proposition within a wider argument. Narratives have begin-
nings, middles and ends. They have to take account of a wider set of
considerations — there has to be an overall whole and a coherence
between stories told at different levels. ‘The trouble with the term ‘story’
is that it implies a lack of concern with links to data and this is not
advocated here. Rather, a term is needed which both takes account
of the need to link interpretations to data and of the wider structure of
the account being told. Perhaps ‘narrative interpretation’ fits this dual
role best.
   Perhaps most important, the emphasis on narrative or story-line
implies narrating or telling to someone. Archaeologists have to produce
different accounts for different audiences. The notion of narrative takes
us beyond the idea of pure knowledge to a recognition of archaeology
as a practice within society.
   The construction of narratives is part of the public responsibility of
archaeologists. It is not enough to say to a wider public that a site is
dated to 8000 Bc or that it has 45 per cent domesticated animals and
80 per cent chert. Many sections of the wider public which funds
archaeology in varied ways want to have the past interpreted for
them in terms of some sequential narrative. Why is a site at this time
period and with these amounts of domesticated animals and chert
important? Why is it significant? In answering such questions for a
wider audience, archaeologists are required to ‘tell a story’, not in terms
of Auel’s ‘Clan of the Cave Bear’, but in terms of a responsibility both
to the information recovered and to public interpretation. There are
thus forces both within and outside archaeology which require archae-
ologists to write narratives.
                                    HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?          57

    A seventh aspect of archaeological reasoning is that it is multiple and
dwerse. In the example given above of the use of narrative in the
interpretation of stratigraphy at the Haddenham long barrow, different
interpretations were espoused by different people, perhaps because of
different pre-understandings. Different people ‘read’ the past in differ-
ent ways and this is one of the themes behind the idea that the
archaeological record is like a ‘text’ which has to be ‘read’ (Patrik
 1985). But whether the text analogy is accepted or not, we have already
seen in chapter | (box on p. 10) that different types of archaeologists,
different specialists and experts in different periods or areas, will tend to
conduct their archaeology in different ways. Those more engaged in
analytical methods linked to the natural sciences (dating, phosphate
analysis, petrographic analysis and so on) often use universal codes and
definitions, they conduct experiments and test hypotheses. Those more
engaged in methods linked to the humanities may take a more inter-
pretive or hermeneutic approach (as defined in the box on p. 32). We
have seen how a Romano-British villa is approached differently from a
Palaeolithic lithic scatter. Certainly, research excavations often have
different agendas and different methods (for example in terms of
sampling and analysis) from contract archaeology.
   As we will see in chapter 9, this diversity partly results from the
diverse global society in which archaeologists increasingly live and
work. But it also results from the fact that archaeology has both
academic and professional arms, and from the ways in which the
discipline sits astride the humanities and natural sciences. ‘Those
archaeologists who see themselves as historians or as serving history
may work in different ways from those who see themselves as in part
physicists or chemists. The archaeologist writing up a site, attempting
to integrate reports from a variety of different specialists, will often feel
like a ‘bricoleur’, needing some degree of ‘do-it-yourself? knowledge of
a wide range of specialisms, fitting together different pieces of evidence
into a synthesis.
   This emphasis on diversity is not the same as that on ‘multiple
working hypotheses’. The critique of the latter partly stems from the
critique above of the tendency for processual ‘hypotheses’ to be frag-
mented and decontextualized. But it is also that the notion of ‘working’
implies that the different hypotheses will ultimately be resolved. In
practice, archaeologists often find that resolving one hypothesis
simply opens up further questions and issues. I argue here that hypoth-
eses are always embedded in narratives that people want to tell. We
58   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

 need later in this book to replace multiple working hypotheses by
multivocality.
    The eighth point concerns productive tensions (a term introduced to me
by Carolyn Hamilton). So far I have implied that the archaeological
process can be seen as a matter of fitting data and theory, parts and
wholes. But much of the time, theories at different levels may not
cohere. The other side of the coin of the search for coherence is that
research often focuses on the places where there is lack of fit and on the
tensions between competing views and perspectives. These tensions
and contradictions are productive in that they lead research on.
    It used to be argued by some archaeologists (e.g. Clarke 1972) that
archaeology went through phases of ‘normal science’, interrupted peri-
odically by revolutionary change. The experience at least of archaeol-
ogy over the past 30 years contradicts this view. The notion that
 ‘everyone agrees’ with a unified set of aims and objectives for the
discipline has been criticized in chapter 1. What has become much
more normal in archaeology is diversity and debate. ‘Normal science’
seems in archaeology to involve the production and reproduction of
differences. In a fully dialectical (Hegelian) view, the tensions never are
resolved — as soon as a coherent synthesis is attained new antitheses are
exposed. Whether we argue that contradictions are ‘natural’ or whether
we say they can be resolved, they are undoubtedly a prevalent and
central part of productive archaeological research.
   Thus, inconsistencies are often resolved only temporarily and provi-
sionally. A set of stratigraphical relationships may be made sense of in a
particular solution, but in the process of reaching a coherence data
which do not fit may have been glossed over or explained away, and
these sacrifices to coherence always provide an opening for doubt and
critique. A solution may be found to a particular stratigraphical prob- :
lem — but this does not deal with the underlying difficulty that at the
micro-level there are sequences of events which cut across our defini-
tion of bounded layers (see chapter 6). At the micro-scale, artifacts may
be deposited at the boundaries or surfaces between two layers which
properly should be associated with neither of them. Much of the time
we ignore this level of imprecision, but there is an underlying contra-
diction between scales of analysis which is unavoidable.
   The tensions are often productive. In the stratigraphical example,
the issue of whether artifacts on the surfaces of layers are in or below the
layer above may lead to careful micro-analysis of the sedimentological
process, of the treatment of layer surfaces (is there evidence of a gap in
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         59

time before the deposition of the upper layer, is there evidence of
trampling onto the surface of the lower layer, and so on). The tension
may lead to new research in the attempt to find a resolution.
   The ninth point deals with evaluating fit’. In the end we are left with
the problem of what makes a good hypothesis or a satisfactory answer
in conclusions. I have defined how archaeologists reason and come to
conclusions, but how do we choose between alternatives — what makes
one say ‘that’s it’ - and how do we respond when someone says ‘no it
isn’t’?
   This last point refers to the dependence on corporate agreement —
we need others to agree and support our claim. Indeed, some might
argue that this intersubjective agreement was ALL that was necessary.
From one angle this is saying that a fact becomes proven or objectively
verified when other people replicate the results. True replication is
extremely rare in archaeology — there is always some doubt about
whether comparable cases really are similar. One can go and dig a
similar site, but not an identical one. The same is true of excavation
units or artifacts. Thus replication is partly a matter of judgement and
intersubjective agreement. From another angle the dependence on
intersubjective agreement implies that truth and objectivity are based
on power and authority — truth depends on who you can get to agree
with you!
   To reduce truth and objectivity solely to intersubjective agreement is
dangerous and inaccurate. Social, political and ideological factors
undoubtedly play a role in the evaluation of hypotheses and judge-
ments in archaeology. But there have been too many cases in the past of
large parts of archaeological communities agreeing to ideologically
manipulated versions of prehistory (Arnold 1990) for us to accept
intersubjective agreement as the sole arbiter of truth. There has to be
the opportunity to challenge consensus viewpoints, for archaeologists to
say ‘the dominant view is wrong’. Indeed, the history of the discipline is
replete with examples of heterodoxies which have become orthodoxies
(such as the rise of processual archaeology in North America, or more
specifically the acceptance of radiocarbon dates in Europe, or changing
views about the origins and spread of agriculture, or about whether
unilinear evolution is applicable to the rise of the state).
   While not denying the importance of social factors, it remains
important to distinguish the criteria archaeologists use in evaluating
the fit of theories. We have seen that the idea of ‘testing’ is inappropri-
ate in archaeology because the data are partly constructed within
60   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

theory and because most archaeology is not an experimental discipline.
The need to shift from ‘testing’ to ‘fitting’ was described in chapter 2.
But how do we evaluate the fit between theory and data? Why are some
interpretations more plausible than others? How does confirmation
occur? The answers to such questions have been discussed in qualit-
ative research across the humanities and social sciences (Denzin 1989;
Lincoln and Guba 1985; Denzin and Lincoln 1994). Differences occur
in archaeology primarily because it is not normally possible to interview
the people who produced the archaeological record, and because
material culture, by its very nature, straddles the divide between a
universal, natural science approach to materials and a historical, inter-
pretive approach to culture. There is thus a particularly marked lack of
agreement in the archaeological community about the appropriate
basis for confirmation procedures. An interpretive position can and
should accommodate scientific information about, for example, natural
processes of transformation and decay of artifacts.
   Confirmation in archaeology mainly concerns the criteria for assess-
ing coherence and correspondence. Coherence is produced if the parts
of the argument do not contradict each other and if the conclusions
follow from the premises. There is a partial autonomy of different types
of theory, from the observational to the global, and a coherent inter-
pretation is one in which these different levels do not produce contra-
dictory results. The partial autonomy of levels of theory is apparent in
the ability of archaeologists to look back at and reinterpret sites on the
basis of the same evidence (e.g. Barrett et al. 1991 in their re-working of
the excavations of Pitt-Rivers). Earlier observations can be used to
allow different interpretations — the different levels of theory (observa-
tional and social reconstruction) are partially autonomous. This point is
parallel to the claim made by processual and positivist archaeologists
that arguments must be tested using independent theories such as
Middle Range Theories (Tschauner 1996). However, in my view,
different arguments and levels of theory are only partially autonomous,
and the emphasis should rather be on fitting multiple strands of theory
and evidence.
   Certainly, some of the strands of evidence that are woven together
refer to widely found theories external to the particular case under
consideration.   Thus, as well as internal coherence     there is external
coherence — the degree to which the interpretation fits theories
accepted in and outside the discipline. Of course, the evaluation of a
coherent argument itself depends on the application of theoretical
                                  HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         61

criteria, and I have already noted the lack of agreement in archaeology
about foundational issues such as the importance of a natural science or
humanistic approach, or about whether ‘independence’ of arguments
can be claimed. But, whatever their views on such issues, most archae-
ologists seem to accept implicitly the importance of simplicity and
elegance. An argument in which too much special pleading is required
in order to claim coherence is less likely to be adopted than is a simple
or elegant solution. The notion of external coherence could also be
extended to the social and political issues identified above.
   The notion of correspondence between theory and data does not
imply absolute objectivity and independence, but rather embeds the fit
of data and theory within coherence. The data are made to cohere by
being linked within theoretical arguments. Similarly, the coherence of
the arguments is supported by the fit to data. On the other hand, data
can confront theory, as already noted. Correspondence with the data is
thus an essential part of arguments of coherence. There are many
aspects of correspondence arguments that are used by archaeologists.
One is the exactness of fit, perhaps measured in statistical terms,
between theoretical expectation and data. Other arguments of corres-
pondence include the number of cases that are accounted for, their
range in space and time, and the variety of different classes of data that
are explained. However, such numerical indications of correspondence
always have to be evaluated against contextual relevance and inter-
pretation in order to determine whether the different examples of fit are
relevant to each other.
   Other criteria that affect the success of archaeological theories
include fruitfulness — how many new directions, new lines of inquiry,
new perspectives are opened up. But much depends too on the trust-
worthiness, professional credentials, and status of the author and sup-
porters of an interpretation. Issues here include how long the interpreter
spent in the field and how well she or he knows the data: their biases,
problems, and unusual examples. Has the author obtained appropriate
degrees and been admitted into professional societies? Is the individual
an established and consistent writer, or has he or she yet to prove her or
himself? Does the author keep changing her or his mind?
   In fact, the audience does not respond directly to an interpretation
but to an interpretation written or staged as an article or presentation.
The audience thus responds to and interprets a material artifact or
event. The persuasiveness of the argument is closely tied to the rhetoric
within which it is couched (Gero 1991b; Hodder 1989; Spector 1993;
62   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

Tilley 1989b). The rhetoric determines how the different components
of the discipline talk about and define problems and their solutions.
   The confirmation of archaeological theories depends, therefore, on
inter-subjective agreement, and on temporality. Different arguments
will hold sway at different historical moments. If what we already know
explains things then we may not search for alternatives — we mainly do
this when standard accounts do not work any more. But equally, our
assessment of an adequate explanation will change because of wider
social and political factors (e.g. Trigger 1984). There can be no uni-
versal ‘cookbook’ for confirming archaeological interpretations. ‘The
tendencies I have described are variously appropriate in specific histor-
ical contexts.


Conclusion

By looking at the practices of archaeologists, by looking at what they (or
at least some of them) do rather than at what they think they ought to
do, it has been possible to characterize some components of the reason-
ing processes involved. First, it would appear that archaeological prac-
tice cannot easily be described as based around the testing of theory
against data. Such a description is under-mined by the recognition that
the data are themselves ‘seen’ through theory and pre-understanding.
To some extent we ‘observe’ what we want to or are trained to observe.
On the other hand, archaeologists are led by the data in certain
directions. They do seem to accommodate their views to their experi-
ence of the data. Therefore, rather than talking of ‘testing’, it is better to
describe the archaeological process as based on ‘fitting’. Archaeologists
seem to work by fitting theory and data together until a coherent whole
is reached.
   Second, this fitting process works best if it aums to be non-dicho-
tomous. It does not help to say that the data are either subjective or
objective. It is more productive to acknowledge that the data are both
constructed by us and that they objectively help to constitute our
subjectivities. Both/and is better than either/or in a number of
domains of archaeological method. The archaeologist searches for
both coherence and at the same time for inconsistencies because it is
the parts that do not fit an argument that lead research forward. The
archaeologist works with both parts and wholes, with both similarities
and differences.
                                   HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?         63

   Third, both in terms of the data and our perspective there is a lack of
fixity — there is always change. We have perhaps got used to the idea
that different theories have to be ‘spatialized’. By this I mean that
different groups and communities will interpret the past from their
different perspectives, situated in relation to different national, ethnic
or local interests. General evolutionary theories have increasingly
struggled to account for regional variation (Yoffee 1994) and diversity
of trajectory. We have seen that multivocality and different audiences
are central parts of the archaeological enterprise. But as well as this
‘spatialization’ of archaeological theory, fluidity is created by a con-
comitant ‘temporalization’. As pre-understandings engage in a dialectic
relation with data-led enquiry, and as solutions are sought to the
tensions between different parts of arguments, so there is continual
flow and movement. As narratives are written at different scales and in
relation to different audiences, and as those audiences and their inter-
ests in the past change, so archaeological intrepretation has to be seen
as part of a historical process.
   This same point about fluidity and diversity can be made by recon-
sidering the metaphor of ‘reading the past’ (Hodder 1986). The notion
that the archaeological record can be considered like a text to be read
invites the parallel notion that the record/text has to be translated so
that it can be read. Certainly this is an attractive metaphor from many
angles (cf. Geertz 1973). The emphasis on translation suggests the need
to make sense of the past both in ‘other’ and in ‘our’ terms. It implies
that our interpretations are largely constructions. The past is made
sense of in terms ‘we’ can understand.      But on the other hand, the
emphasis on translation exaggerates the importance of pre-understand-
ings. It underlines the ways in which interpretation is theory-led and
downplays the ways in which it is data-led. In addition, it involves
notions of domination and control — the past is translated into our
terms. Rather than attempting to understand the past in terms of
interpretations which might confront and disrupt dominant perspect-
ives, translating suggests domination in two respects. First, it implies
dominating the past in the sense of imposing interpretations on it which
are not sensitive to locality, time and difference. Second, it implies that
certain individuals in the discipline can translate the past for others —
they place themselves in a dominating position in the interpretive
process. So, rather than translation we might talk of mediation. The
archaeologist mediates between past and present, neither simply
describing data nor simply translating it into ‘our’ terms. The
64     HOW DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?

archaeologist as mediator provides information, ideas, images to a
diversity of audiences from a diversity of pasts.
   The archaeologist cannot stand outside that process. But the archae-
ologist should not translate or read ‘the past’ for others. Rather, the
emphasis should be on the archaeologist mediating between past and
present (Shanks and McGuire 1996). Actively engaged in current
issues, the archaeologist contributes to a debate, providing narratives
which resonate with contemporary concerns. The archaeologist has to
be critical of the ways in which present interests imprint themselves on
the way the past is interpreted. Between past and present, archaeolo-
gists have to be sensitive to a wide range of contemporary interests
while being sensitive also to the evidence available.




                 is testing and the her
     ‘fitting’ involve (




     Ho be ae ae methc
     biassed one’s interpretations, one




     as is shown in fig
                     ue 6
        Tester:      so | belie
                                  HOW   DO ARCHAEOLOGISTS REASON?          65

    Fitter: That sounds fine, but how do you decide which measuring
 device to use? How do you know which one is relevant to your data?
 These issues of relevance and choice, discussed in this chapter under
 the heading of analogy and comparison, mean that the Middle seer
 Theories are neither independent nor objective.
    Tester: Well, it is rather like the doctor who has a hypothesis that
 you are ill. She uses a thermometer, which is based on independent
 sets of knowledge, to test her hypothesis. Archaeologists use inde-
 pendent arguments about the formation of the archaeological
 record.
    Fitter: But my doctor recently gave me advice based on alternative
 medicine. The trouble with your medical example is that some
 people do not accept the relevance of medical science to their
 illness. This problem is exacerbated in the humanities — it is difficult
 to think of independent measuring devices that we would all agree
 on to ‘measure’ whether a building wasa shrine. In my view even the
 doctor works by fitting lots of pieces of evidence together.
    Dialectical thinker: | agree with the fitting view so far, but there
 are clear similarities between your ‘fititting’ ideas and the type of
 dialectical thought embraced by some Marxists today, such as
 McGuire (1992) and McGuire and Saitta (1996). We dialectical
 thinkers also focus on the data as both subjective and objective.
    Fitter: | agree that the fitting and dialectical views often appear
 indistinguishable. But sometimes there is a difference in emphasis.
 McGuire and Saitta (1996, 199-200) endorse the generalization and
 prediction seen in processual archaeology. | think these emphases
 probably derive from the materialist associations of much dialectical
 thought. Despite the rhetoric of even-handedness, dialectical think-
 ers sometimes retain a materialist and objectivist stance.
    Dialectical thinker: So don’t you accept the need for generaliza- —
 tion and prediction at all?
   Fitter: Generalization of course; but not prediction. The latter
smacks of determinism and material or objective causality.
    Dialectical thinker: In that case, |agree there is a difference. Your
 view is tooopen-ended for me, and in any case, | believe it is possible
 for dialectical thinking to transcend the objective/subjective divide.
4      Interpreting Material Culture




We have seen in the last chapter that interpretation in archaeology
seems to involve 9 characteristics. In the most general of terms these 9
characteristics describe a process in which there is a fluid and non-
dichotomous relationship between the archaeologist and archaeolo-
gical data. Archaeological research involves a ‘fitting’ (not a testing)
process which is both data and question (perspective) led so that subject
and object are interrelated. The fitting process is unstable and diverse.
   Some other characteristics of reasoning in archaeology can be
explored. These further lead to emphases on interactivity, fluidity and
diversity.

Interpretation and description What is the difference between descrip-
tion and interpretation? This debate in archaeology seems to revolve
around the roles of uncertainty and selectivity. In a helpful discussion of
‘interpretation’, Tilley (1993, 1-5) points out that the term is mainly
used in contexts in which uncertainty exists. In discussing where inter-
pretation begins and ends, he uses the example of describing a book. If
I count the number of words in the book, have I interpreted it? Most
people would probably say not. If I say the book was written in English,
does this count as an interpretation? Again, probably not. If I describe
the contents of the book, the situation becomes more blurred. And
certainly, by the time I argue that the book is stylistically complex,
ironic or depressing, most people would accept that interpretive state-
                                      INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE      67

ments were being made. These latter statements seem interpretive
because they involve a selection of information in relation to prior
knowledge. No description of anything can be exhaustive, but as the
thing being described becomes more complex, more selectivity is
required and more uncertainty that different people will come to the
same conclusions.
   Tilley also gives archaeological examples. Counting the numbers of
potsherds on a settlement site does not seem to involve interpretation.
But once I start to say that the high frequency of sherds is unusual for
this type of site, or that the sherds can be classified into types based on
shape, colour, temper, decoration etc., then interpretation does seem to
be involved. When statements are obvious we deny that interpretation
is involved. But once judgement and selection are involved in the
linking together of things to make (new) sense, then we accept that
interpretation has occurred. It is part of the aim of this book to
demonstrate that interpretive judgements are present in all areas of
archaeology, even down to making catalogues, doing laboratory experi-
ments and excavating features in the field. In all these activities we
make selections of information in relation to pre-understandings. In all
these activities we have to accept that other people might make differ-
ent selections and come to different conclusions.
   Descriptions seem obvious and undisputed. Interpretations involve
the selection of information according to certain criteria, and they
involve judgements that can be contested by others. However, all
description involves selecting and ordering information. As we increas-
ingly recognize in the discipline the complexity of archaeological and
material culture data, we open the door to the view that description
involves selection, judgement and interpretation. We can only look at
things from particular perspectives and with particular questions in
mind. For example, we initially approach artifacts normally at macro-
scopic level. At other scales of analysis, different descriptions result. In
the choice of scale interpretive decisions are made.
   All description involves an interpretive component. But equally, all
interpretation involves trying to link sense to data. Interpretation is
always interpretation of something. Thus it is always partially a descrip-
tion. Once again, we need a non-dichotomous approach. The link
between description and interpretation is so close that in anthropo-
logy an interpretive approach is associated with the idea of ‘thick
description’ (Geertz 1973). For Foucault (1977) too, interpreting or
explaining an event involved a description of the minutiae of events.
68   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

As already said, these descriptions involve selecting and ordering.
And they also involve expressing an account in some narrative mode.
Thus a ‘thick description’ would be one in which interpretation was
essential but in which care was taken to come close to the rich specifity
of events.
   This recognition of the dependence between interpretation and
description is very much at odds with archaeological practice. For
example, most excavation coding forms separate out ‘interpretation’
from ‘description’. Thus a layer, unit or context may first be ‘described’
in terms of soil characteristics, and dimensions and volumes may be
measured. The artifacts found in the deposit may be listed and their
locations described. An interpretation follows which may say that the
layer is ‘the fill of room 397 above floor 26’.
   There are two points which can be made about this common
archaeological practice. First, the separation between description and
interpretation is false since even the ‘description’ has interpretive com-
ponents (for the same point in relation to the recording of standing
buildings see Grenville 1997). For example, any archaeologist who has
used codified soil descriptions will recognize the subjectivity involved
(does this wet soil feel gritty, does it have 2 per cent or 5 per cent
inclusions of less than 0.05cm size etc.?). Even the filling of a bucket 1s
interpretive. Archaeologists might be asked to count the numbers of
measured bucket-fulls of soil taken from each excavated deposit. But
what exactly is a full bucket? — shghtly mounded with gaps around the
edge, shaken down, etc. etc.? Some interpretation is involved in the
most descriptive statements.
   Second, the social context in which description takes place also leads
to complex interpretive decisions being made. For example, Gero
(1996) uses the ethnomethodological perspective of Garfinkle (1967)
to demonstrate that our knowledge of the past is embedded in the social
practices of archaeological fieldwork. Dry descriptions of archaeolo-
gical data mask the interpretive process. ‘Formal accounts (including
final site reports) deliberately obscure the practical organization of
knowledge construction’ (Gero 1996, 257). References to the contex-
tual conditions of knowledge construction are ‘removed’ from the text
which ‘reports’ the ‘evidence’. The accounts are generalized and
impersonal, to make it seem as if anyone would have come to the
same conclusions. What is left out is the personal, heterogeneous and
contingent process that lies behind ‘description’ (see box on p. 69 for an
example of the effects of such biasses).
                                        INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE         69

   Interpretation cannot easily be separated from description. Indeed,
good archaeological science depends on carefully made and well-
grounded interpretation. Data ‘descriptions’ are in practice of little
use in themselves (Grenville 1997). In looking through data sheets,
archaeologists tend to turn first to the ‘interpretations’ before being
able to make sense of the ‘descriptions’. It is only when a deposit is
‘interpreted’ as ‘a well packed sub-floor fill’ that the detailed soil
‘descriptions’ make sense. It is the interpretive component in data that
makes the data useful. In selecting and grouping archaeobotanical
samples from excavated units for detailed analysis, the analyst is
dependent on the interpretations of the deposit as ‘floor’, ‘fill’, ‘pit
layer’, and so on.


                Data description; and gender bias

 _ Study of the excavation process at the Palaeo-Indian site of Arroya |
   Seco in Argentina (Gero 1996) provided two examples of andro-
   centric ‘descriptions’ of ee          data.

   |    A dominant male on the site team made larger soil pedestals eB
        artifacts to stand on than a female fieldworker. This practice led
        to his artifacts being noticed by the director and a special feature
        photograph being taken. Little special attention was Paid to the
        female artifact pedestals. For the male, Gero argues that the ©
        construction of these data is part of the assertion of power.
  2       Male fieldworkers tended to outline soil stains with trowels and
       ~ to draw them on maps with clear boundaries; women tendedto
        be less definite in their representation of stains. The description        —
        of clear boundaries indicates a erent mastery of knowledge
        wit the sg le

    an these Exctmpled: *eleséription’ is seen as part 3 cbinples social
  strategies. Gero concludes that rather than being neutral, ‘objective
  science’ is actually exclusionary, divided by gendered practices. She |
  seers the nese for an inclusive science.


Interpretation and explanation In my view interpretation includes, but
is broader than, explanation. But it should be emphasized that refer-
ence is being made here to the particular way the term explanation has
70   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

come to be used within archaeology. ‘Explanation’ is closely associated
with processual archaeology. Its aim is to identify causal mechanisms,
and it involves demonstrating that a particular event is an example of a
general class of events. For archaeologists such as Binford (1989),
explanation involves ‘if — then’ clauses. It involves identifying certain
variables as primary, independent or determinant. Within post-
processual archaeology too, there was recognition that behaviour is
influenced by acknowledged and unacknowledged/unrecognized con-
ditions (Shanks and Tilley 1987), and these could be termed causes. But
there was also recognition that reference to such causes does not lead to
a sufficient account. This is because there is more to human behaviour
than causal relationships. There are intentions, narratives, understand-
ings (Hodder 1992; Johnson 1989; Richards 1991; 1996). Many
archaeologists today, of whatever theoretical persuasion, recognize
that an adequate or full account of human behaviour must go beyond
a description of causal mechanisms in order to interpret the framework
of meanings within which people acted and made sense of events in
the world around them (for an alternative view see chapter 8 and
Barrett 1994).

The general and the particular As already noted, explanation has norm-
ally been seen in archaeology as involving relationships between part-
icular events and general understanding. Interpretation also involves
selecting information in relation to a general pre-understanding, but in
the case of interpretation more importance is given to the uncertainty
of this process. More emphasis is placed on discerning whether a
particular case 7s an instance of a general pattern, and more emphasis
is placed on re-interpreting general understanding in a specific context.
   A contextual approach involves interpreting general categories in
relation to particular instances, transforming the generalizations in the
process. But what is the appropriate scale at which the particular
should be understood? Should it be the individual person or site, or
the locality, region, or cultural group which is seen as the relevant unit
for analysis? Before the development of mapping and high-speed com-
munication, knowledge may have been highly circumscribed and indi-
viduals may have been acting within very partial frames. Barrett (1994)
has argued that archaeological entities such as the Beaker Culture are
at too large a scale to have been perceived by anyone at the time.
Rather, these large-scale entities can be seen as the unintended by-
products of smaller scale processes. Many of our explanations and
                                      INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE     71

interpretations have been at too broad a scale. We have often reified
large-scale categories which are best understood at the local and highly
contextualized level. Meskell (1996) has suggested that we need to focus
more on individual bodies and has criticized others who have claimed
to discuss agency in archaeology but have in fact seen individual bodies
as constructed by larger forces (see also Johnson 1989).
   This emphasis on the very small-scale and particular is important. It
cannot be the case that in the fleeting moments of social agency all the
large-scale structures are in some sense ‘present’. As I make a pot,
struggling to keep the walls upright, or as I write these words, there is
not the time for all the material and conceptual structures in which I
am enmeshed to play a direct role. Certainly I can monitor the effects
of my actions, but my monitoring is itself a partial and ill-informed
view. So, at one level, it is important to consider individual actions and
small-scale events as separate contexts, worthy of interpretation in their
own right. Such consideration may often be difficult in archaeology,
but there is undoubtedly the possibility of considering individual
agency in historic archaeology and in some prehistoric archaeology
(see chapter 8 for a fuller discussion and a prehistoric example). But
there are unacknowledged conditions and unintentional effects of my
actions. Whatever I intend or however I monitor my actions, there are
broader processes and interactions of which I can only be dimly aware.
So attention must also be paid to the larger forces within which
individual actions are embedded. A multiscalar approach is thus
needed which looks at the interaction between individual events and
larger scale processes however the latter might be defined. Once again
the diverse character of archaeological inquiry comes to the fore.

The creative imagination If it is accepted that there is some looseness
between individual and small-scale events and large-scale processes, if
action is not entirely determined by causal mechanisms, and if the
complexity of social systems means that unpredictable, non-linear
relationships occur, then it follows that interpretation of events must
involve a creative component. Interpretation involves selectively linking
events and materials and individuals with larger scale processes. It
involves recognizing that general understanding may have to be re-
formed in order to make sense of a particular case. The uncertainty in
interpretation seems to put creativity centre stage. Creativity also plays
an important role because of the need to find new solutions which
resonate with changing data and changing perspectives.
72   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

   On the whole, the role of the creative imagination has been played
down in archaeology (but see Mithen 1998). As in many sciences, the
imagination is seen as unpredictable, fanciful and misleading, opposed
to the rational. It might be recognized as a source of insight but it has to
be controlled. Because the attempt has been to escape intuitive and
speculative thought in archaeology, the emphasis has been placed on
the testing of ideas rather than on their generation.
   As Sue Thomas (1996) has argued, this is a false and unfortunate
dichotomy which can only limit the vibrance of the discipline. Indeed,
it is now widely accepted that both subjectivity and objectivity are
central to the success of archaeology as a science (Rowlands 1984).
S. Thomas (1996) shows that in fact there is an increasing need for and
use of imagination as disciplinary knowledge increases. The more
archaeologists know about a given situation in the past, the more the
solution has to be imaginative and creative. Imagination in archaeology
operates in relation to disciplinary norms and disciplinary knowledge.
The subjective and imaginative side of archaeological research is not
simply personal or ad hoc. It is informed by disciplinary rules and
knowledge.
   Imagination and creativity are needed in order to ask questions of
the data (Trigger 1998, 102). The whole research process, as we have
seen, depends on posing questions, taking a perspective through which
sense can be made of the data. But imagination and creativity are also
central to finding answers and solutions. They are the key to the
problem-solving process that is archaeological interpretation. Making
sense of events in the past can never be a matter of following rules since
there is always a uniqueness to historical circumstance. Imagination is
needed in making relevant comparisons, in accounting for exceptions,
and in finding a narrative that accounts for more of the data.
   The notion that the ‘whole’ (the interpretation) is more than the sum
of the parts suggests the need for a creative act in going beyond the
parts in order to conceive the whole. Even in the most deterministic of
views in which human behaviour is seen as predictable according to
general rules, a creative moment is needed in recognizing that a
particular case is an example of a specific general rule. The whole is
always more than the sum of its parts.

‘Their’ meanings and ‘our’ meanings When we interpret structures and
actions, are we interpreting the meanings, purposes and intentions
which ‘they’ had in their heads? Are we getting at their (internal) under-
                                       INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE      73

standing or are we only able to describe from the outside, in our own
terms? (This dichotomy between ‘their’ internal meanings and ‘our’
external descriptions is often wrongly linked to ‘emic’ versus ‘etic’.)
   A useful example is provided by White and Thomas (1972) in their
attempt to classify stone tool assemblages from the Highlands of Papua
New Guinea. A classification of the tools in terms of formal types was
unsuccessful. The tools were divided according to the position of the
retouch in relation to the long axis, so that a series of end, side, end and
side, etc. tools were distinguished. The occurrence of these classes,
however, exhibited no consistent patterning in assemblages across
space and time. For example, few trends could be seen through strati-
graphies or in terms of regional patterning. Consistent patterning was,
however, observed when the tools were re-classified according to eth-
nographically documented criteria. In the Highlands, ethnographic
observation suggested that stone tools were indigenously classified
according to the use of the edge. The main criteria were factors such
as the number of edges that were used, and the size, angle, retouch and
curvature of the edges.
   What this example implies is that a description that approximated
the indigenous classification will produce systematic patterning in the
record. However, the possibility remains that a classification that does
not approximate ‘their’ view might also produce coherent patterning.
White and Thomas (ibid.) also point out that we should not take for
granted the existence of an indigenous classification that is not con-
tested by different groups in society. We should also not assume that
individuals have one indigenous view that can be accessed consciously
and explained to the analyst. I want to argue that, particularly for
material culture, it is difficult to accept a simple dichotomy between
‘our’ and ‘their’ perspectives.
   To understand an indigenous perspective we would often assume
that it is necessary to talk to people. Western social science has long
privileged the spoken over the written and the written over the non-
verbal (Derrida 1978). But when material culture meanings are con-
sidered, ‘what people say’ is often very different from ‘what people do’.
This point has perhaps been most successfully established over recent
years by research stemming from the work of Bill Rathje (Rathje and
Murphy 1992; Rathje and Thompson 1981). In studies in Tucson,
Arizona, and elsewhere, Rathje and his colleagues collected domestic
garbage bags and itemized the contents. It became clear that, for
example, people’s estimates about the amounts of garbage they
74   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

produced were wildly incorrect, that discarded beer cans indicated a
higher level of alcohol consumption than was admitted to, and that in
times of meat shortage people threw away more meat than usual as a
result of hoarding behaviour. Thus a full sociological analysis cannot be
restricted to interview data. It must also consider material evidence
separately from questionnaires.
   It might be countered that material culture can indicate indigenous
perspectives because it is like a language that can be ‘read’. Some
material culture is designed specifically to be communicative and
representational. The clearest example is the material object, such as
this book, which is a written text itself. But direct communicative
signalling is also seen in various signs and symbols such as the badges
and uniforms of certain professions, red and green stop and go traffic
lights, smoke signals, and images of Christ on the cross. Because this
category of material culture meanings includes written texts, it is to be
expected to be organized in ways similar to language. Thus, as with
words in a language, such material symbols are often arbitrary. For
example, any design on a flag could be used to indicate a nation as long
as it differs from the designs on other flags and is recognizable with its
own identity. Thus the system of meanings in the case of flags is
constructed through similarities and differences in a semiotic code.
Miller (1982) has shown how dress, like language, is organized both
syntagmatically and paradigmatically. The choice of hat, tie, shirt,
trousers, shoes, and so on for a particular occasion is informed by a
syntax that allows a particular set of clothes to be put together. On the
other hand, the distinctions among different types of hats (bowler,
straw, cloth, baseball) or jackets constitute paradigmatic choices.
   The metaphor of language has been widely applied to material
culture, both in archaeology and in other disciplines (e.g. see Tilley
1990). Initially it may seem to be the case that the pot appears to
‘mean’ in the same way as the word fot. Recent work has begun to
draw attention to the limitations of this analogy between material
culture and language (Hodder and Shanks et al. 1995). Many examples
of material culture are not produced to ‘mean’ at all. In other words,
they are not produced with symbolic functions as primary. Thus the
madeleine cookie discussed in Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu
(Swann’s Way) was produced as an enticing food, made in a shape
representing a fluted scallop (Hodder 1991). But Proust describes its
meaning as quite different from this symbolic representation. Rather,
the meaning involved the evocation of a whole series of childhood
                                          INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE    75

memories,    sounds,   tastes,   smells   surrounding   having tea with   his
mother in winter.
   Many if not most material symbols do not work through rules of
representation, using a language-like syntax (Sperber 1975). Rather,
they work through the evocation of sets of practices within individual
experience. It would be relatively difficult to construct a grammar or
dictionary of material signs and symbols except in the case of deliber-
ately representational items, such as flags and road signs. This is
because most material symbols do not simply communicate. Rather,
their meanings are grounded in the experiences and practices of life.
Insofar as members of society experience common practices, material
symbols come to have common evocations and common meanings.
Thus, for example, the ways in which certain types of food, drink,
music, and sport are experienced are embedded within social conven-
tion and thus come to have common meaning. A garlic crusher may
not be used overtly in Britain to represent or symbolize class, but
through a complex set of practices surrounding food and its prepara-
tion the crushers did come to mean class through evocation and
association. Bloch (1995) has shown that the carvings on wooden
buildings in Madagascar do not ‘mean’ in terms of communication;
rather they play a functional role in emphasizing the social importance
of the house.
   Because   objects endure, have their own        traces, their own   grain,
individual objects with unique evocation can be recognized. The spe-
cific memory traces associated with any particular object (a particular
garlic crusher) will vary from individual to individual. ‘The particularity
of material experience and meaning derives not only from the diversity
of social life but also from the identifiability of material objects. The
identifiable particularity of material experience always has the potential
to work against and transform society-wide conventions through prac-
tice. Because of this dialectic relationship between structure and prac-
tice, and because of the multiple local meanings that can be given to
things, it would be difficult to construct dictionaries and grammars for
most material culture meanings. It is difficult to argue that there is one
indigenous meaning, or that all indigenous meanings can be under-
stood through language.
   The importance of practice for the social and symbolic meanings of
artifacts has been emphasized in recent work on technology (Schlanger
1990; Dobres 1995). Each technical operation is linked to others in
operational chains (Leroi-Gourhan 1964) involving materials, energy,
76   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

and gestures. For example, some clays are better for throwing than
others, so that the type of clay constrains whether a manufacturer can
make thrown pots or hand-built statuettes. Quality of clay is related to
types of temper that should be used. All such operational chains are
non-deterministic, and some degree of social choice is involved (Lem-
onnier 1986; Miller 1985). All operational chains involve aspects of
production, exchange and consumption, and so are part of a network
of relations incorporating the material, the economic, the social, and
the conceptual and even moral. Latour (1988) provides examples such
as modern speed bumps (termed ‘sleeping policemen’ in Britain) which
force people to be socially responsible and moral by not driving too fast
outside schools, although in fact the reason for not driving fast is that
one does not want to break one’s car on the bumps. In archaeology it is
widely argued that monuments or artifacts which involve a large
amount of time, energy or labour to produce are appropriate indicators
of high status; the link between the signifier (such as the monument)
and the signified (high status) is not arbitrary or simply representa-
tional.
   There are thus at least two different ways in which material culture
comes to have meaning. The first is through rules of representation.
The second is through practice and the mutual implication of the
material and non-material. Whereas it may be the case that written
language is the prime example of the first category and tools the prime
example of the second, language also has to be worked out in practices
from which it derives much of its meaning. Equally, we have seen that
material items can be placed within language-like codes. ‘There is some
support from cognitive psychology for a general difference between the
two types of knowledge. For example, Bechtel (1990, 264) argues that
rule-based models of cognition are naturally good at quite different
types of activity from connectionist models. Where the first is appro-
priate for problem solving, the second is best at tasks such as pattern
recognition and motor control. It seems likely then that the skills
involved in material practice and the social, symbolic, and moral
meanings that are implicated in such practices might involve different
cognitive systems than involved in rules and representations.
   Bloch (1991) argues that practical knowledge is fundamentally dif-
ferent from linguistic knowledge in the way it is organized in the mind.
Practical knowledge is ‘chunked’ into highly contextualized informa-
tion about how to ‘go on’ in specific domains of action. Much cultural
knowledge is non-linear and purpose dedicated, formed through the
                                      INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE      77

practice of closely related activities. The practical world involves social
and symbolic meanings that are not organized representational codes
but are chunked or contextually organized realms of activity in which
emotions, desires, morals, and social relations are involved at the level
of implicit taken-for-granted skills or know-how.
    It should be emphasized that the two types of material symbolism —
the representational and the practically associated (or phenomenolo-
gical) — often work in close relation to each other. Thus a set of
practices may associate men and women with different parts of houses
or times of day, but in certain social contexts these associations might
be built upon to construct symbolic rules of separation and exclusion
and to build an abstract representational scheme in which mythology
and cosmology play a part (e.g. Yates 1989). Such schemes also have
ideological components that feed back to constrain the practices. Thus
practice and representation interpenetrate and feed off each other in
many if not all areas of life. Structure and practice are recursively
related in the ‘structuration’ of material life (Giddens 1979; Bourdieu
 1977),
    The diversity of types of verbal, written and material meanings
within any society suggests that it is naive to assume that archaeologists
can reconstruct the indigenous meanings in the past. People often find it
difficult to translate from practical and sensory meanings to verbal
meanings. We learn practical knowledge by repetition and the mon-
itoring of the results of action. Much work in psychology shows that
practising of skills and routines leads to ‘automization’. By this I mean
that we become adept social actors without necessarily being able to
bring practical knowledge into conscious thought with any ease. ‘The
knowledge or know-how becomes difficult to access with conscious
thought. Certainly practical routinization may initially involve con-
scious manipulation in relation to a social environment and social
goals. But once routinized, there may be only partial links to conscious
thought. Thus when ‘we’ are interpreting ‘their’ meanings we are
dealing with skills about which people may not have been articulate —
and which in fact may have become partially disengaged from con-
scious thought.
   This last point undermines the dichotomy between ‘our’ and ‘their’
thought. We learn how to behave in the practical world through
practice and routinization. As already argued, the routines we learn
are embedded within social convention. Our personal experience of
associative meanings, the thoughts and emotions which are embedded
78   INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE

in our practical engagement with the world, are at least partly the
product of the objective conditions within which we live. They are thus
‘outside’ ourselves, as much as they are ‘inside’ ourselves. A similar
point is argued in relation to language by poststructuralist writers
(Bapty and Yates 1990). We think about the world through a language
that is already written for us.
   This discussion demonstrates that there were many types of mean-
ings which ‘they’ had in the past. Even if ‘we’ could talk to ‘them’, they
would be no more able than we are in our contemporary lives to
verbalize all the levels of non-discursive meaning which le within
their actions and statements. It is our role as observors to attempt to
understand the links between actions, events, symbols and the material
conditions and social conventions within which they are embedded.
Both ‘they’ and ‘we’ have to interpret action.


Conclusion

I have argued here that there is a diversity of types of meaning in
society. There have been successful attempts by archaeologists to inter-
pret conflicting and contested meanings in the past (Brumfiel 1991;
Hastorf 1991; Ferguson 1991). But it should not be supposed that if we
could talk to people in the past that the difficulties of interpreting
diversity of meaning would be resolved. Indeed, anthropologists, his-
torians and sociologists have, to some extent, to work like archaeolo-
gists. Many types of social meaning are practically involved in the
material world. They are not spoken and are thus hidden, but they
are not arbitrary and unavailable for study. To the contrary, the non-
arbitrary material relations of much social meaning open up the poss-
ibility of grounding interpretation in the ‘thick description’ of social life.
It is thus possible for the anthropologist, historian or sociologist to
‘excavate’ meaning in the practices of social life, without depending
entirely on the spoken world. For archaeologists themselves, often,
ironically, trying to be like anthropologists, historians or sociologists,
the important point is that meaningful material practices leave residues
on which the creative imagination can dwell, using the techniques
described in chapter 3, so that interpretation can occur.
    Given the diversity, instability, complexity and multi-levelled char-
acter of material meanings it is clear that an interpretive approach is
needed which is open to alternative readings of the same evidence.
                                      INTERPRETING MATERIAL CULTURE      79

Interpretation has to be sensitive to the particular as well as to the
general. Imposing general rules without careful evaluation of their
relevance to the local situation is clearly inadequate. There is thus a
need to focus on archaeological method. A basic requirement for such
a method is that it be able to adjust to changing contexts and circum-
stances. Rigidity of approach is unlikely to be able to accommodate to
diversity in the topic of study. An approach is needed which can reflect
upon itself, probe its own taken-for-granted assumptions, and adapt to
changing circumstance. In the following chapter I wish to begin to
explore the possibilities for a reflexive method in archaeology. Indeed,
the rest of this book will be a response to the position established in the
first four chapters that archaeological research in practice is diverse,
fluid and non-dichotomous. What methods can be used in order to
enhance these characteristics of archaeological enquiry?
5 ~=©36Towards a Reflexive Method




Most accounts of method in archaeology accept that at some level the
data are constructed in theory — they are ‘theory-laden’. This was true
of many culture-historical archaeologists who responded to the theory-
ladenness of data by sticking as closely as possible to the facts. Proces-
sual archaeology certainly accepted the notion that the data are con-
structed through interpretation. The response was to emphasize testing
and independence of middle range arguments. The theory-ladenness of
facts is also recognized in realist accounts (see box on p. 23) and
dialectical accounts (McGuire and Saitta 1996; McGuire 1992 and
see box on p. 64).
   It is unfortunate that archaeologists in their practices have not been
as sophisticated as in their theories. In practice, archaeologists have
ignored or side-stepped the issue of theory-ladenness. As already noted,
many excavation record forms still separate description and interpreta-
tion in the way advocated by Barker (1977; 1982). Carver (1989, 669)
argues that this tradition in Britain extends back to Pitt-Rivers, such
that ‘English excavators, particularly, believe that there ought to be a
science of retrieving archaeological evidence which has nothing to do
with the interpretations that are subsequently made’.
   This same separation of data description and theoretical interpreta-
tion continues in much modern excavation, which is underlain by the
following scheme in which the data are seen to consist of objects
(ceramics and lithics for example) and contexts (layers and houses for
example).
                                             TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD         81

                          DATA          objects     contexts




                          THEORY            interpretation

Figure 5.1     The supposed separation of theory and data in archaeology (compare
figure 5.2).


  Consider the following two statements                from Joukowsky’s   (1980)
A Complete Manual of Field Archaeology.

   In addition to day-by-day notes, the square supervisor is responsible for
   a subjective interpretation of the meaning of his or her excavation.
   This subjective analysis is submitted at the conclusion of his/her work
   in a particular area and is physically kept separate from the ob-
   jective facts, so that assumptions are kept distinct from field notes.
   (pp. 218-19)
      If the earth is from a sterile layer, it can be dumped, but if it comes
   from an occupation level, the earth should be carried to the screen,
   spread on it, and sifted so that no telltale signs will be overlooked.
   (p. 175)

    The first statement argues that interpretation should be kept separate
from objective fact and that it should occur only after data have been
collected. The second statement contradicts this by arguing that the
methods used depend on prior interpretation. The excavator has to
interpret a deposit in terms of whether it is an occupation level before
screening (sieving) is used. How is one supposed to know whether a
layer is sterile before it has been screened?
   Interpretation occurs at many levels in archaeological research, and
in the example just given, it cannot be confined to a higher level. As
was shown in chapters 2 and 3, it is generally the case that how we
excavate a site is determined by our prior interpretation of the site. For
example, decisions will frequently be made about whether to screen on
the basis of interpretation. For example, a ‘floor’ context may be
excavated more intensively than one interpreted as ‘fill’, with 100 per
cent water screening only being used in the ‘floor’ context. In such
cases, whether an artifact exists at all within the archaeological view
depends on interpretation. Microartifacts may only be recovered
because of full water screening of ‘floor’ contexts. The same artifact
from a ‘fill’ would have less chance of recovery and might simply
82   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

‘not exist’. Thus the objective existence of an artifact as ‘data’
depends on the interpretation that has been made prior to and during
excavation. How, then, can it be maintained that subjective data
interpretation should only occur after objective data description and
collection?
   Archaeologists have typically dealt with the problem of needing to
know what is being excavated before it is excavated by sampling
different parts of deposits or sites in different ways, or by taking initial
trial soundings (sondages) before full excavation. The assumption in
such cases is that any mistake made in the method used to excavate
parts of the deposit or site can be rectified when digging other parts of
the ‘same’ deposit or site, or even other sites in the same region or class
of site. The problem with this approach is that in cultural deposits we
cannot assume that all the sampled parts of the deposit, site or group of
sites are similar. In laboratory-based archaeological research or in
experimental archaeology it may be possible to repeat experiments,
varying conditions in a controlled way, so that different instances of the
‘same’ phenomenon can be examined. In excavation, whether different
parts of a deposit or different deposits or sites are the ‘same’ is itself an
interpretation. Such an interpretation might be best made after exca-
vation but it has to be made prior to excavation if trial soundings of an
entity such as a pit or site or of a category such as a class of pit or site
are to be made.
   This contradiction which lies behind archaeological research designs
is again clearly illustrated by Philip Barker’s Techniques of Archaeological
Excavation (1977; 2nd edition 1982), a volume which describes methods
which have become common in British field archaeology. On the one
hand, Barker accepts that ‘interpretation ...inevitably begins as fea-
tures are seen, dissected and removed’ (1982, 145). Since recording
begins during excavation, and since ‘the interpretive element in the
recording can never be completely isolated’ (ibid., 146), the archae-
ologist has a great responsibility to interpret immediately, as layers are
uncovered (ibid.). For Barker, recording is always an interpretation —
for example, a section or profile drawing records what the excavator
sees rather than simply what is there.
    So, on the one hand, for Barker interpretation is prior to or at least
embedded within recording and excavation. But it is a very different
strain in Barker’s account which has come to dominate British field
archaeology. This is the contradictory view that this interpretive com-
ponent should be minimized by separating evidence from interpreta-
                                         TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD       83

tion. ‘Immediate on-site recovery... should be as objective as it can be’
(1982, 147). He suggests that ‘in order to minimise the interpretive
element in the record’ (ibid., 145) neutral terms such as ‘feature’ and
‘context’ should be used. He argues for formalized cards and coding
sheets — indeed for the whole system of ‘objective’ data description that
has become routine. Subjectivity and speculation become central only
at higher levels of interpretation (ibid., 147).
   Why was it possible to side-step the centrality of interpretation within
‘data description’? Perhaps the answer lies in the need to handle
increasingly large amounts of data and the codification implied by
computer-aided techniques. Barker (1982, 206) expresses this latter
need. He suggests that the excavator may start off with doubt about
whether a post-hole might be a root-hole, or a floor a random scatter of
pebbles. Although Barker feels that this interpretive doubt should be
retained in the excavation report he accepts that it often is not. The
reason is that if all such interpretive issues were included in the report it
would become too dull because there would be too much information. The
handling of large amounts of data led to the use of highly codified and
rigid computerized recording systems. In order for such systems to
work it had to be assumed that data gathering could be separated
from and be prior to interpretation. Another important factor was
the development of contract archaeology and the resulting system-
atization of method. Competitive tendering has often led fieldwork to
be undertaken in less time and with less resources. ‘Most archaeological
reports have become terse statements of reductionist objectivity’ (Chad-
wick 1998). Shanks and McGuire (1996) argue that the management
strategies followed by contract archaeologists in the USA led to de-
skilling and to a need for standardization.
   The key point here is that, as many archaeologists would in theory
accept, excavation method, data collection and data recording are all
dependent on interpretation. Interpretation occurs at the trowel’s edge.
And yet, perhaps because of the technologies available to deal with very
large sets of data, and because of the rise of contract archaeology, we
have as archaeologists taken the position that excavation methods can
be separated from and be seen as prior to interpretation. It will be
argued below that modern data-management systems perhaps allow
some resolution of the contradiction. At any rate, it is time that the
contradiction was in some way faced and dealt with.
   The data are not ‘given’ to interpretation. Rather, interpretation is
part of the data.
84   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

                                              understanding

                                           objects——contexts

                     DATA

                                           interpretation

                     THEORY                sea        eee


Figure 5.2   The relation between data and theory in archaeology.




Archaeological Data

Archaeological data can be defined as a set of dynamic, dialectical,
unstable relations between objects, contexts and interpretations (figure
5.2). The terms object and context are here being used relationally
within a nested hierarchy of terms from attribute to artifact to assem-
blage to type to layer to feature to site to region (figure 5.3). Other
terms such as phase could be included. ‘Object’ refers to a lower level
entity (e.g. feature) within a higher level entity (such as a site) termed
context. In the following account I refer mainly to objects as artifacts
and to contexts as layers, assemblages or features. But it should be
noted that similar arguments can be used for attributes (objects) on
artifacts (the context of the attributes). The problem of scale or level is
the problem of how to decide what is the relevant context for a
particular archaeological entity — this is part of the general problem
discussed below of linking ‘objects’ to ‘contexts’.
   The three parts of the hermeneutic triangle in figure 5.2 can be
looked at in the following ways:
   At the primary level of data analysis, interpretive theory constructs objects
in a number of ways. In chapter | I discussed emerging problems in the
definition of the archaeological object. Particularly at the micro-scale,
material ‘objects’ can be seen to be a function of perspective or scale of
analysis. As another example, Munsell charts or type series are devel-
oped independently of new object finds and are imposed on them. But
in applying these codes we often recognize some ‘slippage’ and diffi-
culty — some interpretation becomes necessary, and the absolute
separation between data and interpretation cannot be maintained.
For example, how burnt does a bone/flint have to be before it is classed
as burnt? What boundaries should we choose between large and small
                                              TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD           85

                      attribute             object

                       une                  Lidalial   object

      activity area   ssemblge      layer              Renee    object
                      nips          site                        context   object

                      culture       Kido                                  eine

Figure 5.3 One of many possible hierarchies of relationship between objects (lower
level categories) and contexts (higher level categories).


sherds, or abraded and unabraded? In answering these questions at the
primary level we often do not use object-context relations. We tend to
impose a priori assumptions. We say we are just ‘describing’ the
variability and that this is a relatively objective procedure; or we say
that we are using techniques proven at other sites or regions; or that
there is something universal about the class of object being examined,
etc. But ethnotaxonomic work on colour and on ceramic classification
has shown that typologies are always to some extent socially con-
structed (e.g. Miller 1985; Arnold 1971; Baines 1985; Berlin and Kay
 1969). Cultural variation in stone tool categorization was described in
chapter 4.
   Perhaps the clearest example of how theory constructs objects is that
whether we find objects at all depends on the methods used which
depend on the theories espoused. For example, as already noted,
whether we wet or dry sieve and the size of mesh used determine
whether small objects will be found. The sieving decisions will them-
selves often depend on general theory such as ‘burnt deposits are more
likely to have carbonised seeds’. In all these cases we tend not to use
contextual information in interpreting the general or local rules in
relation to the objects. We do not make full use of the local, varying
information, especially as codification has increased in archaeology.
    Theory also constructs context and again we often ignore local, object-
based, information in defining contexts. We have long recognized in
archaeology that meaning depends on context — for example, whether
an object is defined as residual or not depends on other things in the
same context (layer, pit etc.). But the boundaries of the context are not
‘oiven’ — they are defined theoretically. For example, it has become a
widely accepted convention that the minimum context or ‘unit’ is the
soil matrix. But another way of defining context would be to use
clusters of artifacts (which may lie within or even cut across soil
86   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

matrices). In any case the boundaries of soil contexts often have to be
interpreted. For example, should all the fine lenses in middens each be
separate contexts? Since fine-grained excavation is often not possible,
how many lenses should be lumped together to form one context?
   There is no fixed entity of bounded earth that can be recorded
independently of interpretation. For example, in building ‘fill’ (material
which has been thrown or collapsed into an abandoned building) there
may be many small soil boundaries which we ignore during excavation
and recording. The same is true of dense middens containing multiple
lenses of discarded material. Similar sized lenses when found on a floor
in a shrine would probably be dug separately. In some cases, large
blocks of soil might be taken and the fine lenses excavated under the
microscope. In other words, whether a soil boundary is recognized, or
even seen, depends on interpretation. It is a matter of recognizing a soil
boundary as significant (at a particular scale).
   The boundaries of contexts depend on interpretations of cut rela-
tionships — which pit cuts which, and so on. And the grouping of post-
holes into contexts depends on their interpretation as houses. The
problem is, as with objects, that we try to define the contexts a priori.
We try to do this ‘objectively’ without specific reference to the objects
found in them. But we recognize the slippage, the arbitrariness in
practice — because contexts depend dialectically on theories and
objects.
   So definition of objects depends on interpretation of contexts and definition of
contexts depends on interpretation of objects. There has been a long debate in
archaeology about the relative importance of objects and contexts.
Montelius’ typological division of the Scandinavian Bronze Age in
1885 appeared to depend on a study of objects and their change in
form over time. However, in the same early period in the development
of archaeology, Miiller countered that the systematic placing of an
object within a typological series was only possible if we already knew
its find context (Miiller 1884; Graslund 1987; Sorensen 1997). In fact,
in most archaeological typology some information about context influ-
ences the typological definition of objects, whereas the context is
defined (in relation to its date or function) in relation to the objects
found within it.
    So everything depends on everything else in the hermeneutic circle. I
should emphasize that I am talking here about what archaeologists do
in practice. We all know these complex inter-relationships occur in
practice but we often choose to ignore the slippage from the practical
                                            TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD            87

  STAGE 1




    Stratigraphically A is later than B.
    But if artifacts in B are clearly later than A and if there is some uncertainty
    about the stratigraphical relationship we might, in post-excavation, decide to
    reinterpret the profile/section as;



  STAGE 2




    So that B is later than A.
    Alternatively, we might decide that we had been wrong about the artifacts in B
    and reinterpret them as earlier than those in A or as intrusive into B. Thus, we
    return to;




  STAGE 3




Figure 5.4 A simplified example of the fluid relations between objects and contexts
in archaeology.

aim of separating interpretation and data description. As an example of
what happens in practice, we can look at figure 5.4 and its attached
explanation. The stratigraphical relations between layers can be revised
by evaluating the dates of the objects — and on wider theories about how
the site developed etc. But the dates of the objects can also be revised by
re-evaluating the stratigraphical sequence. And consideration of the
88   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

overall problem of the relationship between objects and contexts
depends also on pre-understanding and on the interpretation the
archaeologist is interested in developing. So everything depends on
everything else in a hermeneutic circle.
   This interdependence of objects and contexts within an interpretive
framework can be shown in a number of different examples, although
most concern the way in which objects are redefined in relation to
context.

Example | — dating ditches S. Thomas (1997) has discussed a site in
which during the excavation the archaeologists had observed from the
data so far excavated that parallel ditches tended to be contemporary.
This theory was being used to date unexcavated ditches and to direct
sampling of unexcavated ditches. The theory was held to even if
contradicted by the artifacts found in the ditches. Thus, in this case,
artifacts found in ditches were being given meaning (as residual etc.) on
the basis of an interpretation of context which was based on the
interpretation of the site as a whole which was itself based on the
dates of artifacts found in some ditches.

Example 2 — palaeoethnobotany A good example from palaeoethno-
botany is provided by Lennstrom and Hastorf (1995). It might be
assumed that the charred plant remains in a deposit relate in some
way to the use of that deposit, but Lennstrom and Hastorf point out
that the charred remains in a feature could be secondary and redepos-
ited. They deal with this problem at the site of Pancan in the central
highlands of Peru (650-1000 ap) by intensive sampling of all deposits
and by comparison of charred plant assemblages in neighbouring
deposits. Thus, if the plant assemblages in neighbouring (including
above and below) deposits are similar, the suspicion must be that the
plants in any particular deposit were not placed there intentionally, but
were part of general background soil contents. Cutting and recutting of
pits, for example, would redistribute charred plant remains through
various deposits.
    Lennstrom and Hastorf note that the soil in some human and animal
burials contains plant remains similar to that in surrounding deposits.
But in some cases, unique assemblages can be observed. In these cases it
can be argued that the plants were placed intentionally in the pits and
graves as part of ritual behaviour. Equally, they determine whether
plant remains recovered from hearths were in situ by comparison
                                        TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD       89

with all other contiguous deposits. In these examples, the meaning of a
particular percentage of maize varies according to context. In one case,
the maize remains would be interpreted as unintentional. In another,
where the percentage differed from surrounding deposits, the maize
would be given a different interpretation, involving intentionality.

Example 3 — lithics    Lithic specialists have tended to impose basic
 divisions of their material based on universal assumptions. One of the
 most widely used is the division between blades and flakes. Conven-
 tional wisdom dictates that any flake that has more than a 2:1 length to
width ratio is typed as a blade (Inizan 1992, 58). Conolly (1996) has
 made several criticisms of this approach. The first is that the terms
blade and flake are often assumed to relate to different technological
processes. Experimental research has shown that blade production
 requires more pre-planning and may be linked to larger scale and
more specialized production (Clark 1987). Clearly, however, these
 same more structured production processes can produce flakes that
 do not respect the 2:1 ratio. Second, the lithic artifacts recovered are
usually broken and fragmentary so that estimates or interpretations of
original morphology have to be made — the full dependence on uni-
versal metric criteria becomes undermined. Third, there may be
important technical and social distinctions between blades which cut
across or do not respect the conventional 2:1 division. Other non-
metric criteria such as dorsal scar patterning and edge profiles may
be used to classify an individual lithic piece in order to tease out such
variation. It is not enough to depend on universal criteria which are
insensitive to context.
    The distinction between blades and bladelets is a parallel case. An
arbitrary metric cut-off point is often used to distinguish small and large
blades in an assemblage (Conolly 1996). But Tixier (1974, 7) suggests
that the specific metric divisions between blades and bladelets devised
by him for the Epipalaeolithic of the Maghreb, should not be used
elsewhere without taking into account the technological context of the
assemblage to which it is being applied. The division between blades
and bladelets is meaningless unless it is related to processes in the
production or consumption of these artifacts. For example, the division
may be related to technical differences between large and small blades,
such as different core types or reduction stages. It may be related to
functional differences as when blades are hafted as sickle segments,
while bladelets are microliths in composite tools. It may be related to
90   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

social differences, as when blades are womens’ tools, bladelets mens’
tools. Thus the distinction between            blades and bladelets must be
worked out in relation to other, local evidence; and it must be seen as
fluid, potentially changing through time and across space.
   As a final lithic example, Conolly (1996) takes the definition of tool
types. Conventionally, retouched lithic artifacts have been assigned a
tool type by reference to criteria such as the blank used, the working
edge morphology and the suspected function. Examples include pro-
jectile point, flake side-scraper, sickle blade. There are clearly difficul-
ties in assuming that only intentionally retouched pieces were used as
tools (Gero 1991a). Unmodified flakes can be hafted as projectile
points, and a ‘projectile point’ can be used as a knife. Use-wear and
functional analyses may help to pick up such variation, but there are a
number of ways in which the imposition of tool categories must be
made sensitive to other or local information. For example, there may
be social differences. Thus a ‘projectile point’ found in domestic con-
texts may be pressure flaked and used as a knife, while the ‘same’ object
found in a non-domestic context may have been made using a soft
hammer and may have been used as a projectile.

Example 4 — burial Parker Pearson (1993) has demonstrated that
contextual information relating the dead to the living is necessary for
adequate understanding of mortuary remains. He identifies three types
of analysis in which burial can be contextualized.

1    Analysis ofspatial and topographic relationships between the abodes of the living
     and the dead Parker Pearson reconsiders the Saxe and Goldstein
     hypothesis that formal, bounded disposal areas for the dead can be
     linked to societies with corporate groups organized by lineal descent.
     Closing off the dead is linked by this hypothesis to the control of
     restricted resources. Morris (1991) has shown in case studies from
     Classical archaeology that these general terms and ideas need to be
     reinterpreted in relation to specific historical circumstances. As Par-
     ker Pearson (1993) notes, notions of liminality, segregation and
     boundedness may be applied differently in different societies. In
     some societies, it may be adequate to separate the dead by placing
     them below the ground; in others it may be necessary to place them
     on the other side of running water. In his own work in Denmark, ‘the
     concept of separation should be seen as relative to whatever existed
     before or after’ (ibid., 206). It is only when sequences of changing
                                          TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD          91

   placement of the dead can be identified that we can attempt to
   ascribe meaning to the relationship of the dead to the living.
2 Analysis of intra-site organization within the abodes of liwing and dead —
   Differentiation among graves can be compared with differentiation
   among houses to see if, for example, status is represented in one or
   both domains. In some cases, the world of the dead may misrepres-
   ent that of the living. Also, the structure of a settlement may be
   organized according to principles such as gender (men’s or women’s
   houses or activity areas), kin (such as spatial distinction of moieties),
   status (as in the central placing of a dominant house), or cosmolo-
   gical principles. Comparison can be made with the spatial organ-
   ization of cemeteries of the same date.
3 Analysis of the distribution of artifacts and assemblages between settlements,
  funerary deposits and other contexts Archaeologists often attempt to
   ascribe ‘value’ to grave goods in order to establish degrees of
   differentiation and ranking amongst graves. There is a danger
   here of a circular argument as artifacts are scored according to
   their rarity in funerary contexts or according to the amount of
   labour invested. Rather than making cross-cultural assumptions
   so that the same thing always has the same value (because it
  involves the same amount of labour), cross-contextual analyses
   allow the symbolic value of artifacts to be assessed more accurately.
  An analysis of the selection processes for grave goods has been
  carried out by Braun (1977). He compared the rubbish contexts
  and grave assemblages from Native American sites of the Wood-
  land Period and distinguished those items in burials which were of
  significant social value as determined by their rarity in the waste
  contexts of settlements.

   In all these cases, the issue is one of ‘redefining the archaeological
object’ (see chapter 1). The accepted division of the archaeological
domain into pottery, lithics, animal bones, burials or whatever, has
proved too restricting. We have taken these categories as self evident,
at least partly because their material nature gives them an apparent
‘objectivity’. But there is a need to break out of the constraints imposed
by this false objectivity and explore new ‘objects’ which cut across the
old definitions and which may be productive in new ways and directions.
The examples above show that the same material object may mean
different things in different contexts. Meaning is relational. Archaeolo-
gical interpretation is imited by the common practice of separating out
92   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

certain classes of object (ceramics, lithics, burial) and considering them
on their own. At certain levels of analysis, archaeologists recognize the
need to break out of these limiting categories in order to examine cross-
cutting concepts. Themes such as burning, or domestication, or decora-
tion can be explored which cut across existing categories and allow a
wide range of different types of data to be involved.


Interpretation at the Trowel’s Edge

This interpretive linking process occurs at all levels, including in the
process of digging itself (Bender et al. 1997). As the hand and trowel
move over the ground, decisions are being made about which bumps,
changes in texture, colours to ignore and which to follow. This is a
practical bodily interpretation. It is influenced by one’s interpretation of
what is happening and by what one is finding. If an artifact flicks out,
we interpret whether it came from this layer or that.
   But we have seen that how we excavate (trowel, shovel; sieving or
not; the placing of sections) depends on an interpretation of context
(e.g. this deposit is worth wet sieving because it is the only example of a
late Neolithic hearth). But the interpretation of the context depends on
knowing about the objects within it. So ideally we would want to know
everything that is in a pit before we excavate it! This is the hermeneutic
conundrum: ‘interpretation is only possible once interpretation has
begun’ (Scruton 1982).
   The way archaeologists have dealt with this is to pretend that
excavation and the coding of objects are objectified, neutral and
systematic. We all know they are not but we turn a blind eye, which
is to some extent justifiable. We have to start somewhere. We cannot
Just sit watching the pit in a crisis of hermeneutic doubt.
   In practice we have to excavate without knowing what we are excav-
ating, and we have to define contexts without understanding them, and
we have to choose traits without knowing what the types are. But
archaeologists have perhaps gone too far the other way — towards a
very codified and generalized and decontextualized analysis (for a sim-
ilar point regarding the recording of standing buildings see Grenville
 1997, 4). This may have been necessary as people began grappling with
very large data sets using relatively crude techniques. But the techno-
logies are now beginning to catch up with the problem — they increas-
ingly allow a methodology which is hermeneutic, fluid and interpretive.
                                         TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD        93

   On the one hand, a fixed definition of objects and contexts is
required in archaeology. This is because (a) excavation destroys evid-
ence. While we can return to the excavated artifacts to remeasure and
redefine them into new categories, this cannot be done with soil con-
texts etc. Thus it is important for the archaeologist to assume that the
contextual relationships are fixed. This is a sense of security based on
insecure foundations and ways have to be found round this problem.
Fixed codification is also needed because (b) sites, features and artifacts
have to be compared. Cultures, phases etc. have to be defined on the
basis of comparing like with like. Thus it is important to know how
many naviform cores are found at which sites and at which phases in
the Near East. Such comparison is essential for constructing spatial and
temporal as well as functional and other patterning. But it can be
recognized that such comparisons may be based on arbitrary distinc-
tions which have no meaning in terms of behaviour or society. It is
more productive to construct comparisons by comparing like with like.
If two artifacts look the same, as we have seen this does not necessarily
imply that they have the same meaning. For example, the ‘same’
artifact type may appear at very different dates in different areas. So
chronologies etc. are not built only on the basis of a fixed relationship
between type and meaning — we allow for spatial-temporal (contextual)
lag in building up chronologies. And this sensitivity to context has to be
applied more widely.
   So a methodology is needed which incorporates a fluidity in the
relationship between object, context and interpretation. This fluidity is
a necessary and integral part of archaeological work, especially in the
excavation process. It is necessary to foreground interpretation here
since interpretation determines excavation and sampling strategies.
   Some of the new technologies for introducing relationality and
fluidity will be described in chapter 7, but for the moment we can
evaluate some simple steps that many have already taken. One ex-
ample is ‘single context recording’, the context here referring to a locus
or a unit of soil. This method was introduced, after experiment else-
where, in the Department of Urban Archaeology in London in 1975. It
involves the recording in the field of individual units of bounded soil
matrix which are described on separate forms (‘context sheets’) and
from which artifacts and samples are kept separately (normally a layer
or arbitrary layer). Typically, also, each context (or unit, layer, or cut) is
planned individually. The original aim of introducing such a decen-
tralized recording system, at least in Britain in the 1960s and 1970s,
94.   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

was to democratize the excavation process — so that excavators of
individual features (contexts) could carry out their own recording and
planning. The sole right to record was wrested from the hands of the
director or site supervisor. The method was linked to the rise of a more
professional and developer-funded archaeology in which higher levels of
training and skills in field specialists could be expected. The technique
thus encouraged more participation, more multivocality, since some
‘interpretation’ was required in the writing up of context records. Inter-
pretation was put more in the hands of the person excavating — at the
trowel’s edge. The technique also has the effect of allowing a flexibility in
the building up of wider plans and phases. These higher level entities can
be defined and redefined in terms of combining and recombining the
individual context information. They allow the higher level entities to be
deconstructed and rebuilt rather than being fixed and determining. In
these various ways, ‘single context recording’ encourages a variety of
interpretation at different levels. It has its disadvantages if one is search-
ing for a fully interpretive approach. In particular, single context plan-
ning produces plans in which units of earth are decontextualized, shown
separated from other units around them. The approach allows a flex-
ibility in the fitting together of units into larger contexts, and in this sense
it foregrounds and opens up the excavation and recording process. But
at the same time it provides a method which is codified so that the
‘context sheets’ can be entered into computerized data bases.
   Another attempted step towards fluidity is to introduce categories
into the recording system which promote interpretation in the field. For
example, many archaeologists in Britain now use a recording event,
context or unit category termed a ‘cut’. This is used to describe the past
event of removal of soil (for example in digging a pit or ditch or wall
foundation) before infill. The existence of such a category helps to
encourage the excavator to decide on interpretations of events in the
field. For example, a boundary between floors can be interpreted in a
number of different ways — was one floor simply placed on another, or
is there evidence of a cut — either a truncation by recutting before the
upper floor was laid, or a wearing away of the lower floor during use?
    It might be objected that terms like ‘cut’ are too rigid and do not
encourage a wide range of interpretations. The problem with allowing
a wide range of interpretive descriptions on record sheets is that it
complicates later computerized search and retrieval. It may thus be
better to have a hierarchy of terms from the very general and codified
to the more specific and idiosyncratic. For example, it may be helpful to
                                        TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD       95

 have on context sheets an ‘event’ category, which can be subdivided
 into ‘positive’ events (such as building a wall, filling in a pit) and
 ‘negative’ events (such as cutting or wearing away), themselves divided
 into different types such as (positive) room fill, natural layer, midden
 and (negative) recut, erosion, wear. These lower-level terms may be
 more in need of redefinition and reinterpretation during the post-
 excavation process. In these ways, the excavator is encouraged to
 make interpretations at a range of different levels.
    But the remaining problem is that large amounts of data have to be
 handled so that a certain amount of codification is needed. After all if
 two very similar layers were called ‘midden’ on one recording sheet and
 ‘dump’ on another, or if freedom is allowed in the use of idiosyncratic
 labels, later computerized retrieval of information might be very diffi-
 cult. Large scale projects which develop over time need to keep tabs on
what has been excavated. The knowledge needs to be easily available
 and retrievable.
    This tension between coding and interpretation will be discussed
 further in chapter 7, but tackling this problem is at the core of any
 attempt to introduce a fully reflexive method. This is because the coded
form (the ‘context sheet’, the ‘locus form’) bears little relation to the
process of excavation. It records what archaeologists think they have
found. It assumes objective data set apart from the process of discovery.
For example, the form in figure 5.6 contains no information whatso-
ever about how the context was excavated. The forms hang in the
ether, ‘objective’ accounts of what was ‘observed’. They are often
largely filled in after the excavation of a particular unit or locus has
been completed. They provide an interpretation of what was seen, but
separate from what was done. In fact, however, what was seen is related
to what was done. The interpretation of a unit or locus depends on how
that unit was excavated. The description of what was ‘objectively’ there
develops within a process of working at the soil. What is found depends
on how the archaeologist searches and works. The ‘objective’ data
emerge within a process of discovery.
    Thus, rather than locus forms and context sheets which purport to
record what was found, it is important to embed claims about the
observed record within the narrative of discovery (for one attempt to
deal with this issue see Bender et al. 1997). Ideally, archaeologists should
write narratives as they dig, describing what part of a feature they dug
first and why, what serendipitous problems they met, ‘what happened
next’, so that data and conclusions can be set within the process of
96   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

archaeological activity, not separated from it. Many field recording
forms do already include contextual information such as weather condi-
tions, implements used, date, and so on. There is the opportunity, there-
fore, for a fuller account, with narratives replacing or adding to forms.
   Retrieval of information from such narrative accounts would provide
a major challenge, and some groups of archaeologists are today experi-
menting with possible solutions. Some of these solutions may involve
new technologies (see chapter 7), such as photographic or video records
linked to spoken narratives which are digitized into a data base. Altern-
atively, it may be possible to link data forms to diary narratives (see
chapter 7). Another possibility may be to provide lists of keywords or
key topics that must be included in excavation narratives and which
then allow computerized search and retrieval. One way or another, the
writing of narratives rather than the filling in of forms may become, or
return as, a central focus of archaeological data gathering.
   Other practical steps to achieve greater participation and openness
have been experimented with at the Turkish Neolithic site of Gatal-
hoyiik (see Hodder 1997 and box on p. 119). As on many ‘excavations
abroad’, it is necessary for many of the non-field project specialists to be
present on site. But it is possible to turn this necessity into a virtue and
have ceramic, faunal, lithic, archaeobotanical, micromorphological etc.
specialists present within excavation trenches and taking part in the
primary interpretive process. This interaction is achieved by tours and
individual visits every one or two days, and it is now planned to have
primary processing of faunal remains and perhaps other artifact cate-
gories in the excavation area rather than in the field laboratory. The
aim of all this interaction across specialisms is twofold. The first pur-
pose is to contextualize specialist information within the particular
characteristics of the site. Thus, rather than assuming what burned
bone looks like universally, the identification of burned bone can be
informed by the interpretation of context. For example, if the bone
comes from a deposit which is, on other evidence, heavily burned, then
it too is more likely to have been burned. In this way, general knowl-
edge about what burned bone looks like can be accommodated to
specific evidence for burning at Gatalhoyiik. The second purpose of
the tours is to empower and inform members of the excavation team by
surrounding them with information. Thus, the more that is known
about the artifacts as they come out of the ground, the more is
immediate interpretation facilitated. In this way methods and record-
ing techniques can be adjusted. This type of interaction may often be
                                         TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD       97

difficult because it involves breaking down barriers and boundaries
between field and laboratory expertise. In some contexts it may involve
conflict between field professionals and academic or laboratory person-
nel. But the end result is beneficial in that excavation and sampling
strategies can be enhanced by an informed interpretation of what is
being excavated and sampled. On small scale projects, similar integra-
tive effects may be obtained by merging the roles of non-field and field
specialists. For example, faunal specialists may be involved in field
excavation, at least on a part-time basis, and increasingly field staff
seek training in other areas of professional expertise.
    A good example of the beneficial effects of this type of interaction on
site is the following, again from Catalhéyiik. During the excavation of a
cut feature which had vertical sides, the excavators suddenly began to
worry that perhaps they were taking out the wrong deposits. They
began to feel that ‘perhaps we have got the whole thing the wrong way
round’ — they were worried that rather than digging out the fill of a
large pit, they were actually digging out the deposits into which the pit
had been dug. Now in such a situation it would help the excavators to
know as they dig what the relative date of the pottery in the two contexts
is. In fact, the ceramic specialist initially thought that the pottery in the
supposed pit was earlier (Level VIII pottery) than what it was dug into
(Level VII pottery). So the doubts of the excavators were initially
strengthened. In the end everything came right and both sides decided
that the excavators had been correct in the first place. The ceramics
were redated and the two sets of data coincided ~ a satisfactory ‘whole’
was created.
    The destabilization of taken-for-granted assumptions and the cri-
tique of universal codes is also encouraged at Gatalhéyiik by the pres-
ence in the field team of an anthropologist whose concern is to study
the various aspects of the context of production of knowledge. Carolyn
Hamilton worked with us during the 1996 and 1997 field seasons and
used participation techniques to try and expose some of the assump-
tions we were making, some of the contradictions we were not facing,
and some of the potential for alternative interpretation. Hamilton’s aim
has been to participate in and contribute to the excavation process and
her presence quickly came to be far from marginal. Her work inter-
digitated with ours so completely that very many of our interpretive
and methodological ideas ended up deriving from discussion with her.
The presence of a team member dedicated to questioning leads to a
greater understanding of the processes in which we are engaged. ‘The
98   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD




                                             oi.

Figure 5.5 Circulating knowledge at the trowel’s edge at Catalhéyuk. Those dis-
cussing the interpretation of a layer in Building 2 include the excavator (in trench),
excavators from other parts of the site, archaeobotanists, micromorphologist, faunal
specialist, lithic specialist, and a member of the video documentation crew.



anthropological work not only makes the account of the production of
knowledge (for example, on video or in diaries, see chapter 7) by team
members more complete. It also means that the knowledge itself is
informed by a greater awareness of alternative interpretations. Hamil-
ton also had a privileged access into our thoughts through individual
interviews and was able to point out for us parallels and comparisons
between team members. Again communication and interactivity were
enhanced. The benefits to the project are tangible both in terms of
results and working relations.


Recursive Archaeology

One way of summarizing the approaches described above is to say that
they involve a move from a linear to a recursive, reflexive or circular
process. Most discussions of archaeological field methodology describe
it as a linear process. For example, Renfrew and Bahn (1996, 106-7)
refer to the step-by-step methods adopted by the Museum of London.
                                        TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD       99

Reproduced here in figure 5.6, this scheme appears as mechanical.
The linearity of such schemes is made possible by the assumption that
description can and should be separated from interpretation. But in
practice a much more complex process hides behind this linear for-
malization. Sharer and Ashmore (1993) generally describe field
methodology as a sequence of retrieval-recording-analysis-inter-
pretation. But they also point out that processing and classification
are best done while fieldwork is still going on. This allows the archae-
ologist to look at the data as they are coming out of the ground and to
suggest areas or problems on which to concentrate. For example, there
may be evidence of a little-known period on which excavation could
focus.
   I have argued in the same vein that it is false to claim that description
can be separated from interpretation. The result of this argument is
that I have tried to describe mechanisms in this chapter which allow for
a complex process of feedback, interaction, and circularity. Ideally, the
aim is to circulate around different types of data, continually adjusting
one type of data in terms of the others until a satisfactory argument has
been built. Figure 5.7 is an attempt to capture this process in terms of a
diagram. The procedures keep returning back on themselves. Loops
occur within loops. Excavation of one unit takes place in relation to the
excavation of other units, all of which takes place within the wider
context of changing understanding of the site as a whole.
   Figure 3.3 expressed a similar point about a still wider context. Here
the excavation of a causewayed enclosure site at Haddenham in eastern
England (chapter 3) is part of a spiral of knowledge which extends
outwards to the region and to more general and theoretical under-
standing of, for example, ritual and social organization. Archaeological
research is a complex, multistranded and multiscalar process. Its path
ways and outcomes are unpredictable. There is continual flow and
transformation.

Conclusion

This chapter has sought to enhance the ways in which archaeological
reasoning is diverse, fluid and non-dichotomous. In particular, it has
focused on archaeological practice and method. In the area of field
methods a contradiction was observed between what archaeologists say
in theory about practice and what they do in practice. In earlier
chapters I had argued that in practice archaeologists use a diverse set
       Grid Square(s)                                               eg?                      Context type       Site Code            Context
                         HO — 15/210                                                         ea                   XYZ | 89               138
       DEPOSIT                          1       a                                               OM                          CUT   :

                    i                                                                                                       1. Shape     pi
                                                f                                                                           2. Qdrners
       3. Composition/                                                                         as                           3. Dimengfons/Depth
          Particle size                                                 A            a                       FCrm           4. Breg of slope- top




       5. Thickness & extent
       6. Other comments
       7. Method & conditions


    RECORDING
    CONTEXT
    SHEET




                                                                                                                                               PTO

       Stratigraphic matrix
        Emer
           a| | e| Pee | a |DES | | Ge |eae
             This context is

                                                Enea |vere |ares|WEED |even |PMY Pee
       Your interpretation : Joterr                         xternal              Structera             Othortspecity)
                               A Dumekp                          Dee,                    ptogAGay Refuse)
       Your discussion :

                                   é                              Of POTTERY AO Rove PulS Tee
                              ATEE                    AND        we             so             AT UE         OGEST       IT 1

                         A DUM? of
                                REFUSE                                  HATER
                                                                            AL
                        _CAGHT
                          Be ASScOATED ity Steuctge [15] )?
       Context same as :                                                                                                                       PTO
       Piannos:P        138                 (XZ ) | Site book rets :                                    Initials & date nit     24 | 8/39
              rawings    :    S/E                       Matrix Jocation-                 :
       aia               = Card nos :                        °              :            a             Oneeecr          ee ay 2/ 2 i,99
       Levels on reverse                                                         Finds (tick)                                                   at
       Tick when reduced and transferred to plans: [7                            pens malpa ous Meta eA a ie ther
      Highest] [                        towest:] |                          LI                                                           Lifer
       Sample nos & type: 3)                  ‘Riuik.       SAmAE
                                                                                  SEN
                                                                                | Finds sample (BM) nos -
                                                                                                                        ROT
       FOR SIEVING            -—       FSH     Fen,
       Checked    Interpretation:




                                                                                                                                              PTO


    MUSEUM
    OF
    LONDON




Figure 5.6 The linear process used by the Museum of London once a context
(deposit or locus) has been identified during an excavation (opposite), and the record
sheet used (above) (Renfrew and Bahn 1996, 106).
              CLEAN AREA


   IDENTIFY       LIMITS OF CONTEXT



     CHECK     WITH SUPERVISOR
    AS TO NEED OF PHOTOGRAPH



       IDENTIFY NUMBER            OF
            GRID SQUARES
     IN WHICH        FEATURE      LIES



        TAKE SHEET(S) OF
     PERMATRACE FROM FILE
          IN SITE OFFICE

    DRAW    A PLAN OF FEATURE
        AT A SCALE        OF 1:20
   UNLESS     ADVISED      OTHERWISE



     TAKE RELEVANT TYPE OF
      CONTEXT SHEET FROM
       FILE IN SITE OFFICE



  TAKE CONTEXT        NUMBERS        FROM
     SITE CONTEXT         REGISTER



    RECORD CONTEXT NUMBER
              ON PLAN(S)

    TAKE    LEVELS;      MARK     SPOT
    HEIGHTS ON PLAN, RECORD
   BACKSIGHT       AND    FORESIGHTS.
 ON REVERSE       OF CONTEXT SHEET



     REDUCE       LEVELS TO OD.
     AND TRANSFER TO PLAN



       DESCRIBE CONTEXT



     OBTAIN       FINDS BAG AND
     LABEL,    AND      ENTER SITE
       CODE AND CONTEXT
       NUMBER        ON LABEL



   CHECK    WITH SUPERVISOR              AS
    TO SUITABLE         METHOD      OF
EXCAVATION,       NEED    FOR SAMPLING
AND METHOD     OF FINDS COLLECTION



      EXCAVATE        CONTEXT,
   AMENDING       AND    ADJUSTING
   DESCRIPTION       AS NECESSARY



           TAKE    FINDS TO
      APPROPRIATE         PLACE



   DETERMINE       RELATIONSHIPS
 OF NEWLY-RECORDED           CONTEXT
  TO PREVIOUSLY          EXCAVATED
       STRATIGRAPHY          BY
      OVERLAYING          PLANS



       CROSS-REFERENCE
  RELATIONSHIPS ON CONTEXT
   SHEET AND FILL IN MATRIX


   ENTER    DATE AND INITIALS
      ON CONTEXT          SHEET



   PLACE PLAN AND CONTEXT
  SHEET IN RELEVANT ‘TO BE
       CHECKED’ FILES

 [ALL PLANS, CONTEXT SHEETS
AND RELATIONSHIPS SHOULD BE
CHECKED BEFORE LEAVING SITE.
102    TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

                                 START

                                                                  Digitise plans and feed
                                                        a         unit- and other forms
                                                                  into database
                              Discuss and interpret                                              ~
                              next area to be cleaned
                                                                                                          Describe process
                              fo                                                                          on film

                      Search site
                      database


                                                                                                                             Describe process
                    /
               Search diary                                                                                                  in diary
                                                                                                      (re)describe and
               {                                            Establish stratigraphical                 interpret unit
                                                            relations with other units
                                                                                                                             “A. Begin) to excavate
      Look at previous                                                     $                (re)sample     ;                      unit
      videos
                                                              Interpret in relation to            \                      ,
                                                            excavation of other units           Discuss finds etc. with
                \                                                           a                   lab specialists         Obtain find’s bags
                                                                                                                                and labels
                                                                                         Fill in feature, space
               Search specialist                                                         and building forms
           information                                                                                                  Plan unit and
                          \                                                                                            take levels



                                 Clear area                                                               Take unit number
                                          Sw                                                               from register

                                                 Photograph             Decide which unit
                                                               ==       to. excavate and method
                                                                        of excavation/sampling


Figure 5.7              The recursive excavation process used at Catalhdyiik.

of strategies in the field and laboratory. These methods were summar-
ized in chapters 3 and 4 as hermeneutic and interactive. But in what
they say in theory about practice, archaeologists often paint a very
different picture. Rather than accepting a non-dichotomous account,
they argue that the theory-ladenness of facts can be overcome by
objective methods. They erect a subject/object opposition and
emphasize the importance of codification and standardization at the
expense of sensitivity to context and question.
   In response to these contradictions, this chapter and this book so far
have suggested the following arguments.

1     Itis important to accept and no longer ignore in practice the widely
      agreed theoretical point that interpretation is involved in the con-
      struction of data. Data description and interpretation cannot be
      radically separated in practice. Much of archaeology is not an
      experimental science and we can rarely test theories against data.
      Rather we construct interpretations in a fitting process.
                                      TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD — 103

2   Meaning is relational — everything depends on everything else, as
    when stratigraphic relationships partly depend on the dating of
    artifacts and vice versa. The parts are understood in relation to
    the whole and the whole is constructed from the parts.
3   Meaning is both general and local. The faunal specialist with a wide
    range of general knowledge about what burnt bone looks like might
    still say ‘we need to find out what burnt bone looks like at this
    particular site’. We should not impose codes insensitive to context.
4   Emphasis has to be returned to the point of excavation. The
    excavator should not be seen as a technician. The person excavat-
    ing should have the fullest possible knowledge and the widest range
    of possible narratives. No one else can ever have the same oppor-
    tunity to deal with the tension of interpretation and data. This
    emphasis on the act of digging is essential because (a) excavation
    is destructive, (b) the method of excavation used depends on inter-
    pretation. What you find partly depends on your interpretation of
    what you are going to find.

   Some will argue that I am simply advocating relativism (see boxes on
pp. 23 and 159), that I am claiming that there is no objectivity at the
level of data collection, and that this chapter is just a pernicious
extension of postprocessual ideas into a realm which has been happily
free from subjectivity and interpretive bias. Certainly I am arguing that
interpretation occurs at all levels of archaeological enquiry. I hope I
have demonstrated clearly enough that interpretation is not something
which happens after description. It cannot be marginalized and ghet-
toized in ivory towers. It happens at the trowel’s edge.
   Complaints about the introduction of subjectivity into an objective
area of archaeological work are caught within the object/subject
opposition which has been so well critiqued by Rowlands (1984; see
also Lampeter Archaeology Workshop 1997). In fact, as we have seen
repeatedly already in this book, ‘objectivity’ is always framed within
questions and theories. To say that data are objective is not to say that
they are beyond argument, dispute or reinterpretation. It is only to say
that they provide evidence to support a theory. This is not to deny that,
looked at from another (subjective) point of view, the data could also
provide (objective) evidence of alternative theories.
   I was very struck by an example of this during the 1996 season at
Catalhéyiik. In the field sections or profiles we observed what we
termed ‘faultlines’. These appeared as discontinuities in horizontally
104   TOWARDS A REFLEXIVE METHOD

layered walls or floors where one block of layers had slipped down-
wards. What had caused these diagonal fault lines (Hamilton 1996)?
Three interpretations were developed. One view was that they had
been caused by earthquakes. Evidence in support of this view was the
existence of earthquakes in the area and the clean nature of the fault
lines themselves. Another view was that the slippage occurred during
construction of the walls. The evidence for this was that the ‘bricks’
were often over | metre in length and were very thin and irregular.
They must have been made m situ on the walls, the clay put on wet
between wooden boarding. Perhaps the boards were sometimes taken
off too early, causing slippage. The third interpretation was that the
faults were caused by pressure from leaning walls and roofs. The
evidence for this argument was that at least in one case the walls in
question could be shown to have moved far from the vertical. This
would have exerted enormous pressure and fault lines. Proponents of
each interpretation would argue their case passionately. And each
would use evidence in ways which they saw as objective and un-
problematic. Each would say ‘can’t you see, it’s so obvious’. Each
wanted to use the fault lines as unambiguous evidence of their theory.
In the injunction ‘look! can’t you see’ appeal was being made to an
assumed objectivity. When in fact what was happening was that the
world was being perceived as evidence for something — that is both as
objectively there and as subjectively constituted.
   And this is my claim generally in this chapter and in this book. In
clawing back interpretation into the data construction process I do not
assert that ‘all the data are subjective’ or that ‘archaeology can only be
relativist’ or ‘anything goes’. Far from it. What is needed is a redefini-
tion of the debate. Rather than subject versus object the central issue is
the use of data as evidence for interpretation.
6       The Natural Sciences in Archaeology




Scientific analysis is often opposed to interpretive archaeology. As was
discussed in the first three chapters in this book, it is possible to argue
for a diversity of approach within the discipline. Positivist, experimental
approaches closely allied to the natural sciences are part of this diver-
sity, as are hermeneutic, interpretive approaches allied to the human-
ities, and empiricist, realist, dialectical or pragmatist accounts. In this
chapter I want to pursue further the distinction between interpretive
and natural science approaches. The couching of this dichotomy in
terms of a single and double hermeneutic (p. 25), implies that at some
level both approaches can be described in hermeneutic terms. I wish to
explore further the differences and similarities between the two
approaches and to incorporate, rather than to marginalize, natural
science methods within a diverse interpretive archacology.
   I wish to start with the example of geology. This is especially apt as an
example of the role of the natural sciences within archaeology because
historically archaeology in the nineteenth century modelled itself on
geology. As Daniel (1962) has fully documented, the geological sciences
were central in the establishment of the antiquity of stone tools in river
gravels in Europe. These sciences also played an important part in
establishing key archaeological concepts such as stratigraphy. ‘Nor
does there appear to be any reason why those methods of examination
which have proved so successful in geology, should not also be used to
throw light on the history of man in prehistoric times’ (Lubbock 1865, 2).
106   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

    It is also an apt example because geology and the earth sciences still
play such a central role in archaeology, for example in the study of cave
sediments, in the sourcing of stone axes, in geophysical prospection,
and in geoarchaeology as a whole. There are several apparent similar-
ities between archaeology and geology. They have similar foundational
‘laws’, particularly those of uniformity and superposition. Both have
similar problems — especially incompleteness of data and gaps and poor
resolution in the stratigraphic record; a lack of experimental control;
and enormous time spans so that direct observation is difficult or
impossible.
    It may thus come as a surprise to archaeologists that Frodeman
(1995) describes geology as a hermeneutic science. To anyone who
has prized open the thin layers of schist rock looking for fossils, the
notion that the geological record is ‘read’ like a book will make sense.
Frodeman argues that geology follows hermeneutic principles (see box
on p. 32) because examining an outcrop is not simply a matter of
‘taking a good look’ (ibid., 963). Rather, the geologist has to read or
interpret the outcrop by assigning values to various aspects of the
outcrop, judging which are significant and which are not. A geological
student has to be taught to make sense of clues of past events and
processes. In terms of the hermeneutic carcle, understanding of the outcrop
(the whole) is based on an understanding of the individual beds (the
parts), which are in turn made sense of in terms of their relationship to
the whole outcrop. The importance of pre-judgements is also clear in
geology. “Io approach the Western Cordillera with concepts like ophio-
hte complexes and accretionary terrains will affect what one sees in the field’
(Frodeman 1995, 964). Geology is a historical science like cosmology,
palaeontology and human history. The historical nature of these
enquiries derives from three factors.
    First, since the pre-judgements have an influence on (though they do
not determine) what is discovered by geologists, it follows that geolo-
gists at different historical moments will ask different questions and
come to different conclusions. Their results are historically situated.
Second, laboratory experiment can have a limited role in the discipline.
As Latour and Woolgar (1986) have shown, even in the experimental
sciences such as physics and chemistry, social and historical factors play
a role. But the aim in experimenting with, for example, chemical
reactions is not to describe specific historical conditions that affect a
particular reaction, but rather to create an ideal and general situation.
Thus the chemicals used have been assayed for purity. Each chemical
                             THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY        107

 reaction is seen as an instance of a general principle. But in geology, at
 least part of the enterprise is to chronicle the particular events that
 occurred at a given location. Geologists do identify general laws (e.g.
 Walther’s law) but at least part of the interest is in individual outcrops
 or events (the Western Interior Seaway, the lifespan of a species).
 Because of the singularity of these events, hypotheses are not testable.
 ‘Although the geologist may be able to duplicate the laboratory condi-
 tions of another’s experiment (e.g. studying the nature of deformation
 through experiments with play-doh), the relationship of these experi-
 ments to the particularities of Earth’s history (eg the Idaho-Wyoming
 overthrust belt) remains uncertain’ (Frodeman 1995, 965). Rather than
 using only experiment and modeling, geologists also support arguments
 by using other strategies common in the historical sciences, such as
 reasoning by analogy. Uniformitarianism assumes that present-day
 geologic processes operate in a manner similar to those in the past.
 Despite changes in the way geologists view principles of uniformity
 (Gould and Lewontin 1979), arguments by analogy with the present
 remain important.
    A third historical aspect of geological enquiry concerns the centrality
 of narrative. As in human history, geologists define entities, themes or
ideas around which data can be organized. Examples are the Laramide
 orogeny, the Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway, the Bridge Creek
Limestone, and the species Mytiloides mytiloides (Frodeman 1995, 966).
These central themes provide the coherence necessary for an intelli-
gible narrative to be built out of seemingly disconnected events. Geo-
logists do not simply work by subsuming events under predictive
generalizations. Rather, they try to integrate events into organized
wholes which have an overall structure or story. So the examination
of the Greenland Ice Sheet Project ice core is explained and Justified by
our concern with global climate change, and the study of black shales is
funded because of the larger narrative of its relevance to hydrocarbon
exploration.
    In conclusion, Frodeman argues that while geology depends in part
on the deductive-nomological methods of the experimental sciences, it
should not be seen simply as using a lesser or derivative version of the
mode of reasoning found in physics. Instead geological reasoning
provides an outstanding model of the techniques of hermeneutics and
history. Geologists use a variety of techniques to solve their problems.
    As our understanding of the social component of laboratory work
progresses (e.g. Latour and Woolgar 1986) it becomes possible to situate
108   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

the natural sciences within the contextual archaeological enterprise.
Archaeological science need not be seen as a separate and foreign
sphere. Indeed, in the practices of archaeological research, different
types of data are played off against each other all the time in order to
achieve a coherent interpretation. Thus, radiocarbon dates are evalu-
ated in terms of whether they make sense in terms of cultural sequence.
‘Outliers’ are rejected unless some special case can be argued. ‘The
history of the impact of radiocarbon dating on European prehistory
(e.g. Renfrew 1973) is replete with examples of archaeologists reluctant
to accept the new dates until gradually they could be accommodated to
a new understanding of the overall culture-historical framework. Maps
of phosphate or magnetic susceptibility values on sites have to be
examined closely to see whether they are indicating depositional, or
post-depositional processes or just ‘noise’. The maps are made sense of
in terms of a wide range of information dealing with architecture and
artifact distributions. For example, does spatial variation in phosphate
values correlate with other evidence for the use of space in terms of
activity areas, stables, burials and so on? At one level it is simply a
matter of integrating scientific and cultural information to make a
coherent argument. At another level it is a matter of deciding whether
‘the data’ make sufficient sense to be accepted and published as data.
    I now wish to provide some more specific examples of the ways in
which natural science data are part of the same archaeological process
of interpretive reflexivity as cultural data. Of course, the distinction
here between the natural sciences and the humanities can itself be
subjected to scrutiny. It can be argued that our understanding of the
natural world is itself culturally mediated. Archaeology, in the following
examples, demonstrates this fluidity between the natural and human-
istic sciences more clearly than many disciplines.

Geoarchaeology and Harris matrices
In chapter 1 I introduced the problem of how to define ‘layers’. These
and their boundaries are often taken for granted in archaeology. Of
course, there are problems of ‘splitting or lumping’, but once the
decision has been taken to lump lenses into a layer or to split a layer
into smaller lenses or layers, it is assumed that the further description of
stratigraphic units is objective and routine. The identification of the
layer (or unit, context, locus, or spit) is the primary building block of the
recording process in archaeology. It is according to these units that
“g2uenbes |je49A0 3y} WO} OF pauiquiod Ua) pue (q ‘D ‘ q ‘v) youe.2 & Jo apis yee Wo.y ape si a2UaNbeas JydeusIes Y ‘eDUEpIAe D1Yydessi9e43s
aU} |e WOjy peyonsysuod Ajjenpess aq Aew aris & JO aduaN bas s1ydeu8ie43s ayi MOY MOUs 0} (686) SI44eH Aq pasn uONesnyj! ay,    =|°g aaNsiy
                                                                                              ULL
                                                                                               §
                                                                                                                         BUDA
                                                                                                                         py;
                                                                                                Bw:
                                                                                                         Ghee veow
                                                                                                       vac   fi      ©
                                                                                           OO           wes
                                                                         p+o+qt+e
110   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

artifacts are retrieved, soils recorded and analysis and comparison
undertaken. For example, the building of a Harris matrix (e.g. figure
6.1) is dependent on the assumption that the primary recording units as
identified in the field have a stratigraphic integrity (Harris 1989).
   Barham (1995), however, points out that we cannot take for granted
the layers and their boundaries as viewed by eye in the field. Most
routine description of stratigraphy is visual and therefore restricted to
the recording of properties within the visible light spectrum (electro-
magnetic wavelengths of 0.4—0.7 micrometres (jum)) and with resolu-
tions limited by the unaided eye to about 60 microns. The Harris
matrix is built up in terms of this particular perspective. There are
now techniques available to archaeologists which allow the recording of
layers and stratigraphies across a far wider range of electromagnetic
radiation wavelengths. Such techniques include sampling of undis-
turbed deposits to allow analysis in terms of micromorphology, sedi-
ment geochemistry, mineral magnetic susceptibility measures, particle
size, and so on. Figure 6.2 gives some indication of the full range of
wavelengths which could be applied.
   Thus on the one hand, a wide range of techniques is available for
exploring stratigraphies at a range of wavelengths. These techniques


                 VISIBLE   PROPERTIES    OF:




                                                                    Wavelength
                                                                  10m    100m




                                                                                         104
                                                   L-radar   ——         Frequency (Hz)

                                               L— microwave 4


                              “near ——mid       far
                                   infrared



Figure 6.2 Electro-magnetic radiation wavelengths utilized by techniques commonly
applied to archaeological sediment context recording, micro-analysis and site geopros-
pection (Barham 1995, 148).
                            THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY        11

have been very productive as, for example, in the use of magnetic
techniques for sediment description and context interpretation (Bar-
ham 1995, 149). The analysis of spectra within thermal wavelengths
has allowed the production of age-estimates from Thermoluminescence
(TL). On the other hand, the field archaeologist struggles to describe
stratigraphy with the eye and with a limited number of aids such as
Munsell soil colour charts and soil description manuals. The archae-
ological data as defined by the visible properties of stratigraphy differ
from those defined at other wavelengths. In this case the application of
techniques from the natural sciences reinforces the hermeneutic point
that the data change when looked at from different perspectives.
    There is no problem here as long as the data from analyses at
different wavelengths produce compatable results. But very often it
may be difficult in the field to determine whether the interfaces
between layers or contexts are the result of primary depositional pro-
cesses or of post-depositional factors (Schiffer 1987). The latter may
include decalcification, redox changes, clay translocation or bioturba-
tion. It may only be possible to identify such processes after analysis at
wavelengths undetectable by the archaeologist working in the field.
Layers and their sequences may be incorrectly defined and inappropri-
ate sampling procedures may be used. The analyses necessary in order
to identify such post-depositional problems often take place after exca-
vation in laboratory contexts. But the Harris matrix describing strati-
graphical relationships is often left unchanged. ‘Re-ordering the matrix
to account for such problems, through integration of data from later
analyses...is normally omitted’ (Barham 1995, 155).
    The need, then, is to integrate analyses of a wider range of wave-
lengths in the excavation process so that a more fully recursive or
integrated interpretation can take place. The scientific analyses do
not lead to the conclusion that archaeological enquiry is a linear
process of theory testing and data acquisition. Rather, we see that
different perspectives have to be integrated at all stages. One aid to
the problem of defining layers in the field is X-radiography (Barham
 1995). X-radiographs are produced by passing X-rays through a speci-
men (an undisturbed sediment sample produced from a core or mono-
lith) onto photographic film. This is a relatively quick and cheap
process and so can be undertaken in the field and can contribute to
the primary definition of layers and their boundaries and interfaces.
Barham (1995, 168) provides examples of the application of the tech-
nique in the field. In some instances the rate and nature of deposition
112   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

can be inferred and the degree of bioturbation. Laminations and
banding invisible to the naked eye can be discerned. Field results
such as these not only contribute to the identification and interpreta-
tion of layers. They also allow decisions to be made about sampling
strategies, for example for pollen and diatoms.
   X-radiography of sediments on archaeological sites thus helps to
provide a wider range of perspectives in the identification and inter-
pretation of layers and their interfaces. Rather than occurring at a late,
‘lab’ stage of analysis, and rather than being insufficiently incorporated
into Harris matrices, geoarchaeological information can be included in
a primary phase of the very construction of data (the layers and their
boundaries). It can be involved recursively in a hermeneutic process.

Other examples: soils, wood and sex
Micromorphology (e.g. Matthews et al. 1996) has come to be an essen-
tial aid to the understanding of prehistoric soils and sediments. Its use on
complex tell sites in the Near East has led to an ability to differentiate
between a wide range of activities in different types of spaces (ibid.). One
such use of this technique is demonstrated in table 6.1. Here field
observations of stratigraphies within buildings are related to micromor-
phological observations of the same stratigraphies and to interpretations
of space. But it is important to recognize that the interpretations of the
use of space which are informed by the micromorphological analyses
are also dependent on the archaeological evidence for the use of spaces
and features. ‘Thus, extremely clean floors can be interpreted as clean/?
ritual spaces partly because of the presence on the floors of Bos jaw and
horn cores and moulded sculptures. Similarly, the interpretation of
floors with charred wood and cereal grain as for burning and cooking
activities is helped by the presence of a fire installation (hearth or oven).
In another example, some micromorphology thin sections from floors at
Catalhoyiik were interpreted as indicating puddling. This interpretation
was undoubtedly influenced by the fact that the floors in question were
placed immediately below the hole in the roof which allowed people,
but also rain, to enter. The interpretation of micromorphology evidence
is also dependent on ethnographic observations so that knowledge can
be built up of the range of activities which leave behavioural signatures
in micro-stratigraphies. Overall, the technique of micromorphology is
used within a circular and multi-stranded interpretive process in which
cultural and natural information play an equal and integrated role.
                              s1Yydeu3i7e23s0
                                         aouenbeas
                                              4d1py                                               suo}eAIasqoO                          aspyo         BDeds                    suo!e}a1d193U!
                                                                                                                                                                                           pazE}DOssysounjzeay ajdueg                                         Suo}j;220]

                                                             MalJo ou                                             payojnuindop
                                                                                                                           susodap                   fenziazjueay>                                                             uondes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bupjing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3se@JO                 ZEA
                                                                                                                                         uve]>                                        wuopejd                           “oRnses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ——————6

          19ISP}q S1OO]}YUM                                      PawiDy> ay1)-pacu                                                                                                                                       ZETA JO Yanos Buipying
                                                                                quojd __suiowiau ———                                                 en}J4jjuekaj>            jew
                                                                                                                                                                          ———————-_ s8unuled ———— uoR2es
                                                                                                                                                                                                      9
        o214yn saysejd Sulysiuy
                             syeod                           pa.   2.40
                                                                      Ul             UOADI|DASul-a4i)
                                                                                           PuD                                                                               pa.  81490 sjelung     BUYS          YINOS:S7"}]|A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jegua>
                                                                asinds   sjuawisp.
                                                                            ul            uonpdno20susodap                                                                        swoped        Pure     UIdISOMSPdIE
                                                             pa.         quied/aiys0
                                                                             uo  ed wuop

                                                             Mat                    paypjnuinoop
                                                                                             sysodap                                                 yenzajsueay>               sog Mel pure uy                                uoldes———_
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 €
                                                             pai            21yI0 S9sua]                                                                                           ‘saio>   Papjnow                      s        ‘Buipjingsaddn                  a2uanbas
                                                                             jDuoIsD220
                                                                                    3unp; sqajjad                                                                                      sa.unjdjnos

         19ISE}q SIOOYYIM MA} JO OU                                  paiipy>Poom                                                                JIssWOp                         jod                            uawadreidwe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ——     uondas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             €
        ay       s93sejd Bulysiuy
                                s7eOD                                  a»yI/-]Da192
                                                                               JUD/q                               SuIDUWdJ                                                                                           s       ‘BuIpjing49Mo}                      aduanbas
                                                                                Jo
                                                                              Quawspyauog
                                                                                      snoauasosajay
                                                                                             quingpub                         quunqun                                                                                         uONDas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p
                                                                                   sapsaussp                                                                                                                                   Sulpjing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N  3°                     AQp'VWIA


       Ma4   pie)                                                                                                                                    pue
                               soo}                                                                                                                                       ——                                                 9
                    aasejd                                                                                                                                                                                         ———
                                                                                     Poom[Da492                                            Suiuang                                                                           uoRdes
a ka   UlR}q 3X92                                 ——————._            passDyr
                                                                   paiby>                                                                                      Supjoos;                                                         2ulays               Rade
                                              14dei8e13soud!W
                                                   pjay           suoneAJasgo                     ulDJ3
                                                                         21UD310
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST Ud3seayINOS
       1/1, 1X92                              |DIISOjOYquowoioILW
                                                           SUONDAIASGO
                                                                                                     $91D8a183D                                                                            uoNRI]/eISU!-3.14
        Plog                 asn jo       a2eds                                     suo}}e3}01d193uU!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IIA


   BIqQUy
       °9=                            Aveuiljaig
                                            apins
                                               07                                                             DWYydeuSnensousiW
                                                                                                                         sagnqiuae      2souseIp
                                                                                                                                           jo              Juasayip
                                                                                                                                                                  sodA
                                                                                                                                                                     Jo          asn jo             adeds           ulyyM           sBuipjing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e                          yndouyeres
              smayreL))
                 32 ‘12         (9661
114   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

   Another example of the importance of integration is wood analysis
based on charcoal identification. On the one hand, this technique can
be used for palaeoenvironmental and palaeoecological reconstruction
(e.g. Davis 1983). On the other hand, it can be used for understanding
social and cultural practices and preferences (e.g. Hastorf and Johan-
nessen 1991). But in fact the two aspects of the ancient use of wood are
interdependent. Environmental study focuses on variation in species
representation through time. But this would be undermined if there
were also contextual variations. For example, if the samples for
palaeoenvironmental reconstruction come from hearths and house fill
and midden — much of the variation in species would be contextual.
Equally, however, it is no use talking about cultural selection of wood
unless there is some understanding of the availability of such wood-
sources in the local or regional environment. In order to understand
the environment one needs to understand cultural variation, and in
order to understand cultural patterning one needs to know the envir-
onment.
   Finally, I would like to take the example of sexing human remains.
Archaeologists have tended to assume that biological sex should be
differentiated from cultural gender (Gero and Conkey 1991; Gibbs
1987). This position has come under scrutiny because of the wide-
spread historical and ethnographic evidence that different societies
and people categorize sex differently (Knapp and Meskell 1997).
Geneticists have come to recognize that a simple opposition between
XX (female) and XY (male) is difficult to maintain. Individuals
exist with XX, XXY, XXXY         and XXXXY       chromosomes.    There is
actually a continuum of chromosomal variation and a range of
different criteria such as genes and sexual organs that do not neces-
sarily coincide in identifying a simple binary opposition (Knapp
and Meskell 1997). Yates (1993) provides ethnographic examples of
societies in which the sexual organs are not regarded as directly deter-
mining the sex of a child. He also refers to Lacan (1977) and Deleuze
and Guattari (1984) in arguing that our conceptions of a natural
biological difference between male and female are cultural-linguistic
constructs. Historical perspectives are provided by Foucault (1981) and
Laqueur (1990).
   Many archaeologists in earlier generations will have had lingering
doubts that the sexing of human remains was objective and straightfor-
ward because of the apparent ability of human remains specialists to
tailor their sex identifications to whether the artifacts associated with a
                             THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY          115

body in a grave were ‘male’ weapons or ‘female’ ornament. More
recently, however, clear criteria have been developed for discerning
sexual difference on the basis of human remains (e.g. Brothwell 1981;
Calgano 1981; Schutkowski 1993), and distinctions are made between
sexual dimorphism (in size etc.) and secondary sexual characteristics
(Garn et al. 1967; Molleson 1994). The criteria used include skull and
dental variation,   the size and robustness     of the vertebral    column,
sternum, clavicle, scapula and long bones, and various characteristics
of the pelvis such as the angle of the sciatic notch. Many of these
criteria concern size, robustness and degrees of variation in form rather
than absolute dichotomies. Indeed, Brothwell (1981, 59) points out that
the features used to identify the sex of an individual vary with the group
being studied (see also Molleson 1994; Thieme 1957). The degree of
supraorbital development used to identify European males is found in a
number of females among Australian aborigines. Equally, the robust-
ness of female Australian aboriginal bones may be far greater than is
generally found in male pygmies. Even within a population group there
is considerable overlap in the range of measurements found in the two
SEXES:
   It is possible that people in the past used different criteria to identify
sex from those used in the West today, and even that the criteria varied
according to age or status. For example, perhaps different sexual
criteria were used to define a high status man versus a high status
woman than were used to define a low status man. It is certainly
possible that more or less male men (on certain criteria) were treated
differently. There would thus be advantages in going beyond the
simple description of human bodies as male or female. It would be
interesting to divide the human remains into more or less male men
and more or less female women. It would then be possible to see
whether these differences correlated with cultural evidence in the
graves. Is there any evidence that robust men were treated differently
from gracile men?
   But such an approach would still leave the (natural science) identi-
fication of the sex of the human remains separated from the (cultural)
interpretation of social roles. A more thorough integration of the
natural science and humanity approaches would be to include cultural
information into the very definition of biological sex. A good example
of the interaction between biological and cultural information is the
work by Molleson (1994) on the nineteenth-century Spitalfields
remains. For these individuals, there are historical records and names
116   THE NATURAL SCIENCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY

from which the cultural attribution of sex can be discerned. This helped
Molleson to evaluate her analytical techniques.
   It would be possible to study human remains from prehistoric and
other contexts in a non-dichotomous way. Rather than first carrying
out a ‘pure’ biological analysis which is then compared to the cultural
inventories from graves, it would be possible to introduce the cultural
information from the beginning. In this way the analysts can ‘read
themselves into’ a particular population and discover the idiosyncratic
ways in which sex was constructed. Of course, it cannot be assumed
that the artifact inventories in graves are themselves divided rigidly by
sex. Neither the biological nor the cultural data provide a fixed point
from which to discern sex. Rather, the process can involve fitting
different types of data, working back and forth between the natural
science and cultural data until the best accommodation is obtained.


Conclusion


Undoubtedly, there are differences between the different sciences and
between the natural sciences, social sciences and humanities. I do not
wish to downplay these. The goals and the methods differ. But when
brought together in archaeology, these different methods need to work
together. I have provided examples in this chapter of research in
archaeology which benefits from a recognition that information from
the natural sciences can be used in order to achieve a better under-
standing of social and cultural strategies in the past. I have suggested
that the variety of scientific procedures used in archaeology can be
accommodated within a generalized hermeneutic approach; by this I
mean an approach in which a diversity of strands of evidence are
brought together in order to construct a whole. It is often by fitting
together contrasting types of evidence that a more complete overall
argument can be made.
7       Using the New Information
        Technologies




 The use of natural science techniques in archaeology does not lessen
the need for an interpretive approach in which meaning is seen to be
relational and diverse. If anything, the use of a wide range of natural
science applications in archaeology adds to the diversity and to the
recognition that the archaeological record is constructed differently
when approached with different pre-understandings and with different
observational tools.
   One scientific instrument which has had enormous impact on the
discipline is of course the computer (Reilly and Rahtz 1992). Initially,
the use of large mainframe computers led to the ability to handle very
large amounts of data but at the expense of a move towards fixity and
codification. Thus, the initial result of the use of computers was away
from relationality and diversity. The trend towards codification was
enhanced by other changes in the organization of archaeology. The rise
of contract archaeology has been a dominant part of this process,
together with an increasing professionalization of fieldwork. ‘The result
has been an enormous rise in the codification of method and the
homogenization of techniques. Accountability, costing, standards, com-
parability are the key concerns here.
118   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES

   As already noted, codification and systematization are needed in
archaeology to cope with large amounts of data, to allow retrieval of
data, and to allow comparison of data. But modern computers and
software allow a more flexible and fluid approach. It is now possible to
conceive of systems which allow retrieval and comparison of large
amounts of data but which are at the same time interactive, flexible
and relational. In this chapter I wish to explore some of the new
technologies to see whether they allow some of the relationality, con-
textuality and reflexivity discussed in chapter 5.

Outline of some methodological principles
I argued in chapter 5 that an important aspect of archaeological
enquiry was that interpretation played a role in the construction of
primary data. What this means in practice is that archaeologists
sometimes find themselves re-assigning artifacts to categories and to
contexts. In the case of re-assigning objects to categories (such as ‘blade’
or ‘flake’) it is always possible to go back to the object and re-measure,
or to measure new variables. But the same cannot be done for con-
textual information. It is not possible to go back to the soil contexts
which have been destroyed in excavation. As a result, archaeologists
have tended to assume that the soil context is sacrosanct, and fixed in
the field. But as already noted in the example provided on p. 87, it may
be desirable to return to contextual relationships in order to re-define
them.
   One partial solution is electronic planning and 3D recording of
artifact locations and context boundaries (e.g. using Penmap). In such
cases, the boundaries of contexts can later be redrawn and artifacts re-
allocated to new contexts. It may also be possible to develop the use of
high resolution digital photographs which can later be reconsidered
and reinterpreted. Alternatively artifacts can be allocated provisionally
to arbitrary groupings such as a, b, c which reflect our multiple
hypotheses. The data base then records that find x could be in abc,
ab, or be. The finds can later be grouped depending on which hypoth-
esis is preferred, or alternative data bases can be built on the basis of
competing hypotheses. It is also possible using this system provisionally
to allocate artifacts to clusters of artifacts which may be within or cut
across soil matrix boundaries.
                         USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES            119


                              Gatalhayike :
   Throughout this book the Ne lithic site at Coaittarai has beea
   used to provide examples. This i partly because it is the location of
   the field project currently being directed bythe author. But it is also_
   used because many of the issues discussed in this volume derive
    from discussions with members of the project: team. The project
 _ participants have contributed Significantly to the ideas inthis book ~
    although they would not wish to accept any responsibility for
       Catalhdyiik East is a 9000 year old site in central ‘Turkey near
    Konya. It was first excavated by James Mellaart (1967) in the sien-
    1960s. The site quickly received international recognition as funda-
    mental to our understanding of early farming (especially —
    domestication), sedentism and the formation of complex societies, _
 _ trade, the role of women in early mythologies and societies. = :
   particular, its spectacular wall reliefs and wall paintings both provided —
    an unrivalled window into Neolithic ways of life and Haouchityand-
    raised questions about the role of early‘art and symbolism’. _   a.
       Fieldwork restarted at the site in 1993, under the auspices of the
    British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara and with a permit from
 _ the Turkish Ministry of Culture. The first‘three years of fieldwork —
    have been published (Hodder 1996), and more can be found out
    about the present research onBs ‘/Icatal.ak cam.ac. uk/catal/cat-
   al.html


   A similar point can be made regarding stratigraphic relations (Harris
et al. 1993). As described in chapter 6, the Harris matrix approach
assumes clear-cut contexts and clear-cut relations. ‘Three-dimensional
soil relationships are reduced to a simplified and codified two dimen-
sions — there is considerable abstraction and formalization, and the
only relations used are above, below, same as. But understanding the
stratigraphic relationships of a context is complex — it depends on
interpretation and narrative. For example, we may say this layer is
equivalent to that because they are both on the same house floor even
though not touching; or we say that this is earlier than that because it is
a ‘foundation deposit’ even though we cannot see the cut; or we say this
layer is equivalent to that because of a join of sherds. It is thus necessary
to produce alternative stratigraphic relationships based on competing
hypotheses and to annotate the different versions with explanatory
120   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES

accounts. In other words, it is necessary to embed the matrix of
stratigraphical relations in a narrative. Chadwick (1998) suggests that
more interpretive components should be added to a Harris matrix. He
points to stratigraphic conundrums that do not always obey the rules
established by Harris, for example fills that build up in much earlier
capped drains, or pits that are dug through deposits while the latter are
still forming.
    As noted in chapter 5, getting information back to the excavator as
quickly as possible is essential. This may be assisted by some of the
currently available technologies. For example, immediate digital data
input may allow the quick production of artifact distributions and plans.
At Catalhoyiik (Hodder 1996) we have invested in a local, on-site
computer network — the terminals of the laboratory and field staff are
linked by a hub so that data sheets and plans can immediately be
accessed and linked to artifact-based information. Indeed it increasingly
seems necessary to have a dedicated “data-analyst’ present with the time
and resources to search for relationships between different types of data
so that understanding can quickly be fed back to the excavators.
    Circuitry and feedback to excavators of information from large data
sets can be enhanced by the new technologies. A major challenge at
Catalhoyiik has been to construct a data base which allows the max-
imum amount of flexibility, change and interaction. The system, initi-
ally designed by Tim Ritchey and now by Anja Wolle, is a standard
relational data base (initially Microsoft Access running on a Windows
NT Server machine) in which all aspects of the project are entered —
that is, excavation unit sheets as well as the faunal specialist records are
on the same data base so that querying across from artifact to context
data is facilitated. The aim here is to allow artifact categories (e.g.
burned bone) to be evaluated against context information (e.g. whether
a deposit or house is burned), and simultaneously to allow context
categories (e.g. burned deposit) to be evaluated against artifact infor-
mation (e.g. whether a bone appears burned).
    Another idea is for the data base to retain multiple hypotheses in
parallel so that analysis can proceed on more than one basis. For
example, different parallel coding systems could be retained for
objects/categories/types. Different definitions of ‘storage jars’ could
be retained on the basis of different categorizations of shape, fabric,
contents, context (storage room, pit). Analysis of the frequencies of
storage jars and the interpretation of contexts could then proceed
along different parallel lines depending on the different definitions of
                         USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES          121

storage jars. As further examples, analysis of artifacts could proceed
using different definitions of context, different cut relationships, differ-
ent lumping of lenses into layers etc.
   While flexibility and the erosion of the notion of fixed objective
categories can perhaps be engendered in these ways, placing large
amounts of information into a data base in such a way as to allow
efficient retrieval and comparison will always require considerable
codification and fixity. It is necessary, therefore, to embed the data
base within other information which contextualizes its own production.
This reflexivity not only helps us to be critical of the assumptions we
make, but it also means that at future dates we or others can look back
 and understand why we made this or that interpretation, why we used
 this category or that context definition. It facilitates use of the site
 archive by later generations.
     The contextualizing information can include more than coded forms
 and texts. The construction of a multimedia data base is essential if a
 full range of information is to be provided to a wide variety of audi-
 ences. Access provides the ability to point to different types of data
 through OLE, or Object Linking and Embedding. When designing the
 data base, the field type (e.g. video field or Autocad field) can be set as
 OLE object, which then gives the flexibility of including data from any
 OLE aware application.
     One of the contextualizing types of data placed on the data base at
Catalhoyiik is the diary at present kept by the site and trench directors.
With more computer terminals at the site it is hoped to have wider
participation in diary writing by members of the project. Keeping some
form of diary or running account of an excavation used to be the prime
method of recording information. The site or trench note-book is still
advocated by, for example, Joukowsky (1980). But in British contract
archaeology at least, most have moved to some form of single-context
recording with codified forms and prompts. Barker (1982, 147) argued
against notebooks of ‘prose whose loose format invites the writer to
confuse the stages of recording, deduction, interpretation and specula-
tion’. But since these stages are, in fact, inseparable (Carver 1990, 299)
it becomes essential, both scientifically and ethically, to record what
was being thought when records were being made and methods cho-
sen. We have found at Catalhéyiik that the process of writing a diary in
the pseudo-privacy of typing at a terminal leads to highly personal and
revealing accounts (even though the entries, as it turned out, were being
immediately and avidly read by others on the network). The entries in
122   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES




                 SEEFEELERE
                          SFr es




Figure 7.1 Video documentation taking place at Catalhdéyiik and an example of the
digitized database entry (opposite).
                         USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES            123

      MP Database




the diary can be linked on the basis of unit and feature number searches
to the codified information so that the latter can be set within the
context of the production of knowledge. The same aim is identified as a
part of feminist practice in archaeology: ‘we might consider publishing
fuller field diaries that tie investigatory decisions to specific items of new
knowledge, to diminish the appearance of knowledge appearing
directly and automatically from the field into textbooks’ (Conkey and
Gero 1997, 429). At the very least, the process of diary writing and
reading enhances information exchange and debate within the project.
   One of the most important aspects of the context of production of
knowledge on an archaeological site is visual (Molyneaux 1997). At
Catalhéyiik daily video documentation takes place of group discussion
in trenches, individual accounts of excavation progress and laboratory
work. In this way team members can point to information they con-
sider relevant, debates can be recorded and illustration provided. These
videos are digitized, edited into short clips, and stored on the data base
with attached key-words. Thus it is possible to use the data base to
retrieve not only field descriptions, Autocad drawings, artifact locations
and diary information for any particular unit, but also video about that
unit, its discovery and interpretation. The editing process is of course
selective, but the visual documentation always includes more
124.   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES

‘peripheral’ information than texts or forms, and it includes more of the
surrounding context within which team members are working and
interpretations are made. Indeed, the video documentation at Gatal-
héyiik, achieved with the collaboration of the Centre for Art and
Media-Technology at Karlsruhe, has become very central to our meth-
odology. Not only do the videos allow later critique and evaluation of
the construction of data on site, but they also lead to greater informa-
tion flow about interpretation (as people listen to each other live or on
playback in the laboratory) and a greater readiness to submit one’s own
assumptions to scrutiny. As members of the team pointed out, the ever-
present eye of the camera means that thought processes are much more
out in the open.
   Photographs apparently give an exact impression of what was found
ona site. Certainly they have come to be used in archaeology as a prime
indicator of ‘evidence’. They demonstrate that the claimed discoveries
‘really were there’. Along with the site plan, the site photographs
provide a final authority. As a result, on many sites much effort is put
into preparation and cleaning for photography. Grass is carefully
clipped, on some sites excavated pits may be filled with dark soil to
make them stand out, and in Japan, the outlines of pits of ditches may be
painted white. The evidence is fixed on film for posterity. But of course,
the term ‘fixed’ has a double meaning. On the one hand the photograph
fixes the data as evidence. But the whole ‘set-up’ process implies that the
evidence has to be manipulated or fixed in order to be real. The new
technologies of digital photography explode the myth of the photograph
as evidence more completely. We can now play with the image, manip-
ulating and exploring it digitally. The legitimacy of the photograph is
threatened and the distinction between virtual and real is blurred.
Similarly the ‘setting-up’ of the video documentation process described
above is very overt. Those involved in explaining what they are doing on
screen have to select what they will say, they select shots and filter the
argument. It is hard in such contexts to ignore the impression that the
objective evidence can be seen in more than one way.
   So far I have described site excavation as being undertaken by ‘team
members’. While on most sites there is a core group undertaking the
fieldwork, research and publication, people in the global community
may wish to have direct access to a site’s data and to participate in its
interpretation. For this reason, the data base at Qatalhéyiik is being
placed on the Web, including drawings and diaries but excluding, for
the moment, video clips which require too much storage space for the
                           USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES                 125




  Mellaart Area




Figure 7.2 Still from a Catalh6yiik CD-Rom. In the upper picture the user can use a
mouse to move around a Virtual Reality model of a Neolithic building. By clicking the
mouse on features such as the bulls’ horns, original photographs from the database
appear below to allow comparison between the virtual model and the archaeological
evidence.


Internet. The presence of contextualizing information in the data base
allows others to understand the process of the construction of the coded
information and to be in a position to critique and re-evaluate from
alternative perspectives. The ‘data’ are thus not hoarded by ‘the team’
until publication but they are immediately part of a public inter-
pretation.
    Interaction is also enhanced by the use of hypertext in ways parallel
to Ruth Tringham’s (1994; 2000) ‘Chimera Web’ for the Balkan Neo-
lithic site of Opovo. It can be argued (e.g. S. Thomas 1996) that the use
of hypertext and non-linear multimedia data-structures allows some of
the decentring of the author and some of the ‘writerliness’ of texts for
which some theoretical statements have called (Bapty and Yates 1990;
Spector 1993; Joyce 1994). Since it is possible for each ‘reader’ of the
‘text’ to move through it in different ways, there 1s a greater openness to
a wide range of interests and greater opportunities for interactivity and
126   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES

engagement. It is possible in this way to embed a narrative about the
site in links to the data base, to visual material, reconstructions and so
on at various levels of specialist knowledge. Care must be exercised
here, however, as S. Thomas (1996) has indicated. A certain level of
archaeological knowledge may be required before the user of hypertext
or hypermedia can effectively interact with it. It may be necessary to
ensure that part of the hypertext deals with explaining terms and
assumptions, so that the tools necessary for interaction are made avail-
able and easily accessible.
   Virtual reality has already been extremely important in providing a
deeper understanding of what it could have been like to move around
within and between the buildings at many sites (e.g. Forte and Siliotti
1997; Rick and Hart 1997). This has been achieved at Gatalhéyiik by
video-length computer animation, but also using Quick-Time VR,
VRML and Real-Time Computers (Hodder 1997). A phenomenolo-
gical or experiential approach has been championed by a current
generation of British prehistorians (e.g. Barrett 1994; J. Thomas
1996; Tilley 1994 and see chapter 8). However, in situations with less
good or minimal monument survival, or in which there has been
substantial landscape change, virtual techniques may allow experiment
with alternative forms of interaction between people and the worlds
they have constructed round them (for a similar point regarding GIS
see Llobera 1996). It may also be possible to use virtual reality to
provide a non-specialist ‘front end’ to a data base. At Catalhdyiik it is
possible for users to ‘fly’ into a CD-Rom version of the site, into
individual buildings, ‘click’ on paintings or artifacts and so move
gradually, if desired, into scientific information available from the
data base. Potentially, users will be able to move through the site,
exploring information, and coming to their own decisions about the
‘data’ at different levels. For example, one of the problems we have at
Catalhoyiik is in deciding whether a building is in some sense a ‘house’.
Rather than accepting ‘our’ conclusions on this, the data will be
available, as far as that is possible, so that users can come to their
own conclusions about the definition of a ‘house’ at Gatalhéyiik.
   Publication on-line or on CD-Rom has the potential to allow greater
interactive access and greater ability to browse through a site archive.
In this way there is the potential to make the archive more accessible
both to specialists and to the wider public, and to facilitate the use of
contextualized ‘primary’ data for the exploration of alternative hypoth-
eses. Within such a digital context it is possible for site reports to be
                        USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES            127

written which incorporate multiple views and which contain informa-
tion about the context of the production of knowledge.
   If the new information technologies potentially allow a greater
diversity and open-ness of interpretation, it may be felt that the author-
ity of the interpretation by the site director is undermined and that such
loss of authority has negative results. Within an open network of
information it is certainly possible for alternative interpretations to be
disseminated. The interpretation made by the excavator of a site can
be balanced by alternative interpretations made by other members of
the team. But it is also possible for the excavators’ interpretations to be
one node within a wider debate. As long as the interpretation by
the excavators   remains   identifiable, wider debates do not threaten
the integrity of the initial interpretations. Informed accounts can
then be made by other groups and individuals. Alternative inter-
pretations may in the end come to have greater authority than that
proposed by the excavators. It is difficult to see why such a process
should be seen as negative and undermining except in bastions of
traditional academic authority where status rather than knowledge
are the key concern.


Conclusion

Simply to introduce the new technologies is clearly insufficient. While
highspeed processors on site, hypertext, multimedia and virtual reality
may all foster some of the reflexivity, contextuality, interactivity and
multivocality that is required, they have to be aligned with broader
changes in approach and work practices. The technologies perhaps
provide an opportunity rather than a solution.
   It may well be the case that some forms of traditional authority in the
discipline need to be redefined. As an example, placing so much
emphasis on the point of excavation may lead to a re-empowering or
re-centring of the field excavator. But it may also involve re-training
and re-skilling such individuals so that they can handle the increased
amount and complexity of knowledge made available to them during
the excavation process. Alternatives might involve breaking the distinc-
tion between field and laboratory staff, and providing opportunities for
field staff to be also trained as specialists in other areas and levels. More
generally, the overall separations between field professional, university
academic and laboratory scientist within the discipline do not provide
128   USING THE NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES

an appropriate context for the necessary degree of interpretive
interaction. If interpretation is not to be seen as secondary but as
primary to data collection, then so will the institutional divides between
data collection, analysis and interpretation be further eroded.
   As a further example of the relationship between methodological
change and the need for wider accompanying changes in approach, it is
possible to consider the impact of widespread data accessibility on the
careers of project researchers and field staff. It will often be the case
that some aspect of their career development is linked to publication.
However, if primary data about the project are immediately widely
available, the ability to publish original information may be under-
mined. Some safeguards and controls on information dissemination
may thus be deemed necessary at certain points in the circuitry.
   Despite these problems and implications, it can be argued that the
end result of a reflexive methodology is an approach with scientific
advantages. If more information 1s available at the point of excavation,
choice of sampling and excavation method will be more appropriate to
the questions being asked and the problems being studied (Carver
1989, 1990); fuller recording of relevant information will also be poss-
ible. If more contextual information is available to those working on
materials from the site, there is less danger of inappropriate codes and
categories being imposed from outside. If those conducting excavations
are open to a wide range of perspectives, they may be more willing to
adjust general views to the particularities of the information being
discovered. A final scientific advantage might be claimed in the pro-
duction of archives with sufficient contextual information to make them
more usable than those archives based on highly objectified and codi-
fied data systems.
8       Windows into Deep Time: Towards a
        Multiscalar Approach




If it is now increasingly possible to envisage archaeological methods
which foreground interpretation, flexibility, multivocality and reflexiv-
ity, it is also necessary to consider theories which incorporate these
same characteristics. In this and the next chapter I wish to consider
some of the wider impact of approaches which look beyond regulation
and structure. I first wish to consider theories of change.
   For a long time archaeologists have searched for formulaic explana-
tions of change (such that ‘x is a function of y + z under certain
conditions’). Increasingly such attempts are seen as reductive, and
‘explanation’ has increasingly been replaced by full ‘description’ of
the complex specificity of local sequences of events. Shennan (1989)
has pointed to the apparent convergence of perspectives from opposite
ends of the theoretical spectrum. Neo-Darwinian and poststructuralist
discussions of change have tended to focus on the individual, on
indeterminacy, and on history. Renewed discussion of Darwinian
thought (e.g. Dunnell 1989) and ideas of punctuated equilibrium
(Gould and Lewontin 1979) on the one hand, and descriptions of
historical ruptures (Foucault 1977) on the other, have broken up
notions of evolutionary and directional change. Contingency and his-
tory are championed in complexity theory approaches (Gumerman
and Gell-Mann 1994), and non-linear modelling (van der Leeuw
1989; McGlade and van der Leeuw 1997). Yoffee (1994) has empha-
sized an evolutionary theory which foregrounds diversity and
130   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH

indeterminacy. At the other end of the spectrum, Barrett (1994) has
argued that the major monuments of prehistoric Europe are the unin-
tended outcome of practices which had no overall plan.
   The Annales school on the other hand has provided a framework for
understanding the relationship between event and the long term.
Events are seen as embedded within medium-term social change and
long-term environmental and cognitive structures or mentalités. But in
such work in archaeology (Knapp 1992, Hodder 1987, Bintliff 1991),
the mechanisms which produce the long-term structures are unclear.
Examples of long-term continuities abound in archaeology — indeed,
the identification of structured pattern over the long term is a particular
contribution for which archaeology is well equipped. Bradley’s (1990)
work on the long-term use of watery deposition in European prehistory,
and South American examples of long-term continuities in the use of
space (Flannery and Marcus 1983) illustrate this trend (see also Huff-
man 1984 and Lechtmann 1984). But we remain far from an adequate
understanding of what creates the long-term continuities, especially
given the emphasis on contingency which is so much in vogue at
present (see above). Certainly, memory (Rowlands 1993; Mizoguchi
1992) and the invention of tradition (Ranger and Hobsbawm 1983)
play important roles, but neither are adequate mechanisms to explain
the construction of long-term continuities even across radical rupture.
   Perhaps our problem has been that as archaeologists we have been
struggling to find a common language for the different scales of change.
We struggle to find an explanation which does equally well for the
short-term contingent as for the long-term structural. Perhaps we
should accept that the two scales are not commensurate (Kelt, personal
communication) and that different types of theory are relevant to the
different scales (Preucel and Hodder 1996). This point can be
approached by a consideration of the way time has been dealt with in
archaeology. Strangely, despite archaeology being a discipline in which
time is central, there has been very limited discussion of time (see Bailey
1981; 1983; 1987; Shanks and Tilley 1987), and time has not been seen
as central to evolutionary theory. Rather, evolution has been ‘spatial-
ized’; time has been treated as space — divided into blocks with relation-
ships between them. This spatial view of time has had consequences
for the type of theories that have dominated the discipline. The focus
has been on the shift from one block of time to another and on
general evolutionary change. Transitions and origins have been the
currency of theoretical exchange. Major causal variables have been
      WINDOWS    INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH          131

sought. Societies have been seen as systems. A very different view of
change and society is developed if space and society are thoroughly
‘temporalized’.
   In a temporalized view, the focus is placed on the fleeting moments of
time which come and go. These can never be recaptured except partially
and provisionally in another time. Moments in time can only be
approached and approximated. Time as fleeting means that structure
and system can never be fully instantiated in the moment except provi-
sionally and partially. In the practice of the lived moment all the abstrac-
tions and constraints and systems cannot possibly be present except in
the simplest of terms and most provisional of ways. This is because of:

      the complexity and size of the system;
      unacknowledged conditions and incomplete knowledge held by
         actors;
      different perspectives and interpretations of appropriate action;
      inability to predict all the consequences.

   There must, then, always be a disjunction between event and struc-
ture. As many have recognized in the social sciences and in archae-
ology, events must always be underdetermined. One can never
adequately explain one level by another; the events and structures are
simply not equivalent. A similar point has been made about norm and
agency. Kelt (personal communication) argues that very little of what
happens in the mind surfaces as consciousness; normative structures
cannot be reduced to agency. This disjunction between moments and
‘objective things out there’ (objects, monuments, systems, norms, struc-
tures, histories) which are stretched out in time perhaps helps to explain
the difference between causal and interpretive statements. Such state-
ments are not comparable because they refer to different scales. Causal
explanation deals with the inter-relationship of variables at a distance,
in abstract, removed from the specificity of events. Interpretation in the
form of ‘thick description’ attempts to include accounts of the contin-
gent and historical specificity of events.
   Archaeology thus needs to develop approaches to two scales of
analysis concurrently. On the one hand the system/structure needs to
be examined in order to identify conditions, constraints and conse-
quences; and on the other hand thick/deep descriptions or narrative
windows are required which look at how individual events resonate
with larger systems and construct change through conjuncture.
132   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH


The Archaeology of Practice in British Prehistory

One set of approaches which attempts to combine structures with
individual agency derives from Bourdieu (e.g. 1977) and Giddens
(1979; 1984). These two writers have had a long impact in postproces-
sual archaeology (e.g. Shanks and Tilley 1987; Parker Pearson 1982;
Hodder 1986) and are now increasingly referred to by authors in North
American archaeology (e.g. McGuire 1992; Dobres 1995). More
recently Giddens’ theory of structuration has been applied extensively
by Barrett (1994). Both Giddens and Bourdieu have increasingly come
under attack in the social sciences (e.g. Turner 1994), the main criticism
being that they do not in the end provide an adequate theory of the
subject and of agency. In both, the structures which bind us leave little
room for transformative action.
   There are various responses in archaeology to such worries. One is
to turn to dialectical thought. This direction is seen clearly in the work
of McGuire (1992) and much of his discussion parallels that described
below. However, in my view, the materialist emphasis which remains
limits the widespread application of these ideas. Another response to
the worries identified above is to turn to phenomenological approaches.
For example,J.Thomas (1996), Gosden (1994) and Tilley (1994) have
all looked to Heidegger and his idea of ‘being in the world’. The main
theme here is that mind is not separate from body or nature. Rather,
the world in which we live is part of us, not separate. It is always already
meaningful.   So, for example, Thomas       describes material culture as
neither essentially cultural nor essentially natural. This anti-essential-
ism resonates with the emphases on non-fixity and spatio-temporaliza-
tion in this volume. Thomas sees material culture meanings as
relational, historical and always changing. These authors use phenom-
enology to focus on how the subject experiences the world through the
body. In particular, they explore how subjects experience monuments
and landscapes as they move through them and carry out practices in
them.
   These structurationist, dialectical and phenomenological approaches
are important in that they attempt to break away from approaches
which foreground structures and systems binding people into particular
modes of behaviour over time. They seek to undermine the notion of
universal oppositions between culture/nature, mind/body, meaning/
practice, structure/agent. Rather they place emphasis on the local and
      WINDOWS    INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH        133

the personal — the lived experiences of individuals inhabiting monu-
ments and landscapes. Also they show that the sites and monuments
never had one single meaning. Rather the meanings were continually
changed through time (Bradley 1993). The site or monument is not a
static structure but the product of a long cycle of reordering and
renegotiating.
   These contextualizing directions lead to radical notions of fluidity
and multi-vocality which is why I wish to discuss them here. But
questions remain regarding two areas of this recent work in British
prehistory: does it provide an adequate account of the reproduction of
structures and an adequate account of individual lives?
   Take the example of the reproduction of structures over the long
term. ‘The authors being discussed are surely right to focus on the
practices through which structures are reproduced. The authors have
enriched our understanding of particular monuments by looking at
them not as plans seen from above but as places in which people
moved and interacted. The monuments can be seen as ‘locales’ (Gid-
dens 1984) in which routinized actions structure future actions without
determining them (Barrett 1994). Such a perspective is important
because, as argued above, in the lived experiences of daily practice
the large-scale structures and systems cannot all be present as abstract
entities. They can exist only in practice. It is thus important to focus on
the level of practice in order to understand long-term change.
   In theory it is argued by these authors that mind and body should
not be universally separated. They are both part of lived experience.
Thus in discussing the reproduction of structures, it is presumably
relevant to explore both conceptual and material structures. But in
the practices of the writings of these authors, the mind/body duality
often re-emerges as a meaning/practice duality.
   The claim is frequently made by structurationist and phenomenolo-
gical writers about British prehistory that archaeologists can avoid
meaning and empathy and engage in the description of practices.
Barrett (1994, 71) argues that in his work ‘we have not uncovered
what those monuments meant’. In discussing Neolithic and Bronze
Age monuments in Britain, practices sometimes appear to become
separated from mind. ‘Monumentality originated in neither the idea
nor the plan but rather in the practice and in the project’ (1994, 23).
This seems to be denying discursive intentionality, idea and plan too
completely. Tilley (1994, 74) writes ‘I make no claims to an empathetic
understanding’ of landscapes.J.Thomas (1996) makes the same point.
134.   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH

For example, the Neolithic Linearbandkeramik ‘house was not a struc-
ture that possessed a positive meaning, so much as being a means by
which the meanings of places and activities might be created’ (p. 112).
In another context, ‘the deposition of artifacts ...is best seen as part of
a performative practice involving sequences of formed bodily move-
ments, in which the meaning of place was evoked and recreated’ (p.
203). The implication is that archaeologists can study the practices and
the mechanisms for creating and recreating meanings without the need
to know what the meanings were. The effects of social action can be
understood, it is argued, without interpreting social meanings.
    Such a viewpoint effectively recreates a meaning/practice, even
culture/nature, dichotomy and long-term structures come to be
understood in materialist terms. For example, Barrett (1994) argues
that in the British early Neolithic the use of monuments and land-
scapes is generalized. Thus, a wide range of activities occur at ‘ancestral
sites’. This pattern is linked to long fallow agricultural systems and
generalized rights to community land. In the later Neolithic and
early Bronze Age a shorter fallow system implies closer links to the
land, the closer definition of inheritance and tenure, and the clearer
marking of burial locations on the landscape. Tilley (1994) too argues
that the placing of prehistoric monuments in the landscape is related to
material factors. The need to control and fix meanings in the landscape
is linked to herding and the control of animals, migratory routes and
pastures.
   These materialist leanings and the denial of the need to consider
cultural meanings limit the ability to explain the specificity of the
monuments and landscapes. For example, both J. Thomas (1996) and
Bradley (1996) describe the ways in which Neolithic Linearbandkera-
mik houses were centres of experience of the self and of the environ-
ment. The daily practices of cutting down trees, moving earth,
respecting older houses, living in and using the buildings created a
sense of place. People came to ‘know’ a place as part of ‘being-in-the-
world’. The similarities of form of Linearbandkeramik houses and
megalithic long tombs over vast areas are not seen in terms of a
common meaning. Indeed, Thomas argues that the houses or tombs
did not have a common meaning. All that was shared in northwest
Europe was a ‘material vocabulary’ (1996, 135). The similarities are
presumably produced by the routinization of practices. But why did
people keep doing the same thing with their house plans and tomb
plans? And why these specific plans?
      WINDOWS     INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH         135

    Rather than viewing people as repeating practical routines related to
material need, it would seem necessary to integrate a fuller account of
the frameworks of meaning within which practical strategies were
developed. The need to consider both practical (phenomenological)
and representational meanings was discussed in chapter 4. Other
accounts have been successful in explaining the specificity of practices
in terms of cultural meanings. For example, J. Thomas and Tilley
(1993) have explored the way in which Breton Neolithic tombs have
plans which cross-refer to symbolism of the axe and the body. Richards
(1996) has discussed the role of water symbolism for henges and other
monuments in British prehistory. He has also demonstrated in a
detailed study how a series of Neolithic monuments in Orkney use a
common symbolism related to the hearth and the house (Richards
 1991). In a long-term view of the transformation of conceptual struc-
tures in the Neolithic of Europe I have argued (Hodder 1990) that
continuities can be observed in the specific forms of houses and tombs.
The idea of the ‘domus’ is seen as practical and material while at the
same time conceptual and historically specific. Using such an idea the
specificity of practices in monuments can be explained (see also Sher-
ratt 1990).
   Another attempt to link practice and meaning over the long term is
provided by Treherne’s (1995) account of changing bodily life-styles in
the European Bronze Age. Why do toilet articles such as tweezers and
razors appear at a particular moment in European prehistory? Tre-
herne shows that such articles are related to evidence for increasing
individualism, warfare, bodily ornament, horses and wheeled vehicles,
the hunt, and the ritual consumption of alcohol. While all these activ-
ities are related to the rise and transformation of a male warrior status
group, Treherne argues that the key is a changing aesthetics of the
body. He describes the ‘warrior’s beauty’ and his ‘beautiful death’. This
aesthetics is a framework of meaning linked to a set of practices which is
quite specific historically and which is part of a distinctive form of self-
identity. This life-style crystallized across Europe in the mid-second
millennium Bc out of roots in the previous few millennia. The institu-
tion of the warrior elite was to survive into and in part give rise to an
aspect of the later feudal order in Europe.
   Treherne’s account of long-term structures integrates the material
and the conceptual. It is important to note that he achieves this by
considering the lived experiences of bodies and selves. “But surely’, it
might be objected, ‘this is exactly whatJ.Thomas, Barrett, Gosden and
136   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH

Tilley are trying to do.’ Certainly, and I would concur with the aim to
incorporate lived bodily experiences, and ways of being in the world.
But I will argue that in fact the bodies constructed by these authors are
universal bodies. We have already seen that the bodies they construct
are not well situated within specific historical meanings; | now want to
agree with Meskell (1996) that opportunities are not taken to explore
individual lives.
   For example, Tilley (1994) describes a walk he takes between the long
parallel banks of the Neolithic Dorset cursus. Much of the account
describes the visibility of other monuments along the way. For example,
he describes the surprise when the walker suddenly can see a barrow
that had been hidden from view. Or ‘walking down into the boggy
depths of the valley provides a sensation of the entire world being
removed’ (p. 181) as views are blocked. But how one responds on such
a walk would depend on who one is (for example a ‘priest’ or ‘war
captive’), on whether the cursus went within or crossed now invisible
community boundaries, on the relative social status of the two ends of
the cursus, and on a host of other social factors. These social ‘meanings’
would have a great effect on the perception of the person walking. Even
the idea of ‘taking a walk’ in the country seems peculiarly contemporary.
Tilley erects a universal body responding to stimuli in universal ways.
All the bodies described by J. Thomas (1996) and Barrett (1994) moving
along processional routes or around monuments are universal bodies.
The monuments have been appropriated by the archaeologist: ‘me as
monument’. As Meskell argues (1996; see also Knapp and Meskell
1997), the reconstructed bodies are not located in a specific time and
place. It is as if the bodies are transhistorical objects, disembodied
beings.
   Treherne (1995, 125) makes a related point in relation to Thomas’
work. “homas’ attention is given to the manipulation of individual
bodies, and concomitant notions of subjectivity, through the dominant
interpretations of built or acculturated space fixed by hegemonic
groups... What he is really concerned with is an external process of
subjectification.’ So once again, the lived experiences of individual
bodies located in a particular time and place are not explored, despite
claims to the contrary. There is too little emphasis on subjectivity and
self as constructed by individual agents. This lack of focus on individual
lives is closely related to the refusal to consider specific cultural and
historical meanings. Universal bodies are described in a universal world
of material practices.
      WINDOWS    INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH         137

   The wariness of archaeologists in dealing with individuals has been
described by Johnson (1989). It is of interest that his remedial example
is taken from historical archaeology where texts are used to gain a clear
insight into individual lives. Tarlow, too, in her call for a mortuary
 archaeology which considers emotion, bases her arguments on exam-
ples from historical archaeology (1992). Meskell (1998) provides insight
into the lives of individuals at Deir el Medina in Egypt in the eighteenth
 to twentieth Dynasties and shows how individuals negotiate and have
 an impact on long-term trends. Her accounts depend very much on
 texts which identify individuals. If it is to be argued that consideration
 of individuals is central to understanding how long-term structures are
 drawn upon in the practices of daily life, then prehistory might be seen
 to be at a disadvantage. We have already seen Treherne (1995) working
in a prehistoric context, but even in this example connections to
historical literature on feudalism are part of the argument. Knapp
and Meskell (1997) suggest that an archaeology of individuals is possi-
ble in prehistoric contexts and use as an example Chalcolithic and
Bronze Age figurines from Cyprus.
    The new archaeology of practice is welcome because it aims to focus
on the fluid processes of the reproduction of structures, and on embo-
diment and subjectivity. The new phenomenology of monuments and
landscapes is an important development which potentially allows large-
scale trends to be understood at the human scale. But because of a
reluctance in some of the work on British prehistory to consider the
frameworks of meanings and the practices of individuals, the creation
and reproduction of long-term processes is not adequately explored. In
my view greater emphasis should be given to those studies which do
discuss individual lived experience within historically specific worlds.
    Whilst historical archaeologists might be most successful in achieving
these aims, we have already seen that there are cases in prehistory which
allow windows into the structures and systems through which people
lived their lives. As prehistoric archaeologists we can routinely chart the
long-term flows of structures and systems. But there are also small
windows which open up and allow another dimension. Individual lives
come into view. The conjuncture of daily events becomes visible. It
becomes possible, bracketed within the vast expanses of prehistoric
time, to write a narrative at the human scale. These narrative windows
are the key to an understanding of the larger flows. The example I wish
to give is the Alpine Ice Man ~— an interpretive account which shows how
an accidental event can play a part in the unfolding of long-term trends.
138   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH


The Ice Man

Konrad Spindler (1993) summarized the information available at the
time concerning the body of a Neolithic ‘hunter’ discovered in the
Otztal Alps on the Austrian border (see also Barfield 1994; Egg et al.
1993; Goedecker-Ciolek 1994).
   The body was partly destroyed on recovery and the site was inade-
quately recorded. Dated to 3300-3200 Bc, the man was probably 35—
40 years old, was laying on his left side, with longish dark hair and
probably a beard. His body was tattooed, and he wore leggings, a cap,
fur or skin garments, shoes and a grass cloak. His equipment included a
hafted copper axe, a long bow, a quiver with arrows (two with tanged
leaf-shaped arrowheads), various tools, a pannier, a dagger, a net and
fire-making equipment.
   The man’s life was not disconnected from a wider society. He was
integrated and linked into exchange networks. His copper axe and
finely made clothes indicate that he was not extremely poor and he
may have obtained them by exchange. His tattoos, which perhaps had
a healing function, are in positions which indicate they were carried out
by someone else. The seeds and threshing residues caught in his clothes
suggest he had just been down in a valley — perhaps Val Venosta which
is only 20 km away or the upper Etsch valley. The shape of his hafted
axe occurs on statue-menhirs which are perhaps of a similar date in the
Val Venosta. So again the artifacts with him link him into a wider
cultural sphere. More generally there are stylistic similarities for the
axe, dagger and arrowheads in adjacent cultures. Spindler sees most
similarities with early Remedello in northern Italy, and Barfield speci-
fies a ‘Civate group’ in an area in which collective burial prevails.
    It is also possible that there was a dependency between the Ice Man
and settled communities in the valleys. Various ideas have been sug-
gested as to his occupation and his reasons for being high in the Alps. As
we shall see, there are indications that he was a seasoned mountaineer
and that he expected to be away for some time. Perhaps he traded
metals, or hunted or was a shepherd. He died near the pass across which
sheep and goats could have been brought down from the summer
pastures. As settlement expanded in the later Neolithic a wider range
of specialized upland resources would have been needed. Sherratt
(1981; 1982) has documented this process at the general scale, and
there is perhaps some local evidence of extension of settlement in the
       WINDOWS      INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH               139




Figure 8.1 The discovery of an ‘ice man’ trapped in a glacier in the Otzaler Alps on
the Austrian-Italian border. The 5300 year old body was discovered by hikers, in
September 1991. Photo: Popperfoto/Reuter. Reconstruction of his clothing and equip-
ment (Spindler 1993).


late Neolithic (Spindler 1993). People experienced in surviving in upland
areas would increasingly have become essential for lowland groups.
140   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH

   We know very little about settlement in the Val Venosta and other
nearby valleys, but in general terms we know of settled lakeside villages
or defended hill-top sites in neighbouring areas at this time. Such
societies needed people who went into the mountains (for stone sources,
ores, shepherding, hunting). This gradual encroachment into the
uplands is part of a long-term process, involving economic changes
such as the increased use of secondary animal products (Sherratt 1981)
and the early use of copper. But I want to argue that the unfolding of
this process was made up from small-scale events, including the death
of the Ice Man, which created conflicts, tensions and dissonance. It is
the detailed narrative of this man’s death which gives an insight into
how the large scale process was played out.
   The Ice Man was integrated into a system. But the most remarkable
thing for us, looking at his equipment, is his self-sufficiency. This per-
spective may simply be a bias of our times, but I would argue that even in
late Neolithic terms, he was unusually self-sufficient. He carried an
extraordinary amount of equipment with him. He had a retoucheur
for making his flint tools, spare bits of sinew, and he was in the process of
making his bow and the arrows. He had also brought along bits of his
broken quiver in order to mend it. He had a pannier probably holding a
birch bark container for embers, and a tinder fungus in a belt pouch.
Another container was perhaps for liquids. He had an awl, scraper,
borer, blade, dagger, axe, net. He had brought some tree bast string to
make his bow. He even had his own ‘medicine kit’ in the form of two
pieces of birch fungus attached to his left wrist. He did not have much
food with him (probably only a sloe berry and probably a piece of dried
meat) but he was able to obtain food using this wide range of equipment.
   He was also well dressed for his upland travel. He had fur skins, cap,
leggings, upper garment and long grass cloak. And he had probably
carried out his own repairs of the clothes — he certainly had the
equipment for it. There is evidence that he was a seasoned traveller.
His body was lean and he had old fractures to his ribs of a type which
often occur in mountaineering accidents. That he travelled a lot is also
suggested by the sources of his wooden and plant artifacts — they
include 17 species from a wide range of altitudes, and there is also a
great diversity of animal products. Part of this variety could have been
obtained by exchange, but extensive travel is also possible.
   There is, then, evidence of independence and self-sufficiency. The
Ice Man’s concern with care of himself is also seen in the healants (sloe/
fungus) and tattoos, the location of which on the body suggests ‘protec-
      WINDOWS     INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH         [41

tion’ or healing. He was not an outsider, but he lived an independent
and self-sufficient life. And a dangerous one too. Spindler argues that a
disaster had occurred producing newly broken ribs so that he lay on his
left side to avoid the pain (although it is possible that his ribs were
broken in the recovery process). His weapons were unfinished. We do
not have to accept the notion of some immediate conflict with lowland
groups to see that his life of upland travel involved dangers and at least
tension in his relations with lowland peoples. The latter were in part
dependent on him — whether it was for herding, wild animals or ores.
But yet he was independent and self-sufficient. And in the end he broke
the exchange relationships. He ‘disappeared’.
    Differences between the Ice Man and lowland areas are seen in his
clothing (Goedecker-Ciolek 1994). There is no woven material at all,
no linen or wool. Wool may not have been available locally yet
Jorgensen 1992), but linen was available in the lakeside villages
(ibid.). Linen would have been of little value as the main garment in
upland areas, but the total lack of linen is perhaps of note. At the very
least a difference between two ways of life is accentuated. In fact the Ice
Man has very little from an agricultural world (except by accident,
hidden in his clothing). He was eating wild ibex meat and a sloe berry.
He had no domesticated meat or bread, and no ceramic artifacts. We
know that the axe type occurs on statue-menhirs and thus in a ritual
context — but again there is no link to the domestic hearth.
   There may always have been people on the margins of society,
independent hunters and travellers. But at the particular conjuncture
of the late fourth millennium Bc, such individuals were becoming more
integrated into settled ways of life. Spindler (1993) suggests that in areas
such as the Val Venosta clearance occurred first in higher areas and
then moved down. At first, people like the Ice Man could remain
marginal. But gradually, as dependence on upland resources increased
and as secondary animal products became more important for sub-
sistence and exchange economies, people like the Ice Man became ever
more central.
   And yet his centrality was contradictory and full of tensions. The way
he lived and died involved independence of the individual, a concern
with the self and the body, dependence on wild resources, exchange,
death and danger. This life-style gradually came close to (in a spatial
sense) lineage- and village-based society in the lowlands. In many parts
of Europe the contradictions and tensions which emerged led to the
break up of that society and the development of a new way of life based
  WINDOWS               INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH




             KOROS                                AVK                         SZAKALHAT & TISZA                         TISZAPOLGAR
             Early sixth                          Late sixth                  Early fifth                               Late fifth
             millennium BC                        millennium BC               millennium Bc                             millennium BC




POPULATION
                     Mee 9
                 POPULATION           EXCHANGE          CONCENTRATION
                  MOVEMENT                                OF WEALTH




                                      NORTII-WEST                                               SOUTH-EAST
 (b)         BC (Cal)



              1500                 MIDDLE    BRONZE      AGE   (Tumutus culture)              long distance exchange

                        Rieeets EARLY                                                      chariot,
                                                                                                                  OTOMANI
                                             a                                            early hillforts
                                              BRONZE              early bronze hoards
              2000                             AGE
                                                                      bev? (SLIPS:
                                                                                          e
                                BELL-BEAKERS
                                                                                                                       2-piece moulds
                                                                    increased importance of livestock
                                                   CORDED

                                                     WARE                   use of wool              horses
                                                                                                                     PIT-GRAVES
                                  LATER
                                MEGALITHS,                                                                        BADEN
                                                                            Spread
                                              2
                                                  ae                   of    plough
                                                                                                              metal-influenced
                        faite     ee eal ee zmunmdtlo
                                                                                                                  pottery


                                  FIRST
                                MEGALITHS                                                                         SE EUROPEAN

                                                                                                                  COPPER          AGE




                                                                                                                    BALKAN

                                                                                                                  NEOLITHIC




                                                                                                                              Z


                                                                   ences IS
                                                                                                                   i          “tia
                                                                                                                          F   2
              WINDOWS      INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH               143
                                         Domus                                            5th
                                                                                         and
                                                                                         4th
          First level                                                              millennia
                                                                                          be




       Second level




          First level                                                                    Late
                                                                                         Ath
                                                                                         and
                                                                                          3rd
                                                   The domus as periphery           millennia
                                                                                           bce
                                                              |
                                                              |
                                                              |
       Second level Hees                   Domus   /       Agrios


 (c)
on a greater emphasis on the individual, particularly on a set of male-
associated traits involving hunting, warring and exchange (Sherratt
 1981; ‘Treherne           1995; Shennan       1986). The new social form may be
close to the Germanic mode of production (J. Thomas 1987). It is this
new way of life and its associated beliefs and meanings that I have
termed the ‘agrios’ (Hodder 1990).
   All such transformations have been described in the literature as if
they unfolded over the long term. For example, Sherratt (1981) has
described the Secondary Products Revolution and I have charted a
gradual change from domus to agrios (1990). From Childe (1925) to
Renfrew (1973) to Shennan (1986) and Treherne (1995) the main
characteristic of this change has been the rise of the individual and
the appearance of individual burial rites. But these long-term structural
transformations are made up from the micro-actions of multitudes of
individuals living their lives and gradually transforming the circum-
stances in which they do so. The life and death of the Ice Man, in
however small a way, were part of these larger scale changes. In his life we

Figure 8.2 Long-term processes in which the Ice Man’s life was embedded. (a)
Sherratt’s (1982) model for population movement into lowland areas and gradual
expansion into upland areas, followed by interaction and exchange between upland
and lowland. This process happens at different times between the 6th and 4th millennia
in different parts of Europe. (b) Sherratt’s (1993, 16) overall chronology for the spread
of various characteristics including Secondary Products and individual burial with
daggers and battle axes (Corded Ware and Bell Beaker) in Europe. The relative
position of the Ice Man at a major transition is marked by a triangle. (c) (above) The
overall shift from domus to agrios in European prehistory (Hodder 1990, 96). The
central location of the Ice Man is again marked by a triangle.
144.     WINDOWS    INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH

see specialization in an upland and independent way of living. We see the
tension of dependence and independence in relation to lowland societies.
We see him dealing in a practical way with the contradictions between an
old and a new system. In the tragedy of his death we see the breaking of
bonds and dependencies. We see the emergence of a set of ideas which
conflict with lowland domus-based societies. These new ideas are less
about continuity and stability of the domestic hearth, and more about a
male-centred ethos of hunting, warring, bravery, exchange and the
independence of the individual. The Ice Man’s death, whatever the
specific reasons, helped to create the impression that this increasingly
important way of life was antithetical to societies based on a corporate
sense of lineage and dependency and symbolized by the domestic hearth.
   The fleeting moment of the Ice Man’s life and cold and lonely death
provide us with a window through which to peer at the playing out of
larger structural and systemic transformations. The find of his body
allows a different perspective on these abstract and objective forces. It
helps us to see how the structures were mediated and transformed, how
they were played out in the practices of personal lives — how individuals
performed and transformed the large-scale historical movements.



                     Narrative windows: acritique oe
       I'm Ss but much ¢as |can see       cont you are making, i
                                                               found the
       example of the Ice Man hopelessly uncritical. There is too much sloppy
 _ and uncritical interpretation. Forexample, you have no idea whether the
_ death of the Ice Man was a ‘tragedy’. This is just cheap, sensationalist
   interpretation. Byyour sloppiness here you are just ‘supporting ‘the | view
   that these narrative windows into past livesalways have tobeunscientifi 7
   just examples of story-telling.                                          :
   I think that is unfair. |didn’t want to writea whole book Aes ce Ice
   Man. If you want to check the detail you can go and read Spindler and
 _ the other references | gave. You will see there that allthe asser ons|
   made are supported by evidence available to me atthe time. |was
   using the example just to make a specific point about how archae-
   ology can in some circumstances provide an insight into how the 2
   large-scale structural transformations we normally study are made ;
   up from the micro-actions of individual Aas: Ne cana erode /
   human Perspective.)                                               ee
   WINDOWS      INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH                   145

But you would accept that other researchers could interpret the Ice Man in
different ways. They could tell a story that had quite different implications.
Of course, | accept that other interpretations are possible. But for
the moment | think my account is plausible and well-grounded. For
example, you criticized my use of the word ‘tragedy’ to describe his
death.
Yes, its use seems emotional. There are other possibilities. Think for
example of the Inca frozen bodies which are the result of sacrifice. It is
also possible that people were relieved at his death.
| did think about such possibilities. But in evaluating them, the
evidence did not seem to ‘fit’. Of course, the recovery of the body
was not initially well controlled, but there seemed to be no evidence
of formalized ritual behaviour. | used the term ‘tragedy’ because the
evidence indicated that the Ice Man had had close relationships with
other people. In his death, those social links were broken; but
because of the manner of his death, it was not possible to use
formalized burial ritual to come to terms with the break. The
‘tragedy’ argument made better sense of the evidence.
I can see your point, but | am still worried about the emphasis you are
placing on this rather sensational find. The book by Spindler is the only
archaeology book | have seen on sale in airport bookshops throughout the
world. The Ice Man has attracted widespread imagination. Is this really the
stuff of a scientific archaeology?
There are many reasons for the popularity of the book, but at least
one of the reasons is that such finds allow an insight at the human
scale. |agree we need to look at the evidence soberly and rigorously,
but we should not lose sight of the importance of such evidence for
providing an important window into the distant past. Rather than
dry descriptions of cultural change, we can gain an interpretation of
 how individuals worked within and dealt with the contradictory
 forces that surrounded them. The finds allow a more agent-centred
 approach; but they also provide a potential for engaging a wider
audience in archaeological debate.
OK. I accept that archaeological science must incorporate narrative win-
dows, as long as you accept that your account could have been more
carefully argued.
Well... OK.
146   WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH


Conclusion

For much of its data, archaeology can only give a general systemic view
— it can describe the flow of cultures or systems, the rise of complexity,
the collapse of states and inter-regional networks of exchange. ‘The data
are often too scanty to allow anything else, and the ability of archae-
ologists to paint grand syntheses with a broad brush is impressive (for a
recent argument in favour of grand narrative see Sherratt 1995). But
there are moments in archaeology which capture the public imagina-
tion when very rich and detailed information is found — an Ice Man, a
Pompeii, a Shang tomb or a Tutankhamun. We should not scoff at this
— the popularization derives from a fascination we all share. It invites
narrative. It provides a window into the workings of the grand systems
which we so painstakingly monitor for so much of our archaeological
lives.
    But it is not only the sensational finds which allow windows into the
fine grain of temporal sequences. Indeed, it could be argued that
archaeologists are better equipped at studying specific moments and
daily rhythms than larger scale processes. Archaeologists can recon-
struct in great detail the sequences of actions behind the knapping of a
flint nodule. Knowledge of the sequences involved in making and firing
a pot may be understood down to a few minutes. Seasonal activities
may be constructed from teeth growth or shell middens. Medieval
archaeologists may be able to reconstruct the daily routes from house
to field, and the weekly passages from house to church and back again.
In many ways, it is the human scale which is the stuff of archaeology;
it is the larger scale which is more distanced from archaeological
material.
    From one point of view, archaeologists best describe and explain
things (cultures, systems, evolution) which are the unintended con-
sequences of numerous small events and actions. What we observe is
a very generalized, distant abstraction from the events that filled
individual lives. Much contemporary theory in archaeology, from
Chaos Theory to neo-Darwinism or poststructuralism, aims to model
or include this local contingency and diversity. From another point of
view, archaeologists understand best the fine grained detail of daily
lives. In practice, archaeologists are able to observe at both scales.
    I would argue, however, that few approaches in archaeology ad-
equately recognize that different types of account are needed at differ-
      WINDOWS   INTO DEEP TIME: TOWARDS A MULTISCALAR APPROACH _ 147

ent scales. Archaeologists have developed effective techniques for deal-
ing with the large scale and the long term. When it comes to individuals
and events, there have been few successful studies. Rather than abstract
mathematical modelling of diversity and contingency, attention must
be paid to lived experience. Rather than accounts of ‘being’ which
remain materialist, dichotomous and disembodied, narrative interpre-
tations are needed of the specificity of meaningful action (Kus 1992;
Gero 1991b). Grand narratives of the long term and small narratives of
lived moments may not be commensurable, but both are needed in an
archaeology which accepts diversity, uncertainty and relationality in
human behaviour.
9      Archaeology and Globalism




The aim of this chapter is to contextualize the moves towards diversity,
fluidity and reflexivity which have become the main themes of this
volume. It is inadequate to see these themes as intellectual outgrowths
or logical results of feminist or dialectical archaeology or of the post-
processual critique of processual archaeology. The very fact that some
archaeological theory has embraced ‘interpretive archaeology’ at much
the same time as, yet apparently unconnected to, the proliferation of
‘interpretive centres’ in heritage and environmental conservation, sug-
gests that a wider process is at work. I will argue that it is necessary for
archaeologists to understand the broader economic, social and cultural
processes within which archaeology and heritage are embedded. ‘To
understand critically these wider processes is to provide a reflexive
context for archaeological reflexivity itself.
   It is often argued today, in many areas of life, that something
radically new is happening in the world, or at least the developed
world. This new discourse of ‘the new’ is partly fuelled by the end of
the millennium debates and retrospectives. But it began independently
of these in the 1970s and 1980s. In the area of information technology,
Negroponte (1996) has claimed a new world order in which there is a
shift from atoms to bits. For Castells (1996, 477-8) ‘it is the beginning
of a new existence, and indeed the beginning of a new age, the
information age’. In the area of philosophy and cultural critique, this
new phase is called variously consumer society, post-industrial society,
                                      ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        149

media society, or high or postmodernism (Lyotard 1984). Fukuyama
(1992) too, though critical of postmodern views, heralds ‘the end of
history’.
   In order to understand postmodernist claims for ‘the new’ it is
necessary to identify that against which they react. The ‘modern’ can
be defined in countless ways. I argue that it refers to a world anchored
by a particular starting point which was also an endpoint, an origin and
a destiny. This point from which all perspectives derived was progress,
not only technological but also social (the march towards liberty and
equality) and philosophical (the triumph of reason). Hobsbawm (1994)
has argued that this Enlightenment view has continued to dominate
western societies through most of the twentieth century. It is only at the
end of that century that these modernist assumptions have been widely
challenged.
   In the postmodern world there is a collapse of perspective, a lack of a
fixed point except that lack — and so immediately the contradictions
emerge which form so much a part of the postmodern world. With a
lack of a vantage point everything is simultaneously true and not true,
real and virtual, universal and local. This loss of fixed points is often
linked to changes in communication technologies and to the increasing
importance of information in postindustrial capitalist societies. People
become atomized within these new systems; the individual becomes a
node in a network of communication. Production processes too become
dispersed within global systems of the division of labour. As a result of
these processes of fragmentation, beliefs in universal notions of progress
become undermined. There is ‘incredulity toward metanarratives’ and
‘the grand narrative has lost its credibility’ (Lyotard 1984, 37).

Globalism A central concept which lies behind many of the discussions
of postmodernism is globalism. What is meant by this term and what
are the globalizing processes which are emerging? Castells (1996) has
described some of the changes in economics and media. For example,
in the area of computers he describes the shift from mainframe com-
puters to personal computers and computer networking and hence the
rise of the centrality of software in order to meet the need for the
flexible, interactive manipulation of computers. Information network-
ing technology took a quantum leap in the early 1990s, due to the
linking together of three trends: digitalization of the telecommunica-
tions network, development of broadband transmission, and a major
increase in the performance of computers connected by the network.
 150   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

 All this has allowed the emergence of fully interactive, computer-based,
 flexible processes of management, production, and distribution. A
 global labour force has resulted to some degree (ibid., 201) and a
 trend towards the individualization of work and the fragmentation of
 societies. ‘The flexibility of labour processes and labour markets
 induced by the network enterprise, and allowed by information tech-
 nologies, affects profoundly the social relationships of production inher-
 ited from industrialism, introducing a new model of flexible work, and
 a new type of worker: the flex-timer’ (ibid., 264).
     But it is not just patterns of work that are transformed within global
 culture. Take, for example, the shift in the presentation of information
 from the printed word (linear typography) to the audio-visual world of
 TV. It can be argued (Castells 1996, 332) that ‘while print favours
 systematic exposition, TV is best suited to casual conversation’. ‘There
 is a shift from a medium which is linked to detachment and perhaps
 objectivity, to a medium which is multi-sensory, often involving little
 effort, and linked to play and the casual. But further down the line
 which we have been travelling in developed countries over recent
 decades, new communication media produce further effects. Walkmen
 emerge, as do VCRs which can be organized to allow more personal-
 ized viewing. Camcorders allow filming of events in your own home,
“and there is a multiplication of TV channels. The result is enormous
  choice and segmentation. It is no longer possible for one message to be
  given. There is decentralization, diversification and customization. ‘The
 linking of TVs to computers and the arrival of the Internet create
 increased individualization, but also greater interactivity.
     Another set of important changes concerns the increasing import-
  ance of consumerism and consumer culture. For Featherstone (1991)
  the rise of consumer culture describes a process in which people are
  involved in a race to spend money on commodities, but these com-
  modities have become simply signs so that people are reproducing signs
  rather than producing them. The endless reduplication of signs by the
  market leads to the ‘aestheticization’ of reality and of everyday life,
  whereby people become ‘fascinated by the endless flow of bizarre
 juxtapositions’ (ibid., 15). There is a lack of stable sense and a depth-
  lessness.
     What are the overall effects of these changes? On the one hand, the
  result is clear. At least for those participating in the new networks of
  production, exchange and information flow there is a process of homo-
 genization. The world shrinks and becomes a ‘global village’. As Bill
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM         151

Gates (1995, 263) puts it, ‘the information highway is going to break
down boundaries and may promote a world culture, or at least a
sharing of cultural activities and values’. But at the centre of the idea
of globalism there is a contradiction. For example, Featherstone (1991,
114—15) suggests that there has been a shift from marking and emulat-
ing categories of difference (nation states or class, or feudal hierarchical
distinctions) to a new pattern in which everyone is both the same (for
example, they all have access to the same fashions) and different (as in
the emphasis on individual life-style). “The network will draw us
together, if that’s what we choose, or let us scatter ourselves into a
million mediated communities’ (Gates 1995, 274). Within globalism,
diversity, heterogeneity, ethnic conflict, and increases in disparities
between rich and poor seem to go hand in hand with homogenization.
New emphases on the global and the local seem inextricably linked.
   On the one hand, global flows decrease the importance of national
institutions and separate identities are threatened by the homogenizing
tendencies. On the other hand, the European Court of Human Rights
might support the individual against the state, or information techno-
logies allow small groups (whether these be ME sufferers or goddess
worshippers) to form and be empowered (Featherstone and Lash 1995).
   It is possible to argue that the homogenization of cultural expression
is linked to the domination of computerized network codes by a few
central senders. Certainly, the price to pay for inclusion in the new
information systems is that one has to adapt to its logic, to its language,
to its points of entry, to its encoding and decoding. But rather than a
centrally dispatched multimedia system, the overall tendency seems to
be towards a multinodal, horizontal network of communication,            of
Internet type (see also the proliferation of local radio stations). ‘The
diversification, multimodality, and versatility of these communications
systems allow different forms of expression, as well as a diversity of
interests, values and social positions (Castells 1996, 374).
   Thus in the developed world, globalism produces homogeneity
through enhanced and extended communication networks and
through processes of production and consumption which have a global
scale. Everything becomes commodified in a global market. At the
same time, the character of the new economies and information tech-
nologies allows diversity and fragmentation. It allows special interest
groups to form and create new identities and local meanings.
   Many parts of the world, especially Africa, are not well integrated
into this new network society. Maps of the global diffusion of the
152   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

Internet, for example, show a gradual spreading out from a concentra-
tion in the United States and Europe in 1991 to cover much of the
world except Africa and central Asia by 1994 (Castells 1996).
Even within more developed regions, there is increasing social stratifi-
cation among the users of the new networks. The multimedia world
increasingly contains two populations: the interacting and the inter-
acted (ibid., 371). Economic position and educational background
affect whether people are able to select their multidirectional circuits
of communication, or whether they are provided with a restricted
number of pre-packaged choices. The ability to participate actively is
linked to class, race and gender, but also to country and region. On the
one hand there is emerging an interactive network of self-selected
communes. On the other hand there is a customized mass media
culture.
   Outside the developed countries there are infra-structural limits to
the extent to which people can participate in the new networks. In
these areas, there is no opportunity for active engagement and empow-
erment via the new media. There is certainly some extension of mass
consumer culture through the participation in global production and
consumption processes. But these areas remain largely ‘un-networked’
in relation to the new information technologies. There is little relevance
here for ideas about postmodernism and aestheticization.

Archaeology and global diversity It is no accident that the label used for
processual archaeology was ‘new’ and for its critique was ‘post’. The
term ‘new’ suggests again the progressive development of modernism.
The term ‘post’ refers to the uncertainty and diversity of postindus-
trialism, postmodernism, postpositivism and so on. Of course, archae-
ologists look at the debates within their discipline parochially. They
understand them as internal developments within the discipline. They
see the rise and fall of successive theories as linked to their success in
promoting archaeological work.
   But a different view is that different archaeological perspectives are
simply products of their time (e.g. Trigger 1984; Patterson 1995). I
want to argue that the reflexive approach outlined in this volume is
both a symptom of and can play an active part in something much
wider — a debate, tension, contradiction within developed contempor-
ary societies. I want to show that reflexivity in archaeology cannot only
be set within wider intellectual movements but can also be related to
wider changes in the nature of economies and societies.
                                      ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM = 153

  It is not, in any simple sense, the case that the introduction         of
uncertainty in archaeology was associated with postprocessual archae-
ology and with the diversity of archaeology in the 1990s. Processual
archaeology embraced science and evolution and origins. In all these
ways it can be linked to modernism (as defined above) with its emphasis
on fixed points and grand narratives. But in some respects, processual
archaeology already introduced doubt. It undermined a self-evident
relationship with the past by emphasizing hypothesis testing in order to
combat bias. The resulting ‘loss of innocence’ (Clarke 1973) ensured
that statements about the past were from now on open to critique. The
self-evident nature of the archaeological record also came to be scru-
tinized and the role of formation processes recognized (e.g. Schiffer
 1987). Simple grand narratives concerning social evolution had gradu-
ally to be tempered with notions of multi-linearity and complexity
(Yoffee 1994).
    These trends towards the undermining of universal schemes and
grand narratives came to dominate in postprocessual archaeology (as
defined in the box on p. 3). Many of the abstract claims of post-
processual archaeology were paralleled in the theoretical debates of
postmodernism. The focus on context (Hodder 1982a) emphasizes the
local and the diverse as against the grand narratives of cross-cultural
anthropological archaeology. The focus on the individual and the
agent (ibid., and Shanks and Tilley 1987) resonated with contempor-
ary notions of fragmentation and the autonomy of the individual
within networks. The overall emphasis on the interpretation of symbols
and meanings recalled the growth of a wider cultural discourse on
consumer culture and ‘style wars’ (York 1980). The postprocessual
flirtation with relativism parallelled a wider willingness to accept uncer-
tainty and a diversity of views. The commitment to social engagement
seen in many postprocessual writings (e.g. Shanks and ‘Tilley 1987) was
part of a wider breaking of the separation between low and high
culture.
   My concern here is to focus on contextualizing the theme of
diversity discussed in this book. Processual archaeology placed a great
emphasis on variability. But by variability was meant systematic
adaptation to environments. The variability in past systems was seen
as being controllable within generalizing frameworks. But the view of
diversity which has emerged in recent decades and which is described
in this book is more radical. It concerns differences which are not
necessarily subsumable within controlling schemes. One expression
154   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

of this desire to foreground diversity has been the attempt to see the
past as ‘other’ or ‘different’ (e.g. Hill 1992;J. ‘Thomas    1990; 1993;
1996; Barrett 1994). The aim is to show that we cannot assume that the
past is the same as the present. We should not impose the present on
the past.
   But in evaluating this emphasis on difference, it is important to
remember the contradictions identified above within the globalizing
trends in developed countries. Perhaps this concern with the past as
‘other’ does resonate with the needs of different communities within
contemporary societies, however virtual those communities might be,
to create a sense of identity and purpose. For example, some black
communities in the United States might be strengthened by the
notion that slaves in the ante-bellum South actively resisted their
domination (Ferguson 1991). Also, some New Age or Ecofeminist
groups may develop a sense of coherence by reference to Gimbutas’
(1982) view that prehistoric ‘Old Europe’ saw a matrifocal society
(Conkey and Tringham 1996). In these ways the past plays a role in
forming diverse identities, sometimes at the small-scale. The fragmen-
tation and pluralism of societies is enhanced in terms of the formation
of active communities. The past as ‘other’ here has a positive role.
Some postmodern writers have suggested that prehistoric sources can
be used as hooks to construct community and to create resistance to
and critique of globalization (Featherstone and Lash 1995, 23). Halton
(1995, 275) argues that we should search in history and prehistory in
order to find different senses of value (about self, family, community
and so on).
   But all too easily, ‘otherness’ comes to mean something very different
— the past as play and pastiche, the past as wished for. I referred above
(p. 150) to the fascination with the endless flow of bizarre juxtapositions
which has come to be such a central part of consumer culture. The
archaeological past has come to play a full part in the provision of the
exotic, bizarre or nostalgic ‘other’. This is the past as theme park which
I will examine below (p. 163); the past as time travel. All too easily such
perspectives impact on archaeology as when evidence of prehistoric
female figurines comes to be used in superficial scholarship in order to
bolster claims about the goddess (Meskell 1995). The past as ‘other’ is
here involved in the play of difference, although the boundaries
between ‘play’ and the ‘passion’ of identity formation may often be
blurred.
                                         ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM           155


          "The deve as identity andas theme park

   | think you should make a distinction beivieer New Age or fhe archae-
  -ologies and the archaeologies of disadvantaged minorities.            :
 ~ On what grounds?
   A distinction should be made in terms ofyour separation between a pos
   mobilized as part of the resistance of subordinate groups, and a past
   experienced as leisure theme park. For example, Native American rights —
   to their past have to be considered in relation to centuries of exploitation
   by a dominant culture. New Age goddess groups are part of a dominant
 _ culture; these people are just involved in thepast for leisure, play,
  nostalgia.                                                                 :
  Well, |have tried to make a distinction and will dscns it again more
  fully in chapter ||. But | think the situation is much morecoemplic: -
  ated than you imply.
   Why?
   What right do you have to judge the role of arihnesloay for sdk _
   viduals who believe in the goddess? | have seen them emotionally _
   moved visiting goddess sites. Some people seem to have a profound _
   religious experience at these sites and the visits play an important
  part in their sense of identity. Many of these people are women.
   Who are you to say that discovering the goddess does not help them
  to gain a stronger sense of what it means to be a woman after
   millennia of subjugation? What right have you to say this is just
   self-indulgent play manipulated by the marker
  But these are not ‘real’ communities. sabae come© togetheron leisure :
  tours or on the Net.                                        |
  Again, what right do you have to say that these fluid or cinpecsta
  networks of people are ‘virtual’ and not ‘real’?
  | thought it was you that was making the distinction between — park
  fun with the past and real identities?                         -
  I agree there is a distinction between theme park and a resist-
ance. My point is rather that in any particular case it may be
  extremely difficult to disentangle the two strands — those uses of
  the past that are part of the spread of the market, play and pastiche,
  from those uses    of the past that define the rights of disadvantaged
  groups. This is ‘difference as play’ versus ‘difference as agency’. In
  practice, the two strands often seem to feed off each other.
156    ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

   So is there apoint in making the dichotomy?
  ‘The extremes seem clear. A heritag play park cansee be
   oO             from |the rooted claim       findigenous ‘groups. But


      particularuse ofDe
                       past.



   A similar point about the past ‘other’ as play derives from poststruc-
turalist debate about difference and ‘differance’ (Yates 1990). Any
interpretation of the past can be seen as just an ‘other’ interpretation,
constructed in opposition to existing interpretations. Thus Said (1978)
has shown that the Oriental ‘other’ constructed as the object of study
within western discourse is very much an inversion of the Occident’s
view of itself. If the West sees itself as dynamic and democratic, the
Orient must be static and despotic. In producing the past as ‘other’ are
we just producing inverse images of ourselves? Are we simply engaged
in a play of difference, of relevance only to our contemporary selves?
   Thus the emphases on diversity and difference within archaeology
can be related to the same emphases in globalized western culture. But
also the same tensions emerge in both archaeology and society. ‘The
archaeological past helps communities to engage in a different, altern-
ative identity. Or it undermines difference and otherness as just a play
within the global market of signs. Both Engelstad (1991) and Wylie
(1992) argue that postprocessual archaeology repeats androcentric
assumptions and biasses. Its openness to diversity is thus illusory.
Indeed, its whole tenor appears to support a dominant and closed
intellectual position. ‘To argue that ‘the past can have different mean-
ings’ is easier for dominant groups (see box on p. 159). The dominated
may have less resources to engage in alternative theories. More import-
ant, the notion that the past can have multiple meanings undermines
claims by dominated groups concerning the concrete reality of their
subjugation. From this point of view, all attempts to argue for the past
as ‘other’ may be seen as simply the play of difference within the
dominant discourse.
   The point is more forcefully made if we consider the use of the past
amongst those groups marginal to, or external to, the new network
society. One of the most important developments in archaeology which
has led to a critique of positivism and universal science has been the
                                      ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM         157

emergent voices of non-western and indigenous peoples. Anthropology
more generally has seen an increasing awareness of the colonial origins
of its discourse on the ‘other’ and has subjected its own concern with
 ‘universal’ (actually western) theorizing to radical critique (e.g. Marcus
and Fischer 1986). Much social and cultural anthropology thus focuses
now on the local rather than on grand narratives.
    In archaeology too, Trigger (1984) has shown how Native Americans
have been constructed as ‘other’ by changing generations of archae-
ologists. For culture historical archaeologists it was assumed that pre-
historic cultures would reveal little evidence of internal change or
development. Any major change observed by US archaeologists was
attributed to diffusion or migration. After 1960 New Archaeologists did
recognize the role of indigenous change, but there was not a serious
interest in the native peoples themselves. Rather, the archaeological
evidence of prehistory was used to establish universal generalizations
about human behaviour. Trigger (ibid.) sees the New Archaeology as
the archaeological expression of post-War American imperialism. Its
emphasis on law-like generalizations trivialises the study of Native
American prehistory as an end in itself. The investigation of any
national or ethnic tradition is seen as only of relevance for a general
(western-centred) study of humanity. ‘By denying the validity of study-
ing the prehistory of specific parts of the world, the New Archaeology
asserts the unimportance of national traditions themselves and of any-
thing that stands in the way of American economic activity and pol-
itical influence’ (ibid., 626-7).
    The past of non-western or indigenous peoples has frequently been
seen as static and lost in time. It has thus been constructed as a typical
‘other’ — simply an inversion of the way colonial and imperial societies
see themselves. Increasingly, however, the ‘others’ have, in a post-
colonial world, starting talking back (see below). They have confronted
taken-for-granted assumptions about universal science and argued that
there are other ways of doing archaeology. Reburial and repatriation
claims in many parts of the world have forced greater co-operation
between archaeologists and indigenous peoples, and some training of
indigenous archaeologists. Of course there is a danger that this process
will simply lead to the transfer of western methods and assumptions to a
global archaeological community. For the moment, however, there is
evidence of diversity and critique as indigenous people enter into a
global debate and critique western approaches to archaeology and
heritage (Swidler et al. 1997).
158   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

   For example, on behalf of the Tasmanian Aboriginal Community,
Langford (1983) argues that objective science does not have a natural
right to study her culture and she opposes the static ‘otherness’ con-
structed by archaeologists and the dynamic lived past understood by
community members. Mamani Condori (1989) shows how the past of
the Aymara in Bolivia is not dead and silent as supposed by the
positivist scientific attitude. There is an increasing awareness of the
potential for a global diversification of theoretical debate in archae-
ology (Ucko 1995). Indian archaeology, for example, has long been
dominated by the colonial heritage of Wheeler. But Paddaya (1995) has
begun to explore alternative directions, drawing links between tradi-
tional Indian philosophies and postprocessual archaeology. In more
general terms, Paranjpe (1990) argues against the universalist assump-
tions of western scholarship. ‘Europe is not the world’, but the agony
for Indian intellectuals is the feeling that not being Eurocentric makes
them powerless (ibid., 160). “To generate our own counter-colonial
discourses from our experience,     tradition, and imagination,     to not
regret our powerlessness in the world given to us, but to fight from
this position to one of greater self-determination and self-respect — these
are the challenges for the third world intellectual. The radical response
to the West is the response from a different, non-European centre’
(ibid., 160-1).
   Paranjpe argues that theoretical debate in the West is an endless
process of dialectical substitution. Theory replaces theory in a violent
and usurpatory way. This game or play of difference is essentially for
power. Instead of participating in such a conflict, Indian intellectuals
should find alternative positions from within their own traditions. For
example, Indian theories of meaning and interpretation should be
considered — Bharata, Nagarjuna, Anandavardhana,          and Abhinava-
gupta. ‘Poststructuralists like Barthes, Derrida, and Lacan talk a great
deal about the indeterminacy of meaning and the eternal play of
signifiers. This is akin to the Indian concept of /eela and maya’ (ibid.,
158). Concepts such as the play of difference can be accessed through
Indian ideas rather than having to be derived from Europe. The
ultimate hope is for dialogue rather than confrontation. In a global
network clear distinctions such as those between east and west may
become less central. Rather, there is increasing dispersal and debate
between different traditions.
   In general and oversimplified terms we might argue that views of the
past that groups hold are linked to the position of those groups in
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM — 159

relation to the global networks. Within the networks of high-speed,
interactive and multimedia information flow notions of progress or
evolution have given way increasingly to a ‘timeless time’ (Castells
1996, 465). Here there is fragmentation of time sequences, flexitime,
blurring of life-cycles, and instantaneity in information flow. Senses
of grand narrative, sequence, duration are disturbed. Temporal differ-
ence is just part of the overall play of difference. It is important to
recognize that even when the past is used to create identities and
support communities in networked regions, these communities may
be placeless or virtual. For example, when New Age communities are
created and reproduced through interaction on the Web, these com-
munities may only exist virtually in space/time. This is not to argue
that they are not real, but that their reality is virtual — unlocated in
place and time.
   Time and the past are understood differently away from the net-
worked centres. Here the past is used to create links and continuities
into the present. Time is continuous and has duration. ‘Time is central
to the establishment of rights over land and to the formation of
identities. As already noted, history and prehistory play an important
role. Heritage is central to rights and identities.


 From relativism to pluralism ;and multivocality
As noted in the box onp.23,
                          relativism is often understood   in archaeology

 “equally valid. Th becomes impossible to‘‘expose the misuse ofarc :
  ology by aes bey nationalis ks cranks’pe 1995, 330; see




= d be answerable to data., Theywou
                                            ldalso
                                                ee              that this
                                         A a. ee ee! is neces-



  commitment toobjectivity will protectarchaeclogy from misuse.
160     ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

      Your view frightens me. Take thefollowing quote from Wylie (1992, 21): ‘I
      myself find inescapable the suspicion that strong constructivist and relat-
      ivist positions embody what seems patently an ideology of the powerful.
      Only the most powerful, the most successful in achieving control over their
      world, could imagine that the world can be constructed as they choose’.
      Wylie is here arguing that relativism undermines the ability of those who
      lack power to take a stand, to argue that their subordination is grounded
      in the objective realities of their existence. Relativism appears to make all
      standpoints equal, and to destroy the universal and objective bases of
      claims for emancipation.
  But note how one can return to Wylie’s quote an substitute an _
  objectivist for a relativist perspective and retain the meaning of the
  sentences: ‘I myselffind inescapable the suspicion that strong pos- _
  itivist and objectivist positions embody what seems patently an
  ideology of the powerful. Only the most powerful, the most suc-
  cessful in achieving control over their world, could imagine that the
  world can only be constructed in one way, objectively’. One of the
  great realizations for| many inthe West in the twentieth century has
  been that western notions of science have done unaccountable
  harm. In a postcolonial world, in the world left from the Great
  War, the Holocaust and Hiroshima, universalist western traditions,
_ including positivism and objectivism, have come under scrutiny. Little _
  (1994) discusses for archaeology the link between positivist ration-
  ality and male domination. In reburial issues throughout the world,
  objectivist science is used on the side.of those who confront the _
  disempowered. |
      So you are saying that both objectivism and relativism can he eedin the
      interests of the dominant against the subordinate?
      Yes. It is naive, wrong and dangerous to believe that an epistemology
      can guard us against misuse of the past. ‘Truth’ will not protect us
      from ‘politics’. Neither objectivism nor relativism nor any other
      philosophical -ism can stand in for social and moral evaluation of
      political uses and abuses in archaeology. Misuse of the past can only -
      be evaluated socially and ethically. As members of society we make
      ethical evaluations of the use to which epistemologies are a in the
      service of politics.   _
      It is my opinion that in the present historical moment of |oka
      information | capitalism and postcolonialism, a dialogue between
      diverse perpen: on the past is needed in a morally and peel
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM           161

  aware archaeology. We live in a.plural and multivocal world. This is
    ot the same as saying that we live ina              vorld if by that is —
   meant that we cannot make judgements between the claims of
 _ different groups. The difference between plurality and relativism is —
     at the former refers to the rights and dignity of diverse groups.
  -Multivocality is grounded in our diverse — mo sae        and mater-
   shen
      mainte | Meteuive I—



The Modern and the Postmodern in ‘Heritage’

As argued above, a characteristic of globalization is the dual process of
homogenization and fragmentation. Homogenization can be seen as
the result of the market, of new information technologies, and of global
environmental issues. Fragmentation can be described in two contrast-
ing ways: (a) On the one hand, fragmentation is an essential part of the
global networked economy since the latter depends on a dispersed, de-
regulated and de-unionized process of labour. The global economy also
depends on defining new markets and tailoring its products for special
interests, hence the concept of niche marketing or the constituency or
‘market of one’. The new information technologies allow the market to
be extended from the mass to the individual. Fragmentation also serves
the economy in a less direct way — through nostalgia and false con-
sciousness. ‘Getting in touch with yourself, or your locale or group
involves small-scale solidarities and often a nostalgia for a more
‘centred’ way of life. This is parallel to the ‘me as monument’ view
described in chapter 8. Fragmentation in these terms may be a way of
dealing with alienation and the dispersal of power; it may alleviate the
frustration at not being able to identify the source of power. Nostalgia
for community may involve making the best out of the experience of
fragmentation. In all these ways, fragmentation serves and is part of the
economy. (b) On the other hand, fragmentation can be seen as part of
empowerment. The fragmentation can be seen as a reaction against
homogenizing tendencies, against the dispersal and concealment of
power. It allows people to act back, to use the new technologies to
resist globalization, to form not a false but a real ‘centre that holds’, and
to argue for rights and resources.
   ‘Heritage’ is centrally involved in the dual homogenization/frag-
mentation process, and the growth of heritage issues has all the com-
162   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

plexities and paradoxes just described. On the one hand, there are
universal notions of a common heritage for all humankind. Such
notions lie behind the specification of certain world monuments as
‘World Heritage Sites’. At a different scale, within Europe, sites are
identified as prime examples of ‘European heritage’. They are assumed
to have a common meaning for all Europeans despite the fact that
Europe itself is a historical construction. So heritage is common to us
all. A similar point can be made in quite a different way. The term
‘heritage’ conjures up a commercialized world open to the market, a
‘theme-parking’ of history and the past. Our changing relationship with
the past has been documented by many. For example, Lowenthal
(1985) has argued that we have in the West increasingly become
alienated and distanced from the past which has become ‘another
country’ which, as Fowler (1992) has shown, we are both protected
from (by the state) but encouraged to visit on vacation. We sit in ‘time
cars’ and travel to distant worlds miraculously reconstructed for us. It is
no accident that Baudrillard and Eco use this changing relationship as
an exemplar of the shift to the postmodern pastiche of depthlessness.
The ‘theme-parking’ creates the past as universal commodity.
    On the other hand, the term heritage is linked to inheritance and to
ideas of belonging, nation and community. It refers not to depthlessness
but to deep links with the past, to rights and senses of place, to own-
ership and roots, to origins. In many countries, national heritage is still
defined by and controlled by the state. The link between archaeology
and nationalism is strong if variable (Diaz-Andreu and Champion
 1996; Dietler 1994). Areas of conflicting interests from the reburial of
human remains in North America to the riots at the Ayodhya site in
India (Rao 1994; Bernbeck and Pollock 1996) are now the subject of
intense archaeological, heritage or museum involvement. In such cases,
the past is connected, deep, inherited. Thus the conferring of the labels
‘World Heritage Site’ or ‘European Heritage Site’ to an archaeological
site may have the result of reinforcing local identities and claims. The
notion of heritage raises issues of ownership and of the relationship
between local groups and global processes. Archaeologists routinely
recognize this when they say that it is important to ‘work with the
locals’. Locality and time sequence are important in the strategies of the
un-networked.
    Does the contemporary world of heritage serve only the interests of
the new global economy or does it also enhance and engender com-
munity empowerment and resistance?
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        163

      In several ways, contemporary approaches to heritage are not
   empowering. For example, many interpretive centres and heritage
   experiences are designed primarily for fun or pleasure as in the typical
  historical theme park (in Britain a good example is ‘The World of
  Robin Hood’ in Sherwood Forest). The concern here is with depthless
  pastiche. Other uses of heritage are primarily nostalgic rather than
  empowering. For example, many of the men’s, goddess, Ecofeminist or
   Gaia movements are deeply embedded in a symbolism derived from
  the past (Meskell 1995). In my experience, some of these groups are
  primarily concerned with helping their members to get in touch with
  themselves so that they can better deal with the world around them.
   Even in cases in which participants feel empowered (for example, as
   ‘women’ or ‘men’) within such movements, the use of the past by such
  groups may be largely nostalgic. It may not be the links to the past
  which create empowerment, and the past is often treated in superficial
  and stereotypical ways.
     However, in other cases the past clearly does play a central role in
  empowerment (for the goddess groups see box on p. 155). For example,
  in the museum and archaeological excavation in District 6 in Cape
  Town, a fragmented and dispersed community is refinding its existence
  and reforming its identity (Hall 1998). Throughout the Americas and in
  Australia, the past is being used to justify claims to land, rights and
. resources and new alliances are being formed between indigenous
  peoples. In such cases, marginalized groups are undoubtedly empow-
  ered through their engagement with their heritage. In the contempor-
  ary world there is an increasing concern to open up the past to all
  citizens — to say ‘this is your heritage’. Museums, in particular, have
  been undergoing a major transformation. In trying to go ‘beyond the
  glass case’ (Merriman 1991) museums are increasingly concerned with
  participation, interaction, multiple interpretations, gender and other
  social issues.
     Or are they? Superficially and temporarily yes. But what of the
  longer term? In most cases, the debate over conflicting claims regarding
  heritage takes place in the terms of the dominant discourse. In other
  words, the terms and techniques used are those of western science.
  When indigenous groups learn to look after and ‘do’ their own archae-
  ology, they normally adopt western archaeological concepts and are
  trained by and within the western academy. In Cultural Resource
  Management, the past comes to be seen as a quantifiable resource.
Certainly there are examples in which a different view is maintained.
164   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

For example, in excavations in the Andes, foreign archaeologists are
often obliged to hold rituals to ensure the success of the project or to
placate the spirits or gods on the recovery of a human or llama
burial. But after the rituals, the western conception of archaeological
science reasserts itself. Certainly there are regional differences in the
way archaeologists excavate. Japanese, British and North American
archaeologists go about the task of excavation in rather different
ways, using different tools and techniques. But I can think of no
example in which minority groups within these societies have devel-
oped their own approaches to excavation. In the end, it could be
argued that the approaches and techniques of the dominant culture
will prevail. Over the long term, there is a homogenization of techni-
ques and terms.
   So in one way or another, the globalization process wins out in the
end. Either heritage serves the global economy by fragmenting into
pastiche and individual nostalgia, or the process of negotiating heritage
rights homogenizes and makes same. Either way, the market and new
forms of the dispersal or power are engendered. Power is centralized
and its effects dispersed at the same time.
   We construct interactive multi-media displays or hypertext narrat-
ives, or we make all our data available on the Web — and yet this
‘empowerment’ serves the dual process so well. Individuals can ‘con-
struct their own pasts’. In this way they are fragmented, atomized,
prepared as individual units in the market. And at the same time
they are all using the same systems, being homogenized in a global
netscape.
   Is there any way out of the Gordion knot? Not easily and perhaps not
at all, but there are two points worth considering: (a) There is a sense in
which, despite all the above, some empowerment is enabled, however
marginally and temporarily. Despite their central production and con-
trol, the new information technologies do allow the formation of and
haison between small interest groups, the creation of identities, the
greater awareness of gender issues, a greater awareness of one’s own
abilities to act. Subordinate groups are perhaps being drawn into a
homogenized global archaeological language, but at least they can then
participate in the debate. (b) The technologies also have the potential to
deepen engagement with the past as well as to counteract the depth-
lessness so often claimed for postmodernism (Smith 1994). This is
because the power and interactivity of the information systems allow
access to enormous amounts of data. As Lyotard (1984, 67) has noted,
                                     ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        165

computerization ‘could aid groups. .. by supplying them with the infor-
mation they usually lack for making knowledgeable decisions’. Archae-
ology has tended to see an absolute divide between ‘deep’ specialist
information (published, if at all, in heavy data tomes) and ‘shallow’
popular books, films and exhibits. Modern information systems allow
the two to be provided together (for example, on line or a book
published together with a CD-Rom). Potentially, one can now bypass
the duality of ‘I have the data/techniques/specialist knowledge; you
can play with the interpretation’. Public access to ‘depth’ can be
provided, and alternative perspectives empowered.
   The new technologies available within the world of heritage enhance
the homogenizing and fragmenting tendencies, but also perhaps leave
room for some empowerment in the face of, or via, those tendencies.
The technologies homogenize and centralize and so serve the market
but they also allow for indepth engagement which is both less hier-
archical than in the past and less like postmodern play. And yet, as I
have tried to indicate, the balance between the interests of the new
global economies and empowerment is subtle, difficult and unstable.
There are many fine lines to walk along and many difficulties of
interpretation. In the end, there is no substitute for local and specific
resolution of the various opposing tendencies. The impact of the use of
the past in a particular context has to be established in terms of local
issues, for different groups, and in relation to both short-and long-term
considerations. ‘Context’ may itself be the product of global fragmen-
tation processes, but it is within those contexts that the global issues
have to be worked out and acted upon.


Global Processes Versus Local Heritage: The Example of
Catalhoyuik

It may be helpful to clarify the theoretical account in relation to a
particular example; recent experience at the Catalhoytik project in
central Turkey (Hodder 1998) has exposed many of the issues described
above. One of the commercial sponsors of the project is an interna-
tional credit card company. With its Istanbul-based PR firm, this
company is genuinely interested in supporting the project while at the
same time making use of its commercial potential. For example, during
press visits to the site all the excavation staff wear hats with the
company logo, and a replica of the Catalhdyiik “Mother Goddess’ (a
166   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

figurine discovered at the site by James Mellaart in the 1960s) with the
company name is handed out to clients at receptions in Istanbul. The
company saw a particular link to Catalhdyiik when I, as project
director, argued that obsidian could be seen as the first ‘credit card’.
Members of the team laughed when I told them and the obsidian
specialist was embarrassed. Perhaps I was embarrassed too, but I
justified my compliance by arguing that obsidian was exchanged widely
(like credit cards) and that ethnographically artifacts such as obsidian
can come to act as media for exchange, and exchange involves setting
up debt (and thus credit) between the giver and receiver.
   At one level, the credit card company and other global interests in
the site are using the project to ‘trade in the exotic’. The site’s foreign-
ness, distance in time, strange name, make it an ideal ‘other’. The
exoticness and otherness can be used to promote international corpor-
ate relations within the company and to promote an international
credit card designed for a multicultural global society. The sponsorship
can be promoted in terms of ‘the first payment system’, and the
company remains primarily interested in a commercial involvement.
While individuals in the company may be interested in the archaeology
which takes place at the site, the prime motive of the company 1s
commercial.
   But global commercializing processes of the type entered into with
the credit card company also have an impact locally, such as in the
rural areas of central Turkey where the site is situated. The company
wanted to set up an exhibit in the on-site museum which showed the
development of ‘credit cards’ from the first obsidian to the latest credit
cards with microchips. One could not help but see the probable out-
come of this. Turkey is seeing a massively expanding market for credit
cards, but the main take-up is in the urban centres. In rural areas there
has been less impact. The exhibit and the message about prehistoric
credit cards might not only legitimate the modern company’s claim to
be concerned with Turkish culture but also might encourage local
interest and take-up.
   Nevertheless, the support of the company was very much needed if
the project was going to be able to continue and have any long-term
benefit for local identity, tourism, employment and social change
through development of the site as a heritage resource.
   I wanted to hold a ceremony at the site to open the dig house. I
invited the Turkish Minister of Culture as well as local politicians. The
Minister of Culture had recently changed to be a member of Refah, the
                                      ARCHAEOLOGY
                                               AND GLOBALISM           167

religious fundamentalist party (later banned). I wanted our sponsors to
 come so that all parties could thank them. Indeed the Minister of
 Culture would unveil a plaque listing the support of the sponsors.
This ‘photo-opportunity’ was rejected by the credit card company
which decided it did not want to be associated in this way with the
Refah party. Here commerce and Islam confronted each other and the
former stood down.
    In the end the Minister did not attend and sent his Director General
 of Monuments and Museums. The European Ambassador also came.
West and east, secular and religious met, and talked at a podium
decked out by the local Mayor in a Turkish flag. The speeches
 described the importance of the project and I presented the buildings
to the Turkish state. But the currents of differing meanings, strategies
and interpretations were rife.
    In all the political manoeuvering, the site and the local concerns
seemed to play little role. They seemed overrun by larger-scale pro-
cesses and oppositions. But on the other hand, the town Mayor and
other local officials made their speeches too and there was considerable
coverage in the local press. Black Mercedes, flags flapping at high
speed, swept in in clouds of dust. Armed guards surrounded the
mound, and out got the national officials. They came and went,
involved in their own strategies. Local people had to be bussed in to
create a crowd at the ceremony — a true ‘rent-a-crowd’. The local
people seemed to understand the motives behind the show for what it
was. They tolerated the event as long as it meant they could continue to
work, make money, and follow their own strategies. The ceremony, and
the national, fundamentalist and global strategies in which it was
enmeshed, were necessary if their own lives were to continue to change
in ways they, from different points of view, wanted.
   Thus, in this case there is no simple opposition between global and
local. In the local villages around Catalhéyiik people participate differ-
entially and purposefully. They use the global processes to their own
ends. For example, one of the site guards has applied to open a shop at
the site so that his family’s meagre income can be increased by the
profits from sales to the increasing numbers of tourists. Women’s lives
also change. The images of 9000 year old naked ‘goddesses’ confront
local Islamic attitudes in many ways, but particularly in regard to
women who always have their heads covered. Initially their men-folk
refused to allow them to work at the site. In the end they were allowed
to work and, even though their husbands may have wanted to control
168   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

their resulting wages, some women were able to use the situation to
their advantage.
   As another illustration of local manipulation of global processes, I
wish to take the example of the strategies of the Mayor in the local town
of Gumra. The recent Mayor is a member of the MHP party — Islamic
but primarily nationalist. The rhetoric of the party is at times anti-
Europe, anti-foreign involvement and anti-secular. At times it was
difficult working with local officials who might be members of the
MHP or the religious Refah party. Some would very pointedly not
shake hands with female members of the team, especially on Fridays,
since such contact would mean washing again in preparation for the
mosque. Our English-speaking Euro-centric friends in Istanbul were
always surprised that we got on so well with the Mayor. In our early
years at the site he helped us with accommodation in Gumra, with
equipment and materials.
   He always embraced me and showed the greatest of respect. In 1995
he asked us for some photographs, especially of the naked ‘Mother
Goddess’, to put in the foyer of the hotel in Gumra. Inside, it was full of
Islamic religious references in its decor. Guests had to remove their
shoes at the door. In such a context large images of the ‘Mother
Goddess’ seemed so inappropriate, especially in a town in which all
women always remained covered in public. Why did the Mayor want
to do this?
   The contradictions increased. In 1996 the Mayor made a formal
proposal to the authorities in Ankara to set up a Gatalhéyiik museum in
Cumra itself. In the same year he announced to us that he wanted to
call his annual agricultural festival the Gumra Catalhdyiik Festival. We
were to provide a film and slide show, which we did, to a large and
attentive audience. After the slide show the Mayor started handing out
prizes for the best tomatoes and melons. I was embarrassed suddenly to
be called on to the stage to be honoured and embraced in my turn, and
presented with a plaque.
   Why this public endorsement? What was the public advantage? After
all, here was a foreign team digging a pre-Islamic site which confronts
Islamic teaching both in its use of images and in its specific representa-
tions of women. Certainly the naked images are only acceptable
because of their non-Islamic context. But the project clearly introduces
commercialism and western attitudes. Why should it be so overtly
embraced by an Islamic nationalist from a political party on the far
right? Part of the answer is simply that our work brings money into the
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        169

region, it increases employment, and it encourages tourism. It contri-
butes to economic development and helps to gain a popular vote. It was
for these reasons that the Mayor wanted to build a museum in Gumra —
so that tourists would come to the town as well as to the site, 12 km
away. But also, more personally, the Mayor found himself, as a result of
the project, the centre of media attention and the host to political
figures who visit the site from Konya and Ankara. His wider political
ambitions were served.
   The Mayor’s rhetoric at public occasions involving the site dealt with
the contradictions in subtle ways. Catalhéyiik, he said, is a site of great
national significance. ‘It is the source of Anatolian civilization. And yet
it belongs to the world. Its knowledge is for everyone, without bound-
aries. We wish to give it to the world. The international scientific
interest shows the importance of Anatolian civilization.’
   The Mayor continued, ‘Catalhéyiik is for all humanity’. When I told
my Turkish friends in Istanbul about this they gasped. ‘Did he really
say that?’ And in many ways his strategy was risky. There was all the
reason in the world for him to be distrustful of us. There were many
local people in the Gumra area who were suspicious of foreign contacts.
The site and its imagery might be seen as confronting Islamic tradi-
tionalists. The site is certainly pre-Turkish if by Turk one means the
movement of Turkish people into Anatolia in historic times. And yet,
overall, the Mayor had decided, at least for the moment, that it was in
his interests to support, embrace and even promote the project.
   In the above instance, rather than a simple opposition between
Islamic groups and religion and the international and commercial
components of the project, we see subtle ways in which adjustments
are made in order to achieve specific aims, such as increased employ-
ment and political status. At least in Turkey some accommodation
between the global and the Islamic is clearly possible.
   The local people are not simply duped into being ‘globalized’. People
have to be bussed to the opening ceremony. A blind eye is turned to the
naked goddess in the visitor centre at the site, and to the busloads of
people who turn up at the site on ‘Goddess Tours’. Locally women may
obtain their own wages and the Mayor follows his political ambitions.
Locally men and women use the past in their own ways. They may be
drawn into a global process but they reject some aspects and emphasize
others. Change occurs, but in a complex and diverse way. There is a
diversity of global and local experiences and responses within which
Catalhéyiik is embroiled.
170   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM


Cultural and Archaeological Resource Management

A similar linking of the global and the local can be engendered in the
management of the archaeological resource. It has been argued in this
book that the rise of contract archaeology created the need for field
methods based on codification and structured management systems.
The archaeological resource had to be managed quickly and efficiently.
Standardized, repeatable and ‘objective’ methods were the result. But
Adams and Brooke (1995) suggest that the methods employed in con-
tract archaeology were not simply the result of the functional need for
an efficient system of resource management. Rather, they argue that
both the methods used and the management systems employed were
underpinned by the same scientific objectivist paradigm. Certainly
there are clear links between processual methods and contract archae-
ology. For example, much Cultural Resource Management is based on
sampling procedures and the testing of specific research questions, both
hallmarks of the processual contribution to archaeological method. But
it is widely recognized that a rigid adherence to hypothesis testing in
contract archaeology has negative results. This is because the cultural
resource manager has to be responsible to the totality of what is in the
ground. The testing of a narrow range of hypotheses is in conflict with
the wider public interest.
   And yet the sampling and analysis of the archaeological resource
must be seen to be publically accountable and open to scrutiny. I have
argued, following Grahame Clark (1934), that the rise of a scientific
archaeology in the late-nineteenth century was intimately linked to the
growth of a state interest in the guardianship of the archaeological
heritage (Hodder 1989). It was of fundamental importance that the first
Inspector of Ancient Monuments, Pitt-Rivers, was also recognized as
the first scientifically meticulous field archaeologist. In line with Fou-
cault, I argued (ibid.) that authoritative statements about the past were
increasingly taken into the public domain where they had to be seen to
be neutral, soundly documented and distanced from speculation. An
objective and scientific method was born in this context. In recent
decades similar arguments apply. The expansion of contract archae-
ology has led to decentralization but also to the need for regulation and
repeatable methods. A positivist framework appeared to provide the
necessary method, while at the same time a positivist approach to
management appeared to ensure functional efficiency. ‘A mechanistic
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        171

view of information, or “data”, derived from Newtonian science, anda
 passive view of the human resource which grew out of early manage-
 ment theory, have reinforced one another — this is hardly a coincidence’
 (Adams and Brooke 1995, 98).
    Within the ‘scientific’ mode of management which came to be
 adopted by cultural resource managers, the emphasis is on replication,
 monitoring and strict functional division of tasks. The overall model
 involves planning and control and it is linear, reminiscent of the factory
 production line. The ‘product’ (the archaeological resource) is passed
 along the line. This linear process is shown, for example, in the process
 of archaeological project assessment in figure 9.1 (HBMC 1991).
 Although this scheme aims to be iterative and to incorporate some
 flexibility, most users in the UK have found that in practice it remains
 linear and structured.
    An emphasis on formal rules and procedures within management has
 unattractive consequences which Adams and Brooke (ibid.) outline:
 people may feel less responsible for decision-making; they may be less
 able to adapt to sudden changes in conditions; their ability and motiva-
 tion to produce creative solutions may be limited. Archaeological work
 thus becomes unfulfilling. The interactive and exploratory nature of
 archaeological enquiry becomes suppressed within rigid procedures
 and motivation decreases.
    Alternatives to this type of linear approach to management focus on
participative procedures in which employees are involved in decision-
making. Employees are empowered by establishing systems in which
interpretation and reinterpretation are encouraged at all levels. As
already noted, the single context recording system used widely in
contract archaeology in the UK was designed to allow greater partici-
pation in the recording and interpretation of field information.
Employees now filled in their own forms and drew their own plans.
More recently a fuller management system with these alternative aims
in mind was introduced in a small professional field unit attached to
Durham University (ibid.). The aim was specifically to design a set of
recording tools compatible with other regional units but able to cope
with ‘fuzzy’ (subjective, interpreted, fluid) data; to empower employees
to implement such tools through training and gaining new skills; to pay
employees at a high level to retain loyalty and motivation; to produce a
high quality of output.
    In most contract archaeology contexts it may be extremely difficult
to introduce such changes. The limited resources and time constraints
                 PHASE               STAGE                          PRODUCT
   |. PROJECT                         Initiate a
   PLANNING                            project
                          P
                                    Costed project
                                        design


   2. FIELDWORK           D        Project design &
                                     costs agreed

                         DC

                                          Fieldwork                   .       .




                          No
                                     assessment?
                          P
                                        Identify
                                   assessment costs

   3. ASSESSMENT OF       D       Assessment costs
   POTENTIAL FOR                           agreed
   ANALYSIS
                         nak                                  Assessment report
                          R
                                      Proceed to
                          No              analysis?

                          P       Costed & updated
                                    project design
   4. ANALYSIS                                        :
   AND REPORT             D | Updated project
   PREPARATION                   design
                                     &costs agreed

                         DC      Analysis and report
                                     preparation
                                                                    Report text
                          R           Proceed to
                                    dissemination?


                          P                Identify
                                 dissemination costs


                                        & SMR                   P
                                                                    roject archive
   ere                            vaaeipe eds ag


                                      Publication              Published report


     Key:   P=Proposal   D=    Decision      DC = Data-collection     R = Review

Figure 9.1 The linear process of archaeological project assessment as suggested by
English Heritage (Adams and Brooke 1995, 97).
                                     ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM — 173

may impede any more than the most minimal of reflexive process. But
it is clear that the approaches discussed in this volume do not only have
relevance in the research context. The issues of interactivity, fluidity
and reflexivity are equally relevant in heritage where multiple voices
are heard and where there is a wider need for participation and
engagement in the construction of the archaeological resource. The
same issues are central in contract archaeology, especially in multi-
ethnic situations, but also they enhance the management of the archae-
ological resource in ways which are inclusive and rewarding for
employees. The challenge in contract archaeology may be severe, but
the wider movement in global societies towards participative, open,
multivocal procedures has an impact in all areas of archaeology. For
example, some of the attempts described in chapters 5 and 7 to embed
data collection within narrative accounts may, when linked with multi-
media data bases, promote wider use and foster the greater public
engagement with archaeology on which a better resourced contract
archaeology depends. Without greater engagement in local/global
issues, and without a more relevant and public issue approach, contract
archaeology is liable to remain under-resourced.


Other Implications of Diversity in Archaeology

How archaeologists write   A clear indication that archaeology is not
always the same thing can be obtained by comparing the different ways
archaeologists write. The same author, describing the same site, will
produce very different reports, often using different data and even
different conclusions, depending on the audience. Reports written for
heritage managers, local administrators, academics, children, funding
providers, and the popular market will vary widely.
   Some of the different genres of archaeological writing are now
coming under scrutiny. For example, Tilley (1989b) has explored the
genre of the Cambridge Disney Professor Inaugural Lecture, and I
have examined the tropes used in writing archaeological site reports
from the eighteenth century to the present day (Hodder 1989). A major
trend in the latter case has been towards distanced, neutral accounts in
which the voice of the author is masked, and in which the contingency,
uncertainty and non-linearity of the research process are hidden
behind a timeless, certain and linear account. More recently, however,
archaeologists have begun to experiment with writing which incorpor-
174.   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

ates multiple perspectives (e.g. Tilley 1991). Especially in the gender
literature there has been an increasing concern to write in ways which
position people in the past and the archaeologist as author in the
present (Kus 1992; Tringham 1991 and Spector 1993). In a particu-
larly interesting example, Joyce (1994) uses a story-board technique to
write a non-linear account of the life of the archaeologist Dorothy
Popenoe. Such techniques can now be extended into digital media
and the development of CD-Roms for interactive, multimedia engage-
ment with archaeological sites is now increasingly found (e.g. Tringham
2000; Emele 1998).
   In these ways, a supposedly singular archaeological past is defracted
by different forms of writing into a kaleidoscope of forms; ultimately
each ‘reader’ at each moment is able to construct a new version. I have
already discussed some of the problems of this process. Since it is not, in
my view of the information network society, a process that can be
stopped, and since in my view there are benefits to archaeology in
encouraging such diversity, the issue is really one of defining which
types of writing, presentation or mediation are most appropriate in a
given archaeological and social context. For example, I have already
pointed to the idea that narrative forms of writing are more appropriate
for the ‘windows’ we gain into the workings of past systems and large-
scale structures. It is at the small-scale, in the reconstruction of indi-
vidual lives, that narratives which attempt to capture the specificity of
experience are most appropriate. However, some difficulties with this
view will be discussed in the next section.

‘Origins’ The most important and most widely referenced archaeolo-
gical contributions to wider knowledge concern the search for origins —
the first humans, the first culture and art, the first agriculture, the first
city and state. Whether it is the first wheel or the origins of inequality
that are being sought, archaeologists are looked to for an answer. By
collaborating in this search for origins archaeologists become impli-
cated in perhaps the fundamental project of modernism — the search
for an origin and a destiny (progress to rationality, equality, liberty).
   The political aspects of the search for origins are numerous. At one
level, personal prestige may be enhanced for archaeologists who find
the first hominid, or the earliest occurrence of megalithic burial. Group
prestige and status may be enhanced by showing that ‘our’ ancestors
built the first city or invented pottery. Origins research includes
Childe’s search for the origins of capitalism in Bronze Age Europe
                                       ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM        175

(Trigger 1980). It extends to the use of archaeology to justify the
territorial claims of ethnic groups.
   In all these cases the claim for an origin is part of a wider narrative
which ends with ourselves. Indeed, it could be said that it is the end
point which has led to the focus on a particular starting point. Many
narratives in archaeology mislead because they appear to concern
themselves with beginnings. However, ‘narratives are in fact, as so
many have discussed, determined not by their beginnings but by their
endings. Our stories of the past must end with the present’ (Moore
1993531).
   The whole notion of origins and the originary have been subjected to
critique by postmodernist and feminist writers and there has been some
discussion in archaeology (e.g. Conkey with Williams 1991). In a
discipline which has evidence for the large-scale there is an obvious
attraction towards grand narratives which discover origins. And yet
the difficulty with writing narratives which have beginnings, middles
 and ends is that any such construction must be built from the
present looking backwards. I do not mean to imply here that we can
somehow avoid writing narratives. Neither do I argue that people do
not live narratives in their lives (Hodder 1993). But in many instances
the archaeological emphasis on origins tends to mislead and misre-
present.
   When looked at in detail many of the major transformations in
human history seem to be incremental, gradual and diverse. It is
increasingly difficult to identify any point within a 4000 year period
at which agriculture ‘began’ in the Near East, and J. Thomas (1993)
has submitted the term ‘Neolithic’ to critical analysis. Johnson’s (1996)
work on the rise of capitalism provides a further example of how
archaeology can contribute to an understanding of the gradual and
diverse processes which lie behind what we see as major originary
transformations. Contextual emphases on diversity, meaning, agency
and contingency undermine any notion of ‘the origin’. In a multivalent
world, past and present, it becomes difficult to separate out a fixed
‘thing’ for which an origin can be found. Rather than focusing on the
origins of major transformations, it is possible to use archaeological
data to gain an understanding of the indeterminate relations between
large-scale processes and individual lives. At these smaller scales, issues
such as the origins of agriculture or the secondary products revolution
or the rise of capitalism may have little impact or relevance. As the
example of the Ice Man narrative in chapter 8 attempted to show, daily
176   ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM

lives are always ‘original’. They are part of larger processes. They are of
interest and relevance whether or not they mark some boundary or
origin which we define ourselves in hindsight. Archaeology provides us
with windows into the lives which lie within the grand narratives.
Rather than the modernist search for origins, we can focus on the
diversity of individual lives and their relations to long-term processes of
change.


Conclusion

In this chapter I have tried to demonstrate the dangers of an open-
ended commitment to diversity and difference. The intellectual pursuit
of fluidity and contextuality can too easily become blind to its social
implications. In an increasingly globalized network society, the search
for difference and diversity can become part of a ‘play’, serving the
interests of the dominant. It can undermine the strategies of the less
networked.
   Yet, the same processes of global networking and flows can empower
groups and individuals. Consideration of the wider context for the
archaeological concern with diversity in this chapter has aimed to
point to the often difficult ethical and social judgements that have to
be made in discerning whether a particular case of difference serves the
dominant processes of globalization or supports the responses against
them.
   The emphases on diversity, fluidity and interactivity in this volume
can be used to promote a centralized global society in which informa-
tion systems, commercial markets and production systems become ever
more efficient at identifying individuals and catering to and exploiting
their every and varied needs. In the end the result is ‘difference as play’
within a homogenized and centralized world.
   But these same systems for the creation of networks and flows can be
used to encourage difference in terms of identity and agency. They can
be used so that we become increasingly aware, as members of global
communities, of other concerns and perspectives grounded in histor-
ically different ways of life. And they can be used to generate new
communities and new ways of life. Rather than the past as play or
pastiche, archaeology can be used to generate new and grounded
differences. The example from Catalhoyiik suggests that in the complex
interactions of daily life, the global does not in any simple way win out
                                    ARCHAEOLOGY AND GLOBALISM — 177

over the local. There is rather a negotiated process in which the past
serves a variety of interests.
   Given that a wider context has been identified for an archaeology
incorporating diversity, to what extent can some of the new technolo-
gies which are so much part of the global processes identified in this
chapter contribute to an archaeology of diversity? Answering this
question is the task of the next chapter.
10        Can the New Digital Technologies
          Deliver a Reflexive Archaeology?




The Spatio-Temporalization of Archaeology

In this book archaeology has been described as a diverse process, with
numerous theories, methodologies, areas and scales of analysis, and
applications. The diversity now seen in archaeology is part of the
globalization of the developed and developing world.
   An underlying theme of this book has been that archaeological
statements about the past involve an interpretive moment of uncer-
tainty as the general is related to the particular. In this uncertain
creative moment the main methods that are used are accommodative,
involving the search for part-whole coherence and correspondence. But
any accommodation that is reached can only be provisional since the
hermeneutic circle is never closed — interpretation is always doubly
embedded in the changing contexts of the present and of the material
past. Indeed, reflexive archaeology is the first fully processual archae-
ology since all categories, data, theories, methods      are seen as in a
continual state of flux — all archaeological ‘things’ are in fact processes.
This emphasis on archaeology as a continual process allows the archae-
ological past to play a transformative role in the present. The material
past is part of the present experience through which we come to
understand ourselves.
   Thus the ‘archaeological process’ of the title of this book concerns
both the notion that nothing in the past was essential, fixed,
       NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?            179

systematized — everything was about transformation and change. But
the title also refers to the lack of fixity in doing archaeology.
    It can be argued that archaeology is in crisis in three respects: (a) The
rise of archaeology as a discipline was intimately linked to nationalism
(Diaz-Andreu and Champion 1996). People used to inherit culture, and
archaeology and heritage were part of that inheritance. Now, increas-
ingly, some people can choose their culture. They increasingly choose
how they wish to relate to and interpret the past. The past is part of the
 ‘performativity’ of fluid identities (Butler 1990; 1993). This trend is
parallel to but different from the emergence of new ethnicities in a
postcolonial world, but again the diversity undermines a coherent and
unified scientific approach. Thus (b) archaeology is losing its role in
finding universal origins and human-ness, since the ‘other’ is talking
back and giving different perspectives on these views. (c) Commodifica-
tion and commercialization of the past have increased, partly as a result
of withdrawal of the state support in some countries, but also as a result
of the nostalgic fascination with exotic otherness which is so much a
part of global society. How can standards be maintained within the
discipline in the face of the market? And how can the past be used both
to create local identities and global play?
    The problem is how to find a role for archaeology after the supposed
‘decline of ideology’ and in the face of plurality. I have argued in this
book that the appropriate response is not to police yet more rigidly the
boundaries of the discipline and to define yet more narrowly the
definition of archaeological science. Rather, the answer is to open up
the discipline to reflexivity, contextuality, interactivity and multivocality
and so to create a continual process of interpretation and re-interpreta-
tion. These opportunities in fact offer an exciting challenge.
    It can be argued that these global directions are enabled by the new
digital technologies. A stronger claim is that the technologies have
caused the economic, social and cultural changes involved in the
decentralization of work practices, the creation of virtual communities,
the diversification of life styles, and the fragmentation of time. While it
may be difficult to accept such determinism, I do wish to argue that the
new roles for archaeology and heritage in the world are parallel to and
enabled by the new information technologies. How we use these
technologies will vary. Some will use them to bolster established and
fixed versions of the discipline. Others, as I have tried to outline in this
book, will use them to involve the past in the present in new, less fixed,
ways.
180     NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?

   Within this latter view, the aim is to shift our model of archaeology
from hierarchy to that prime metaphor for a global society, the net. A
net or network has multiple nodes rather than one centre. It allows
information to flow horizontally but to be collated locally at nodal
points. It concerns flow rather than fixity. Indeed, in the latter sense,
even the metaphor of the net fails since within the networks of archae-
ology the nodes themselves may change. Rather than a fixed network
there may be an ever changing set of flows and interactions. This is
what is meant by the ‘spatio-temporalization’ of archaeology. Theories
about the ‘origins of agriculture’, or systems of classification such as
Stone, Bronze, Iron Ages or Band, Tribe, Chiefdom, State, can now be
seen to be the product of a particular perspective on the past appro-
priate to a particular time and place. Within the metaphors of nets and
flows, all universal claims can be contested and locally situated in a
spatio-temporal moment. They are a particular pulling together of the
strands of an argument. They may have general validity, but only from
a specific local perspective.
      In this new and more   ‘processual’, un-fixed archaeological world,
there will be much reliance on technologies. I wish to explore some of
the apparent links between developments in archaeological theory and
digital technology. What are the potentials offered by this convergence?
But also what are the dangers? Can the new technologies really deliver
the more open yet critically grounded debate that is sought? I will first
give an optimistic answer before examining some of the difficulties and
challenges that are posed.


Theory and Technology: A Benign View

There are many grounds for arguing for a convergence between
archaeological theories based on the metaphor of the text and the
new information technologies (Landow 1992). The technologies allow
a shift from conceptual systems based on centres, margins, hierarchies
and linearity to those based on multivocality, nodes, networks and
flows. ‘The technologies promise to deliver on the theoretical emphases
on textuality, narrative and new relations between the writer and
reader. Writers such as Barthes (1970; 1977) and Foucault (1977) out-
side the discipline and Tilley (1991) and Joyce (1994) within, are
concerned with texts in terms of networks and links, as having several
points of entry, and as having multiple pathways through them so that
       NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?          181

meaning is always changing and constructed by the reader (rather than
solely by the writer). There are obvious parallels between the poststruc-
turalist emphasis on such factors and the technologies which produce
hypertext (blocks of text linked electronically) and hypermedia (as
hypertext but including pictures, sound, animation etc.). Indeed, we
can explore nine ways in which a convergence between theory and
technology can be claimed.

1   Readerly and wniterly texts Barthes (1970) makes a distinction between
    ‘readerly’ and ‘writerly’ texts (see Olsen 1990; Bapty and Yates
    1990). It is only the ‘writerly’ text which forces active engagement
    by the reader with the text. Certainly the vast majority of archae-
    ological texts expect a passive reading process. They do not facil-
    itate other ways of reading or thinking about the archaeological
    data. In hypertext, on the other hand, the reader is forced to
    make choices and decisions and to become implicated in the con-
    struction of an account or interpretation of textual and visual
    material. So it may well be the case that the new hypertext tech-
    nologies can deliver the theoretical aim of more interactive and
    ‘writerly’ texts.
    Intertextuality Derrida emphasizes textual openness, intertextuality,
    and the breakdown of clear distinctions between inside and outside
    the text (Yates 1990). For Derrida ‘there is nothing outside the text’,
    no boundaries between the textual and non-textual. Whatever one
    thinks about the extreme form of this claim, it is undoubtedly the
    case that texts make references outside themselves. In the discussion
    on p. 198, it is argued that a global approach to Catalhoyiik
    involved a blurring of the boundaries between who is in and who
    is outside ‘the team’. The ‘text’ produced about Catalhéyitik extends
    outwards indefinitely. More generally, in hypertext archaeology the
    reader can click and move out of a text and search for references
    within a global network of information. Intertextual links can be
    explored.
    De-centring A closely related idea in poststructuralism is that
    there are no centres or points of reference that are not them-
    selves constructed. It is argued that our choice of centres of invest-
    igation is conventional, as are our questions and perspectives. ‘The
    critique of origins research and of the assumption of original ‘start-
    ing points’ in chapter 9 shows the extent to which a ‘centred’
    approach in archaeology is coming under scrutiny. The role of
182    NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?

      the ‘home page’ on the Web indicates that people still need centres
      from which to look out. But the network technologies allow such
      centres to be seen as provisional, and as one of many possible entry
      points.
4     Death and re-birth of the subject The claim is widely made in post-
      structuralist writing that the author as a ‘self’ is always already a
      node in other texts and codes, is always already written. Derrida
      and Foucault have, in different ways, decentred the subject (Bapty
      and Yates 1990; Tilley 1990). For Ricoeur, authorial meanings
      escape and are reinterpreted at a distance by the reader (Moore
      1990). It is certainly the case that the new information technologies
      raise problems of authorship and control. Archaeological site
      reports have increasingly become collaborative, but the new tech-
      nologies allow the radical extension of this process. Placed on the
      Web or in some interactive hypertext environment, a site report can
      become a continually commented on, multiple, contested network
      of information. The autonomy and fixity of the text are under-
      mined, and the author (if such a person can be identified) has less
      mastery and control over the message. On the other hand, there
      has been much theoretical reaction against the idea of the “death of
      the author’ and the ‘decentring of the subject’. We have seen many
      examples in this book of attempts to introduce experiential and
      phenomenological and agency-centred accounts, and of attempts to
      write the past as a narrative transparently constructed by the
      author. The new technologies again facilitate this re-birth and
      recentring. Virtual reality allows reconstruction of different per-
      spectives of past monuments and environments. Codified, imperso-
      nal data bases can be linked to personalized diaries so that the
      construction of data by team members can be recorded (see
      chapter 7).
5     Fragments Derrida conceives of texts as made up of discrete reading
      units. A focus on discontinuities is widely found in recent archae-
      ological theory (Hodder and Shanks et al. 1995). Shanks and Tilley
      (1987) and Tilley (1989b) discuss how the past is used as ‘quotes’,
      bracketed fragments within an assemblage of knowledge. Barrett
      (1994) entitles his volume on interpretations of British prehistory
      ‘fragments from antiquity’. The new on-line journal based at the
      University of Sheffield is called ‘Assemblage’. It is precisely the
      structure of fragments linked together into an assemblage that
      defines hypertext and hypermedia.
       NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?           183

6   Multwocalty Much contemporary theory in archaeology empha-
    sizes the past as dialogue rather than being represented for ‘us’ by
    a tyrannical, unified voice. The sources of this plurality are most
    directly feminism and globalism. But indirectly these changes
    derive from the wider fragmentation and diversification of societies
    and the proliferation of individual pursuits and identities. The
    widespread availability and low cost of digital information flows
    allow small-scale groups to emerge and gain mutual support. Those
    marginalized within traditional systems of knowledge dissemination
    find the ability to constitute themselves as other voices. Whether
    such groups are within the academy (such as micro-faunal special-
    ists) or outside it (ley-line hunters or goddess groups) the ability to
    take part in dialogue is increased.
7    Virtuahty Archaeologists have grown accustomed to the notion that
    the past is not ‘real’ — it is at least partly how we construct it. Such
    claims can be made for data catalogues (Spector 1993) as much as
    they can for site reports (Hodder 1989). Archaeologists are increas-
    ingly interested in how people in the past perceived monuments
    and landscapes, and how they understood them in the movements
    of their bodies (chapter 8). The new technologies produce digital
    information represented on a screen. We can easily change the font,
    size of letters, or lay-out. What we see is a virtual representation.
    The same sense of virtuality is experienced in ‘virtual archaeology’
    reconstructions of past monuments and landscapes (Forte and
    Siliotti 1997). Archaeologists and non-archaeologists form them-
    selves into virtual communities on the Net in order to further
    their special interests. None of this is to say that the virtual is
    not real. Rather, it is to say that the opposition between real and
    virtual is questioned in both theory and in the application of the
    technologies.
8   Non-linearity Writers such as Barthes, Derrida, Bakhtin and Fou-
    cault make continual reference to links, networks, paths or weaving.
    In archaeology, Shanks (1992) places an emphasis on rhizomes —
    expanding networks of paths and links. Themes such as causality
    and power are discussed in terms of complexity and dispersal rather
    than linearity (e.g. Miller and Tilley 1984). The links to non-linear
    modelling and applications of chaos theory in archaeology are
    evident (Shennan 1989). The brunt of these theoretical critiques is
    often narrative — a coherent structured story with a beginning,
    middle   and    end.   Lyotard   (1984)   defines   postmodernism    as
184    NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?

      incredulity towards meta-narrative. This critique of narrative may
      seem at odds with attempts to introduce narrative as a way of
      gaining a fuller understanding of the lives of prehistoric people
      (e.g. Spector 1993; Tringham 1991). But the narratives that are
      produced may themselves seek for non-linearity, as in Tringham’s
      (2000) hypertext account of Opovo (Chimera Web). Of course,
      there is linearity in hypertext. There may be a ‘menu’ to which
      the user continually returns, and there are cues like ‘click here’ or
      ‘start here’. And certainly the user takes a path through the hyper-
      text environment. And yet the path is chosen by the user; it is not
      controlled and constructed in a linear fashion. It is certainly poss-
      ible to construct experiences of the past which are more like net-
      works and less like paths.
9      Reflexivity There has been widespread theoretical discussion in
      archaeology of the need for critique. For example, various types
      of Critical Theory have been used to subject taken-for-granteds to
      analysis (Leone et al. 1987). The post-structuralist emphasis on
      deconstruction has led in a similar direction (Bapty and Yates
      1990; Shanks and Tilley 1987). The world of heritage and
      museums has in particular been the subject of critique from mar-
      ginalized and indigenous groups (e.g. Gathercole and Lowenthal
      1989). The new digital technologies might be said to foster at least
      some forms of critique and reflexivity. For example, it is increas-
      ingly possible to read a text while at the same time calling up
      critiques and alternative views. Often these contrasting perspectives
      can be called up onto the same screen and compared directly. The
      ability to compare different texts, different types of data, and
      different media simultaneously increases the potential for critical
      scrutiny and reflexivity. For example, it may be possible to compare
      statements about stratigraphical relationships on a site against field
      photographs or video (see chapter 7). Reflexivity is also enhanced
      by the existence of multiple channels in the information network so
      that a plurality of voices can be heard.

   It might thus be argued that the cumulative effect of the above nine
points of convergence between archaeological theory and the new
digital technologies will be to enhance the developments outlined in
this book. But we can now turn to another point of view in which the
new technologies create a global world in which a supposedly multi-
vocal archaeology continues to serve a minority.
       NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?         185


Theory and Technology: A Critical Response

It is often assumed that the new hypermedia are essentially democrat-
izing, leading to a more decentralized, liberated existence. If this is so
then application of digital technologies in archaeology should lead to
wider involvement of the past in the lives of an increased range of
people.
   However, contrary to the claims for decentralization, many com-
mentators have argued that digital communications reinforce centre—
periphery divergence and domination (e.g. Gillespie and Robins 1989).
An increasing centralization of power amongst the already dominant is
seen in the fact that digital flows are closely tied to new transnational,
global corporations and tend to be focused in major metropolitan
areas. An electronic democracy is endangered by the way in which
Microsoft has dominated all competition in the software market, by
how telecommunications conglomerates like British Telecom-MCI or
Time-Warner have invested in digital technologies, and by how digital
technology enables the more efficient dispersal of surveillance systems
(Palattella 1995). It is argued (e.g. Kroker and Weinstein 1994) that we
may be living in the 1990s in a false dawn. As the sprawling disorder of
the Net gets taken over by telematics and the information superhigh-
way, and as we all put ‘boxes’ on our TVs owned by multinational
telecommunications conglomerates, many of the initial claims for revo-
lutionary changes and democratization may be disappointed.
   Interactivity and the Net can be seen simply as ways of drawing a yet
larger market into the new technologies. The aim is not interactivity
but the control and expansion of a commercial market (Kroker and
Weinstein 1994). Globally, advanced regions provide technologies to
marginal areas. The processes of uneven and unequal economic devel-
opment continue. Kester (1994) argues that democratization and the
free flow of information are undermined by the fact that information
does not flow directly to ‘the public’. Rather it is mediated by those who
provide the information. Only a limited group of people are connected
by the new technologies. The Internet creates a ‘utopian’ community,
overwhelmingly consisting of white professionals. Its supposed open-
ness and democracy are made possibly by its homogeneity; diversity is
not embraced (Kester 1994).
   It can therefore be argued that the attempt made above to identify
nine points of convergence between digital technologies and theories in
186   NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?

the humanities and social sciences is an attempt to appropriate the new
technologies within an elite culture. By linking the technologies to the
authority of white western male authors (Foucault, Derrida, Barthes
etc.), an attempt is made to assert the relevance of theory to society
(Palattella 1995). The link justifies and legitimates. And so the dom-
inance of the established elite continues. The new technologies are de-
radicalized. They simply enable an extension of existing liberal ideas of
democracy. Nothing much changes.
   Following Marx, Kroker and Weinstein (1994) argue that every
technology releases opposing possibilities towards emancipation and
domination. While undoubtedly the above dangers of increased dom-
ination exist, the archaeological case suggests that the new technologies
can be steered in the direction of having beneficial and transformative
effects.
    Certainly, both Engelstad (1991) and Smith (1994) from different
points of view have argued that the impact of postprocessual archae-
ology is to continue dominant structures of male-centred elite intellec-
tualism. With regard to the impact of the digital technologies, S.
Thomas (1996) has pointed out that use of hypertext cannot simply
be linked to democratization. Users have to have some knowledge of
archaeology before they can navigate themselves around a hypertext
environment. On the other hand, I have given several examples in this
book of how the technologies can be used to enhance reflexivity,
contextuality, interactivity and multivocality. As described in chapter
7, sites, monuments, excavations, data bases, and textual reports can be
opened to a wider scrutiny than has traditionally been available.
Certainly knowledge is needed to be able to participate in global
archaeological dialogues, but I have also suggested that it is possible
to use visual media in order to provide ‘user-friendly’ ‘front-ends’ to
archaeological information. Potential users can be led into archaeolo-
gical debate and provided with the information necessary to participate
if they so wish.
   While the Internet is often accused of elitism, there is a growing
grass-roots participation organized, for example, by local public
libraries. As the digital market extends outwards, seeking to incorporate
marginal or low-status groups, so those groups become integrated into
the network. They can participate and be less isolated. The widespread
Internet activity dealing with Egyptian archaeology, for example, has
been documented by Meskell (1998). I have noted above the intense
interest in Gimbutas, the goddess and Catalhéytik by a wide range of
       NEW DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES DELIVER REFLEXIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?          187

women’s groups (see also Meskell 1995; Conkey and Tringham 1996).
It is increasingly possible to contact and interact with leaders of Native
American and other indigenous groups through digital networks.


Conclusion

 The wider dissemination and democratization of archaeological know-
 ledge and increased interactivity with interpreters of the past are not
 limited to digital information channels. Many of those working in
 museums or heritage centres have shown a concern to engage a
wider range of people, including minorities, in an interactive manner.
 Those concerned with writing the past have also placed emphases on
 alternative voices, reflexive critique and openness (e.g. Spector 1993;
 Tringham 1991; Tilley 1991). Leone et al. (1995) have focused on the
 representation of the past in tours of Annapolis.
    But all these concerns with interactivity and openness may only be of
interest to those already engaged in ‘high culture’ (Merriman 1991).
Digital technologies, for example, seem little more than niceties of elite
self-interest when viewed from deprived areas throughout the world. As
discussed in chapter 9, those people who are relatively un-networked
may be more interested in archaeology in terms of links to place and in
terms of rights to resources. In contrast to the networks and fragmenta-
tion created by dominant groups, the archaeological past may provide
a prime means of creating specific identities and gaining access to
rights.
    Thus in chapter 9 I argued that in the case of Gatalhoyiik the global
processes were used in complex and sometimes contradictory ways in
order to further the interests of local communities. But the assertion of
community rights and identities through archaeology is not limited to
groups of people anchored in space. What I have described as the
‘spatio-temporalization’ of archaeology is a process incorporating net-
works and flows rather than fixed spatial and temporal boundaries.
Special interest groups such as goddess worshippers may come together
initially on the Internet. They may thus form a ‘virtual’ community.
But the distinction between ‘virtual’ and ‘real’ is increasingly difficult
and invidious. Network communities may be important in creating a
sense of identity, with just as much efficacy as those communities tied to
place. In both the spatially bound and the spatially free communities,
the global network is manipulated in order to create different pasts.
1!        Conclusion: Towards                    Non-
          Dichotomous Thinking
          in Archaeology




At various points in this volume, I have outlined a reflexive method that
is being used in the excavation of the site of Gatalhoyiik in Turkey (see
also Hodder 1997 and box on p. 119). I wish now briefly to recapitulate
and summarize 12 steps that are being attempted in that methodology.

     Every one or two days during the excavation, the laboratory spe-
     cialists visit the excavation areas on the site (Figure 5.5). This is
     possible because faunal, archaeobotanical, lithic, ceramic, soil
     micromorphological, ground stone, human remains and other
     specialists are present on the site during excavation. The aim of
     the discussions between the laboratory and field staff is twofold.
     From the point of view of the laboratory staff, information is gained
     about context. For example, it is helpful for the ceramics specialist
     to know if there is some uncertainty about the stratigraphical
     relations and dating of a layer, hearth or other context. From the
     point of view of the field staff, the tours by the laboratory specialists
     provide them with information about what they are excavating. For
     example, a faunal specialist might be able to recognize in the field
     the animal species and skeletal parts. This might help the excavator
     to interpret what is being excavated and thus make appropriate
     decisions about sampling strategies. This takes us to the second part
     of the Catalhoyiik methodology.
     We have seen that many approaches in field archaeology assume,
     despite provisos about ‘theory-ladenness’, the objective sanctity of
  CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY                 189

the archaeological data. As a result, sampling strategies are often
developed which can be applied in a wide variety of different
contexts. The codification and systematization of archaeological
recording procedures have also been encouraged by the develop-
ment of cultural resource management. Sampling strategies are
adopted ‘off the shelf’, using pre-set formulae. In practice, archae-
ologists have a duty to be responsible to what they find. As a result
sampling strategies are often changed as a survey or excavation
progresses. But even the most codified of sampling strategies
involves making interpretive decisions. For example, it may have
been decided to excavate 10 per cent of all pits on a site, but 20 per
cent of the hearths. It becomes necessary to interpret a feature as a
pit or hearth before excavation. And what happens if a new cat-
egory of feature is found, such as a ritual hearth? In order to avoid
these difficulties at Catalhoytik, we have replaced decisions about
sampling with negotiations about priorities. When the laboratory
staff tour the excavation areas, they discuss with the field staff which
layers and features should be prioritized. Different members of the
team argue for this or that layer or feature to be sampled more
intensively (wet sieving as opposed to dry sieving for example). The
percentages of deposits of a particular type which have been prior-
itized can be monitored. The priority contexts are retained in all
further laboratory analysis. In this way, the sampling (prioritizing)
can be related to the changing interpretation of the site and its
features. It can be moulded to the particular site and adapted to the
particular interpretation.
Another characteristic of many field approaches is that they assume
the self-evident nature of ‘the archaeological object’. For example,
when trays of artifacts are brought into the laboratory from the field
they are usually divided into pottery, metal, bone, shell, lithics and
so on. These divisions determine how these objects are then studied
and published. The artifacts are sent off to the pottery, metal, bone
and so on specialists. This common archaeological procedure
involves wrenching artifacts out of their context. Decontextualized
they become difficult to interpret except in universalist terms. At
Catalhoyiik we have recognized that this process does not help the
understanding of the site or of individual object categories. ‘The
need for interaction and integration lies behind our emphasis on
having all the different types of specialist present at the site. But we
have also recognized that the categories themselves are arbitrary
190    CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

      and dependent on the scale at which we happen to work. At the
      microscope pieces of obsidian might be used as filler in pottery.
      They are thus not ‘lithics’ but ‘pottery’. At the large scale, we have
      attempted to define ‘objects’ which cut across traditional categories.
      For example, the study of ‘refuse’ involves all types of materials, as
      do the ‘objects’ ‘burning’, ‘decoration’, ‘food’ or ‘domestication’. In
      these ways the interactions between the different types of specialists
      are maximized.
4     Another aim of the tours by the laboratory staff is to get informa-
      tion back to the field staff as quickly as possible. ‘The reason for this
      is to discourage the idea of excavation as a mechanical process of
      recording objective data. Rather, the aim is to encourage the idea
      of excavation involving interpretation at the trowel’s edge. In order
      to interpret stratigraphy properly, it helps to know the date of the
      pottery in the layers. In order to identify a floor it may be helpful to
      know about the degree of abrasion of pottery and bone. So, as we
      dig, we need to know as much as possible about what we are
      digging. This knowledge and our interpretations will determine
      the sampling strategies we use. At Catalhoyiik, the laboratory staff
      are thus asked to ‘fast-track’ the material from some layers and
      contexts. In other words, they look at this material quickly and feed
      back the results to the field staff. Other potential ways of speeding
      up the flow of information include digital recording and planning.
      In this way plots and plans can be examined immediately. Histo-
      grams and comparisons can be made immediately so that excava-
      tion can take place with maximum knowledge of what is being
      uncovered.
5     An integrated and fluid data base is essential for any attempt to link
      different participants in an archaeological project. At Catalhéyiik
      we have attempted a computer network so that the field staff and
      laboratory specialists can query each other’s data and make com-
      ments on the provisional interpretations of their colleagues. All the
      different types of data, from field records to plans and drawings to
      measurements of lithic and ceramic artifacts to the film and diary
      data to be described below are available on the same data base.
      The separate computers are linked by a hub to one central com-
      puter to which all have access. The high degree of circuitry that is
      thus produced means that interpretations can always be in a state of
      flux, ‘data’ can continually be reconsidered and transformed, and
      conclusions are momentary.
  CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY               191

However much one might want to create a fluid and flexible data
base, some degree of fixity and codification is necessary. This is in
order to allow comparison and in order to handle very large
amounts of data. But any data base is a construct, and it is import-
ant that the user understands it as such. The user of a data base has
to be able to situate it within its own context of production. In order
to do this at Gatalhdyiik we have reverted to the writing of a diary.
This is written into the data base and cross-referenced. Thus, if a
user wants to find out about layer 321, it is possible to find all the
 diary entries relating to layer 321 as well as the codified lists of
 animal bones, ceramics etc. found within it. The diary allows the
user of the data base to understand what the excavators were
 assuming as they excavated a particular layer. It allows under-
 standing of why the layer was excavated and sampled in a parti-
cular way. It allows the biasses and pre-understandings to be
explored. But writing the diary too has a beneficial effect. Other
people read the entries as they are made and so the circuitry of
information is enhanced. Also, the writing of the diary makes the
excavator reflect on the excavation process and evaluate that pro-
cess in relation to the questions that are being asked.
In the same way, the video recording of the excavation process leads
to a reflexive stance. At Catalhdyiik, the discussions by laboratory
staff on the tours of the site (see point 1 above) are video recorded,
as are summaries of their work by the field and laboratory staff.
These video recordings are then digitized and edited into | to 2
minute clips which are placed on CD-Roms. The clips can be
accessed by a keyword search system (figure 7.1). Thus, it is possible
to search for layer 321 in the data base and not only find the artifact
and field records and the diary entries but also the video clips.
These clips may show the excavator of layer 321 describing her or
his work, pointing to the layer, and explaining its interpretation.
This process allows the user of the data base to understand using
visual information. It also allows the user to understand the assump-
tions and misconceptions under which the excavation was under-
taken. The ‘data’ thus become relativized within a particular
context of production of archaeological knowledge. Again, as with
the diary, the process of filming itself means that information is
circulated around members of the project as recording and viewing
take place. Reflexivity occurs as project members are asked to
explain their work and assumptions before the camera.
192.   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

 8     Being reflexive and self-critical involve a considerable amount of
       energy and commitment to theoretical awareness. In practice,
       archaeologists may have little time for and inclination for ‘navel
       gazing’, despite the benefits derived. In addition, most archaeolo-
       gists are not trained in the observation of living cultural behaviour.
       Thus, at Catalhoyiik, anthropologists work with us, dedicated to
       the study of the construction of knowledge at the site. They
       participate in our daily lives on the site, observing and conducting
       interviews. One studies the ways our interpretations are
       embedded within unrecognized assumptions and _ pressures.
       Another explores the visual conventions (Molyneaux 1997; van
       Reybrouck 1998) through which we see and record the site (in the
       form of plans, section drawings, artifact drawings, photographs
       and video clips). Another studies the impact of our presence on the
       local community. The presence of people questioning assumptions
       has a destabilizing effect on the excavation and research teams.
       But a lack of stability is necessary if a critical approach is to be
       taken and if the project is to remain responsive to a changing
       world around it.
  9    In order to facilitate maximum participation in the interpretation
       of the site from a variety of different communities, steps are being
       taken to place the entire Gatalhoyiik data base on the Web. The
       aim is to provide a data base which is accessible and multimedia.
       This type of openness may conflict with the interests of individuals
       and groups with special access to the site. For example, the career
       paths of younger members of the project may be threatened if
       others have access to, and publish, primary data. Indeed, it is
       conceivable that alternative Catalhoyiik Web sites be set up by
       competing groups. However, while the rights of individuals and
       groups need to be protected, such concerns cannot justify the
       long-term secreting of archaeological information. Immediate
       accessibility encourages participation and engagement in the
       research process itself. It enhances multivocality.
10     The linearity of most archaeological narrative restricts the com-
       plexity of the stories that can be told. It also encourages the
       separation of evidence and interpretation. The latter is usually
       presented after the evidence has been set out. Hypertext, on the
       other hand, allows accounts with multiple pathways and incorpor-
       ating multimedia. Thus a narrative account can be given and links
       provided between the narrative and pictures, plans, and coded
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY               193

     artifact data. On the computer, the hypertext user can ‘click’ from
     narrative text to data base evidence in order to check the basis on
     which interpretations are made (figure 7.2).
11   Archaeologists have always made plans, drawings and models of
     the buildings they excavate. These and other reconstructions
     allow hypotheses about original construction techniques to be
     experimented with. They also allow wider public participation in
     the understanding of a site. Today, the techniques of Virtual
     Reality allow greater speed and flexibility in the reconstruction
     experiments. ‘The construction of a virtual world on the computer
     allows visualization and the experimentation with alternative
     reconstructions. Also, the virtual world can be made interactive
     so that the user can ask questions about a site and explore it from a
     non-specialist point of view. At Catalhoyiik the aim is for a virtual
     reconstruction of the site to become the ‘front-end’ to the data
     base. Non-specialist users can thus ‘travel’ to the virtual site and
     then find out about the archaeological information to a required
     level of detail. Virtuality also allows experimentation with different
     ways of experiencing the site.
12   At Catalhoyiik teams from different parts of the world are encour-
     aged to excavate their own parts of the site. Equivalent recording
     and data systems are used, but each team uses its own traditional
     techniques of excavation and analysis. The assumption here is
     that the different teams, using different methods, will produce
     different results. By looking through different windows each
     team will see and find different Catalhoyiiks. Rather than being
     decried as chaotic, this diversity is welcomed since it is preferable
     to a single perspective and monolithic approach. The latter would
     produce a coherent account but that account would be based on
     the taken-for-granted assumptions of a particular archaeological
     tradition.


A Method with Flows

There seem to be four themes which underlie the twelve practical steps
to excavation described above: reflexivity, relationality or contextuality,
interactivity and multivocality. These have been discussed throughout
this volume but they are summarized here.
194.   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY


Reflexivity By this I mean the examination of the effects of archae-
ological assumptions and actions on the various communities involved
in an archaeological process, including other archaeologists and non-
archaeological communities. Examples of this type of emphasis at
Catalhoyiik include the work of anthropologists who study the impact
of the project on the local community as well as on national and
international groups interested in or visiting the site. Reflexivity is
also engendered by the diary writing and video filming, since these
processes encourage those on the team to examine their own assump-
tions. The diaries and videos also provide contextual information about
the excavation process so that others can look back and critically
evaluate the claims that have been made. The results of archaeological
research are reflexively related to the context in which knowledge is
produced.

Relationality or contextuality The notion here is that meaning is rela-
tional. This emphasis is seen in the reflexive attempts to relate
findings to a specific context of knowledge production. But the empha-
sis is also visible in the inter-relations of contextual and artifactual
information. Thus the date of a layer depends on the artifacts found
in it. But in some cases, the date of the artifacts may depend on the
stratigraphical relationships of the layers. In another example, at
Catalhoyiik the interpretation of a building as a house rather than a
shrine depends on the artifacts within it. But the interpretation of the
artifacts partly depends on whether the building is seen as a house or
shrine. So, usually in archaeology, everything depends on everything
else within a hermeneutic whole. Our aim at Catalhdyiik has been
to facilitate this circuitry, for example by having information
about artifacts available to excavators as they dig contexts in a trench.
The interpretations of artifact and context depend on each other and so
it is necessary to have many artifact and context specialists present
together on site so that information can be mutually available, espe-
cially for the excavators themselves. ‘The aim is to be highly integrated
and inter-disciplinary. Relationality also implies flexibility in the
research process. If everything depends on everything else, then as I
change one variable in my analysis so there are knock-on effects on all
other variables. ‘Thus a data base should be seen as open to change and
as flexible as possible; conclusions are seen as momentary and always
subject to change.
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY                  195


Interactivity The aim here is to provide mechanisms for people to
question and criticize archaeological interpretations that are being
made, as they are being made. During the excavation process, interac-
tion between laboratory and field staff is encouraged by the tours of
trenches. The prioritizing (sampling) procedures are arrived at by
negotiation between staff members. Interactivity is also facilitated at
Catalhéyiik by the provision of the data base on the Web and by
the provision of access routes (e.g. virtual reconstructions) that aré
‘user friendly’. It is also facilitated by the provision of information in
diary and video form that situates the data base and opens it up for
critique and alternative interpretation. The aim in the on-site museum
is to have a community section in which a display about the site is
constructed by members of the nearby village. In the museum too an
interactive CD-Rom will be provided with hypertext and Virtual
Reality components so that visitors and students can find out about
the site in a non-linear way.

Multivocality A wide range of different groups often have conflicting
interests in the past and wish to be engaged in the archaeological
process in different ways. The same point is often made in feminist
archaeology (Conkey and Gero 1997). Mechanisms need to be pro-
vided so that different discourses can take place. For example, at
Catalhoyiik different teams excavate different parts of the site and
present their own ‘windows’ into the site. While the Web site may
allow interaction with international, educated and networked groups,
the local rural community is best able to interact through museum
displays and visits to the site itself. In the future it may be conceivable to
provide a modern shrine so that religious groups such as Mother
Goddess visitors can pray at the site.

   In still more general terms, one can argue that there is one theme
which underlies these four emphases. This theme is the breaking down
of boundaries and dichotomies. Archaeologists have spent much of
their time throughout their history defending their subject against
antiquarians, looters, Creationists, metal detector users, reburial move-
ments, goddess worshippers. Some of these groups have been defined
as ‘fringe’. Others are seen as entirely outside the discipline. But in the
end, the rigid maintenance of disciplinary boundaries, while effective in
some circumstances, constrains the reaching of dialogue and compro-
196   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

mise in others. For example, at least in Britain, many archaeologists
now realize they can work with metal detector users within a frame-
work that involves education and mutual understanding. The reburial
conflict in Australia and the United States has involved a good deal of
give and take on both sides. Wherever indigenous archacologies
develop, at least in a postcolonial era, some negotiation is involved.
Wherever the market is needed as a financial underpinning for archae-
ological research, the views of a diverse public need to be catered for.
Increasingly it is realized by archaeology that it needs to incorporate a
diversity of views and provide a diversity of mechanisms for engaging
with the past.
   The boundaries around the specialisms in archaeology also need
breaking down. As archaeology has matured it has successfully diversi-
fied and a wide range of specialisms have burgeoned. This has been
healthy and necessary, but there is now a need for integration and for
research which cuts across speciality boundaries. I have described
above the need for relationality and interactivity in the archaeological
process. We need to identify new ‘objects’ to study which cross-cut
specialism boundaries. Greater integration is facilitated by the new
information technologies.
   We need to break down the boundaries around the site. This is
partly a matter of opening the site to a wider range of visitors and
encouraging interactivity and multivocality. But it is also a matter
of recognizing the radical effects of the new information technologies.
It is of interest that in the discourse of the new global ‘Web-speak’ the
term ‘site’ has been taken to mean a location or address on the World
Wide Web. It is possible for new Web sites to be built which act as
alternatives to ‘official’ sites. For example, there are numerous (Web)
sites at which you can find out about the (archaeological) site at
Catalhoyiik. In a way, the one place that Catalhéyiik isn’t is at Cat-
alhéytik. By this I mean that people construct their own versions of
Catalhoyiik. They may do this on a Web site or in some other medium,
or even just in their minds and imaginations. When they come to the
archaeological site they see the site through their own perspectives, in
the same way that the different teams working at the site produce
their own windows. All these various interpretations of the archae-
ological site derive from other ‘sites’ (other places, Web sites, ima-
ginations). Archaeology has to be multi-sited. It has to be open and
less bounded.
     CONCLUSION:     NON-DICHOTOMOUS        THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY            197


                      Multi-sited archaeology

  Despite allyour emphasis on‘fluidity and plurality, it still seems to me that
  archaeologists often gain at least some of their status and identity from _
  being linked to a particular site. When they meet, archaeologists often say
_ ‘where are you digging now?’, and lists of excavations worked on are
  important parts of CVs. Archaeologists become very protective and in
  Practice are seen as ‘owning’ the rights to work at a particular location or
  region. They say ‘this is my site’. Many still carefully guard and control the
  information from a site until it has been published.
  But surely notions like ‘off-site’ archaeology (e.g. Foley 1981) bare
  already dispersed the focus on sites? Even when one is talking of a _
  site excavation, note how many of these are now published by
  multiple authors and project participants. Certainly competitive
  tendering in contract archaeology in Britain has eroded the idea of
  an archaeologist’s ‘right’ to a region or site. In addition, as noted in
  chapter |, many archaeologists do not excavate — they may ay!
  work in laboratories or museums or libraries.
_ And I suppose you would see the idea of the Web ‘site’ further dispersing
  sitedness, in that people can constructee        ‘sites’ away from the :
  archaeological ‘site’?
 Yes, that’s right. In all these ways the focus is shifting froma sone
  site excavated by a single director towards the currents that flow
  through a site, dispersing it into a myriad of other sites.
_ But is this not bringing us dangerously near the idea you have been es
  to escape from in this book? | mean the postmodern idea of dispersion
  through play.
   _ My argument is parallel to that of Marcus (1995) iin ethnography. But
     | think a particular edge is given to the critique of ‘site’ in archae-
     ology because of our taken-for-granted dependence on the ‘site’ as
- the building block of archaeological knowledge and careers. In this
 _ book | have argued that the dispersal of the site can be grounded ina
  - situated plurality. sia is not always a matter of postmodern
 _ play.
  Perhaps it would helpifyou explained that.
  Well, we can see that different communities engage in the archae-
~ ological site by constructing their own ‘sites’ (for specific examples
  see chapter 9). In particular, we can explore the tensions between
198     CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

      the ‘sites’ constructed by different communities (global, national,
      local, etc.). A grounded multi- sitedness is also seen in the way that
      different teams working at a site, perhaps at different times, will
  produce different interpretations — it will seem as if they have dug
  different sites. Different sites are also produced by asking different —
  questions. Archaeologists increasingly define themes which cut
  across categories of evidence. Rather than ‘digging a site’ archaeolo-
  gists have increasingly followed a thing such as a type of pottery, ora
- theme such as decoration, or domestication, or burning. The new
  perspectives and technologies which emphasize plurality simply. :
  extend the multi-sitedness, but in all the examples | have given |
  here the different perspectives are situated within the strategies of
  specific interest groups. Such groups may be highly dispersed glob-
  ally, but their interest in an archaeological excavation is omer
      grounded within a strategic network,
      But you are not saying the archaeological site does nnot exist? And what of
      your emphasis on contextuality? We don’t just construct sites in our
      imaginations, and you don’t want to support the search for themes
      which are not sensitive to the site being studied, do you?
      Of course not. | think we are shifting from seeing the archaeological
      ‘site’ as an object, to seeing it as a point of mediation between past
      and present. It is less easy now for an archaeologist to say ‘thisis my
   site’, or ‘lam digging this site’. Such claims are becoming undermined —
 by the negotiation of multiple interests and by theoretical and
 practical reflexivity. But there is still a need to.ground ‘our state-
   ments in evidence, meticulously uncovered, even a the evidence sS
   immediately dispersed into other sites.                                  :


   As a corollary of the last point, it is necessary to break down the
boundaries around the team. As more and more people become
involved in the excavation, analysis and interpretation of an archae-
ological site, the team working at the site becomes very diffuse, open
and flexible. At Catalhoytik I have become increasingly unclear who
is and who is not a member of the team. Some team members
have never visited the site (except on the Web site). Other people
have visited the site and contribute but are not normally described
as archaeologists. Comments offered by strangers on the Web may
prove very useful and be incorporated into ‘the team’s’ research pro-
cess. All the four themes identified above, but in particular interactivity
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY               199

and multivocality imply a blurring of the boundaries       of any distinct
team.
   The boundaries around the author also become blurred. As more
voices are involved in the archaeological process, as interactivity is
encouraged, and as critical self-reflection is embraced, so the distinctive
voice of the sole author is undermined. As the status and authority of
the author are opened to critical evaluation and as multiple media are
introduced, so the privileged place of the written word is diminished. As
hypertext is increasingly used, the linearity of written text and its
distinctive rhetorical devices are replaced by multi-path, multi-nodal
forms of information flow.
  As these boundaries are broken down, so too are the main dicho-
tomies which have underlain archaeology since its inception. Breaking
down boundaries around the discipline and around the specialisms
results in breaking the dichotomy between science and humanity.
Archaeology is not a science or a humanity. It is both. The archae-
ological process involves a heavy reliance on the natural sciences for
dating, the study of site formation processes, the analysis of environ-
mental change, the sourcing of exchanged artifacts and so on. But such
information needs to be set within humanities (e.g. historical) and social
science (e.g. social and cultural anthropological) knowledge about the
organization of societies and the manipulation of culture. Indeed, the
term material culture, the main focus of archaeological enquiry, neatly
encapsulates the duality inherent within the discipline. Archaeology
depends on the scientific study of materials in order to infer cultural
patterning.
   The causes of variability in the archaeological record are not
cultural or natural. They are both. Many archaeologists would now
accept that while the environment and material forces constrain human
endeavour, the specific character of human behaviour is equally
informed by cultural choice and human intention. This dialectical
view has been arrived at from many directions. We see it in an earlier
generation in the work of Grahame Clark (1957 (1939), 219) who
argued that while the environment limits or constrains social choice,
the latter determines cultural behaviour. We see it in neo-Marxist
discussions of the relations between the forces and social relations of
production (Friedman and Rowlands 1978; McGuire 1992). We see it in
contemporary applications of complex systems (Flannery and Marcus
1976; 1993; van der Leeuw and Torrence 1989) and in phenomeno-
logical approaches to monuments and landscapes (J. Thomas 1996;
200   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

Tilley 1994). In all these cases attempts are made in different ways
to think about culture and nature not in either/or but in both/and
terms.
   But perhaps the greatest dichotomy that has dogged archaeology is
the Cartesian split between subject and object (Knapp and Meskell
1997). Archaeologists have always been concerned about distinguishing
objective from subjective pasts. Subjective views have to be tested
against objective data. But archaeologists, including processual archae-
ologists, have also accepted that the archaeological data are theory-
laden (Renfrew and Bahn 1991) and that theory and data are related
dialectically (they depend on each other in a theory-data circuit). This
view is even more clearly articulated in neo-Marxist (e.g. Friedman and
Rowlands 1978, McGuire 1992) archaeology and in postprocessual
archaeology (Hodder 1991). If the archaeological process is opened
up to interactivity and multivocality, if the boundaries around the
discipline, site, team and author are broken down, then it cannot any
longer be adequate to separate an objective past defined by archae-
ologists and a subjective past defined by non-archaeologists. We all
interpret the past from different perspectives and these different inter-
pretations can be evaluated in relation to evidence. Different theories
can be compared using a variety of mechanisms. The past is not
objective or subjective. It is both. By this I mean that the archaeological
evidence has an ‘objective’ materiality which limits and confronts what
can be said about it, and which contributes to the experiences of
‘subjective’ observers. At the same time, the ‘subjective’ interpreter
of the evidence constructs the ‘objective’ data from a particular per-
spective.


Global Information     Flows

I have described above an archaeological process which is reflexive,
relational, interactive and multivocal.   The   effect is to break down
boundaries between inside and outside the discipline, between different
specialisms, between   site and non-site, between    author and reader,
between subject and object and so on. The breaking of these bound-
aries encourages us to try and think in non-dichotomous terms, that is
in terms of ‘both/and’ rather than ‘either/or’. Moving away from
dichotomies we search for alternative metaphors. Rather than bound-
aries we describe networks and flows. Rather than rigid oppositions we
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY               201

discern fluidity. Rather than space and time we grapple with spatio-
temporality.
   I have argued in this book that the search for a more inclusive
discourse in archaeology should not be set up as prescriptive agenda;
rather the search is part of wider changes in society which lead towards
flows and networks (Castells 1996). These wider changes are termed
post- or high modernism, the information age, consumer society, post-
industrial society, media society, and so on. It is important to under-
stand the nature and direction of these changes if we are going to make
sense of the impetus towards non-dichotomous thinking in archaeology.
   I have argued here that the trends which lead towards the flows of a
network society are best understood in the context of globalism,
and that globalism has the three components mapped in figure 11.1.
At the apex are the homogenizing tendencies most easily and obviously
associated with the Internet and the information superhighway.
Homogenization is also produced by the spread of the market, the
dispersal of work practices and by common environmental concerns.
The end result is a loss of cultural diversity as McDonalds and Coca-
Cola emerge as parts of a homogenous market and the ‘global
village’. National governments become subservient to multi-national
companies.
   But one of the fascinations of the global process is that it produces
fragmentation and diversity as much as it produces homogenization.
Again, non-dichotomous thinking is needed. There are two quite
different fragmentation processes mapped in figure 11.1: fragmentation
caused by the processes of high capitalism, and the search for identity
within and against the market.
   Fragmentation is produced by the market within high or late capit-
alism in a number of ways. For example, transformations in patterns of
work produce flexible regimes according to which people work at home
or at odd individual times. Fragmentation is also produced by the new
information   technologies.    The    television etc., but then also VCRs,


                                     homogeneity




                       market fragment —————        identity

Figure 11.1   The conflicting components of globalism.
202   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

walkmen, and the multiple communication channels now available all
lead to greater choice by individuals; there is decentralization and
customization. It becomes possible for ‘Web managers’ to tailor the
provision of information to individual needs. Niche marketing, and
even marketing designed for individual persons, become possible.
   At the same time, these same technologies can be used by individuals
to create new communities and new identities. The Internet has
allowed the proliferation of special interest groups. High or post-mod-
ern society has seen the emergence of small groups which may be
localized or dispersed (virtual communities). These may resist “mass
culture’ or they may contribute to it. They may be part of the global
market or they may be antithetical to it. Equally, there are those outside
the global network whose identities are linked to place and to a history
on the margins. These are the less wealthy, the less educated, the less
connected. Such communities receive few of the benefits of global
culture; their exploitation is associated with alienation and resistance.


Mapping Global Heritage

I now want to map first heritage and then archaeology onto the scheme
set out above and in figure 11.1. Heritage has become a global industry
expanding at remarkable speed. It is implicated in all the contradictory
processes described in figure 11.1, as indicated in figure 11.2.
   The homogenization of heritage is apparent in the rise over recent
decades of the concept of ‘world heritage’ and UNESCO designated
‘world heritage sites’. The underlying concern here is to protect sites
which are of global importance and which are part of a ‘common
humanity’. The aim is to protect ‘our’ common heritage, for the good
of all. At a different scale, the European Commission designates sites of
cultural interest for Europe as a whole rather than for individual nation
states.
   This homogenization process has positive and negative relations with
the market. One of the effects of designation as a world or European
heritage site may be commercial exploitation. The international visibil-
ity given to a site by such designation may attract tourism and the
leisure industry. ‘Travel ‘to another time’, whether in Disneyland time
cars or as part of international travel, has become a central part of the
leisure industry, an essential component of the exotic otherness to
which we increasingly seem attracted. As Lowenthal (1985) has
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY             203

described it, the past has become ‘another country’ to which we wish to
escape as part of our leisure travel. The result at heritage sites may be
the inflow of funds and the ability of local groups or national govern-
ments to enhance the facilities available. The tourism may also increase
local wealth and employment.
   But there are also tensions between world heritage and the market.
For example, international agencies are concerned to protect sites from
commercial exploitation in the form of looting and vandalism. The
commercial development of sites for tourism may benefit international
companies more than local communities. Commercial development
(hotels, shops, car parks) may be constrained by the heritage interests
of the site.
   Similarly, there are positive and negative relations between world
heritage and the formation of community identities. The international
attention and influx of tourism may enhance the local sense of identity.
New communities may be formed through a renewed awareness of a
common heritage. These communities and their common traditions
may be ‘invented’, as in the case of a pan-Native American identity.
They may also be dispersed, as in the goddess movement which
involves women in the search for an original world before patriarchy.
Whether local or dispersed (virtual), these communities are strength-
ened by being involved in global networks. The global interactions
encouraged by the World Archaeological Congress support emerging
identities based on heritage (Ucko 1987).
   Global processes provide emancipatory mechanisms, but they also
create greater possibilities for domination and exclusion. Some govern-
ments resist world heritage designation since it allows intervention by
international agencies in the internal affairs of national heritage pro-
grammes. Both the world heritage status and commercial exploitation
may lead to the wrenching of a site away from a local meaning and
identity. Local people may find traditional understandings of sites
denied or disrupted by external agencies. Local heritage identities
easily become fragmented by the global process.
   Groups and individuals which are not networked become separated
from global information flows and have difficulty gaining access to
knowledge about heritage. They may use languages which exclude
them from international debate (e.g. Olsen 1991). The multivocality
and openness to subaltern voices may occur primarily amongst the
networked. The result may be a silencing of other voices and an
ultimate incorporation into a global homogenization. Alternatively,
204   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

the un-networked may form cultural and heritage identities in tradi-
tional forms, reacting against the new forms of virtual community.
   There are also positive and negative relations between community
heritage and the leisure industry. As already noted, tourism may foster
employment and growth in local communities and it may enhance
community identities through the management of heritage. Cases
such as the Hopi-Tewa in the American Southwest, where commercial
exploitation of traditional crafts has contributed to local production
and employment, can be cited. Engagement by tourists and visitors in
‘other’ life-ways also has ‘beneficial’ effects for developed countries.
The nostalgia and escapism which people discover may help them to
deal with alienation and the fragmentation of modern life. The interests
of high capitalism and the market are thus served.
   The relationship between the market and community heritage can
also be negative. Local interests can easily be overwhelmed by ‘big
business’ and local rights over-ruled. Gommercialization may turn
identity into pastiche, continuity into fragment. Disney-land pasts
may trivialize community claims and sensitivities. The notion of an
‘Auschwitz Theme Park’ dramatizes the insensitivities that may occur.
How can some grieve at a heritage site while others play? Such
instances and such tensions are clear cut. In other cases, the lines are
harder to draw between the past as leisure play and the past as
community identity. For example, the travellers who come to Avebury
and Stonehenge in Britain to celebrate the summer solstice include
groups such as the Druids and Wessex Anarchists. Are such groups
engaged in play or in political and social action? Are all members of
such groups equally committed to a social cause? Where does one draw
the line between play and passion? And even if individuals are passion-
ately committed to particular causes, is their committment simply a
product of the diversity engendered by high capitalism? The answers to
these questions are difficult. Once again, as in the other relationships
shown in figure 11.2, the relationship between the market, including

                                 world heritage




                  leisure industry        +—      community heritage

Figure 11.2   The conflicting components of global heritage.
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY                205

the leisure industry, and community heritage is dialectical and non-
dichotomous.


Mapping Global Archaeology

The homogenization fashioned by global processes can be compared
with the search in archaeology in the later half of the twentieth century
for universal laws and universal methods applicable regardless of time
 and place (figure 11.3). Clearly this was the clarion cry of processual
 archaeology. While less emphasis is placed on universals in postproces-
 sual archaeology it is undeniable that prescriptive statements are rou-
 tinely made, as in ‘material culture is meaningfully constituted’, ‘the
 archaeological record is (or is not) a text’, ‘structure is the medium and
 outcome of action’. While postprocessual (and neo-Darwinian) archae-
ologists attempt to re-embrace history, contingency and indeterminacy,
they nevertheless base their arguments for diversity and difference on
general claims. All archaeologies, from whatever tradition, are then
evaluated in terms of these generalizing claims.
    Universalizing approaches in Anglo-American archaeology can cer-
tainly lead to an erasure of history. Trigger (1984) has emphasized that
the study of Native Americans by processual archaeology led to the
search for law-like generalizations and so trivialized the prehistory of
specific Native American groups as an end in itself. He argued that by
denying the validity of studying the prehistory of specific parts of the
world, the New Archaeologist asserted the unimportance of national
traditions themselves and of anything that stood in the way of Amer-
ican economic activity and political influence. Earlier, a colonial out-
look led to the establishment of British archaeological methods in for
example, India and Australia (Clark 1939). Indeed, wherever archae-
ology is practised today, its methods are influenced by, if not wholly
dependent on, Euro-American methods and perspectives.
    In some regions, especially those with recent histories of dictatorship,
such as Spain or Chile, universalist claims and objective methods may
provide a basis for the critique of established authority structures. ‘They
provide a common currency to expose the arbitrary assumptions of
power. They promote democratization. In other regions, objective
science is itself associated with the arbitrary exercise of centralized
power. For example, in the conflict over the reburial of Native Amer-
ican remains or over Australian aboriginal land rights, archaeological
206   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY

objective science came to be associated with vested establishment
interests against which local communities had to fight. Indeed, in a
postcolonial world archaeological administration and research have
increasingly been ‘indigenized’. While the taking over of local pasts
into local hands may promote the writing of contextualized pasts, the
methods used often derive from the colonial legacy. The global debate
takes place in the terms defined by the dominant centre. Much the
same effect is produced by global information networks.
   The widespread availability of archaeological information on the
Web may undermine the identity of local communities and dilute
their distinctive character. Individual career paths may be threatened
— for example, researchers whose careers depend on publication of
unique data from a site may not want ‘their’ data immediately available
to all. But equally the widespread availability of information on the
Web may allow communities to enhance their identities. Individuals
scattered across the globe can gain access to archaeological data for
their research or for their personal or political interest. For example,
goddess groups can learn of the work of Marija Gimbutas (Meskell
 1995). The latter process may end up in shallow scholarship close to
play (ibid.), or it may simply entice local groups into the discourse of the
dominant. But there is also the potential for the formulation of altern-
ative perspectives. For example, Mamani Condori (1989) has argued
for an approach to archaeology informed by indigenous perspectives
concerning monuments as ‘living’ parts of the landscape. In India,
Paranjpe (1990) has begun to explore alternative directions, arguing
against the universalist assumptions of western scholarship (see also
Ucko 1995). Such scholars argue that Indian theories of meaning and
interpretation should be applied as a reaction against western dis-
course.
    Archaeologists increasingly recognize that reports of their research
need to be written, often in very different terms, for a wide variety of
different audiences. The boundary between a universalist or contex-
tualized account, on the one hand, and a ‘popularized’ version, on the
other, is often difficult to draw. And it is right that, as in much of the
postmodern world, the boundary between ‘high’ and ‘low’ culture
should become blurred. Many of the more popular accounts have
important social effects, as in writing for children or in TV presenta-
tions for a large audience. But as already noted, scholarship can easily
be abused or misinterpreted. The increasing prevalence of commercial
sponsorship of archaeological projects raises the possibility of bias as
      CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY                  207

reports are written to ‘provide what the sponsor wants’. The import-
ance of discoveries may often be exaggerated by archaeologists in order
to satisfy sponsors’ needs for publicity and sensation. Commerce and
play can, then, lead to the compromise of archaeological scholarship
and method. On the other hand, it is undoubtedly the case that much
archaeological work today, especially in the United States and Britain,
is dependent on sponsorship. Relations with corporate sponsors can
often be channelled and monitored so that interference is minimized
and so that both sides benefit.
    Perhaps the major link between commerce and archaeology occurs
in those countries which have established a system of cultural resource
management funded by developers. In such cases there are undoubt-
edly strains (Hunter and Ralston 1993). Jobs may be won by archae-
ological teams which compete by cutting costs to minimum levels.
There may be little investment in research and publication. Employ-
ment may be short-term and insecure. ‘There may be limited opportun-
ities for the development of integrated research designs and regional
research strategies. The growth of commercially funded archaeology
has led to the setting of standards, the codification of procedures, and
the monitoring of results by central agencies. It has thus created uni-
versalizing tendencies.
    Cultural resource management has certainly allowed the large-scale
expansion of archaeology in the countries involved. But these beneficial
effects are offset by the tendencies towards codification and regulation.
These latter contradict precisely the openness and multivocality of an
inclusive approach to the past. They contradict directly the fluid
systems, the integrated and contingent methods identified in this
volume. They impede the recognition of other voices and interests.
As a result, in many      areas, local communities         have taken over the
management of their own cultural resources.



                                   universals




               commerce and play           Tae
                                                    contextual pasts


Figure 11.3   The conflicting components of global archaeology.
208   CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY


Conclusion: Going with the Flow

I have argued in this volume that archaeological research and fieldwork
can be fluid processes of interpretation. They can be reflexive and
participative, negotiated from different perspectives. In my view, this
openness, which involves a breaking of dichotomies and a critiquing of
assumptions, has become necessary in a world which is both increas-
ingly homogeneous and diverse. ‘Political correctness’ has become a
serious issue, not just because of a current trend, but because it deals
with the sensitivities and rights of a diversity of groups. It is no longer
possible in archaeology to police dogmatically the boundaries of the
discipline. It is no longer acceptable to close off sites and teams from the
wider world in which they work. It is no longer acceptable to close
debate by saying ‘these are the objective data’, since other interests may
wish to make sense of data in different ways. It is no longer acceptable
to base archaeological authority on a closed discourse constructed by
archaeologists themselves. In a highly networked world, authority has
to argue its case.
   For many in the late twentieth century, events such as the Vietnam
war demonstrated the dangers of an uncritical belief in western beliefs
and strategies. The decentering of authority has also been part of the
widespread emergence of articulate postcolonial voices. In addition, the
new processes of global information exchange have both quickened
and dampened the diversification and the differentiation.
   Archaeology can play an important role as these processes continue
and expand into the 2lst century. It is directly implicated in the
homogenization and differentiation of identities. But the role it plays
can be emancipatory or dominating. On the one hand, we can engage in
multi-sited archaeology, facilitating the engagement of multiple inter-
ests at all levels of analysis and interpretation, from the trowel’s edge to
the published output. We can engender the proliferation of locations,
nodes in a global network, at which the past can be reconstructed. We
can create flows of the past, continua of interpretation. We can encour-
age the un-networked to use the past to express their rights and
identities or to become networked. We can use archaeology as a
flexible, open and participatory project in order to break established
patterns of thought and domination. So, on the one hand, archaeology
can play an emancipatory role within the global processes of post-
colonialism and the information age.
         CONCLUSION: NON-DICHOTOMOUS THINKING IN ARCHAEOLOGY          209

   On the other hand, the same technologies which liberate an open
debate can be used to close off and to exclude discussion. The post-
modern flow of cultural symbols (including archaeological knowledge)
can easily be limited to a new, information-based elite. The un-net-
worked become yet more disadvantaged in relation to the centres of
domination in developed countries. Alternative voices become incor-
porated into a discourse defined and regulated at the centre. Codifica-
tion and standardization become disseminated in the interests of the
cultural resource market. Difference is celebrated as a necessary part of
rational market identification and manipulation. So archaeology can
play a role in processes of domination within the global environment.
   The new technologies, and the flexibility and non-dichotomous
thinking which they allow, provide not a solution but an opportunity
and a challenge to archaeologists of the new millennium. They can be
used to create emancipation in the sense of an open and diverse
engagement with the past, a participation from multiple perspectives
and interests. Or they can be used to exclude, close off, and dominate.
The new technologies, postcolonial movements, and other global issues
such as tourism and environmental concerns, force archaeology into a
new situation to which it can either react by closing down or by
opening up. It can reinforce dichotomies or it can “go with the flow’.
I hope it is clear that, in my view, the long-term future of archaeology
should be in flows and networks rather than dichotomies and bound-
aries.
Bibliography




Adams, M. and Brooke, C. 1995 Managing the past: truth, data and the
  human being. Norwegian Archaeological Review 28, 93-104.
Anyon, R., Ferguson, T. J., Jackson, L. and Lane, L. 1996 Native American
   oral traditions and archaeology. Society for American Archaeology Bulletin 14:2,
    14=16.
Arnold, B. 1990 The past as propaganda: totalitarian archaeology in Nazi
   Germany. Antiquity 64, 464-78.
Arnold, D. 1971 Ethnomineralogy of Ticul, Yucatan potters: etics and emics.
   American Antiquity 36, 20-40.
Auel,J. 1980 The Clan of the Cave Bear. Crown, New York.
Bailey, G. 1981 Concepts, time-scales and explanations in economic prehis-
   tory. In A. Sheridan and G. Bailey (eds) Economic Archaeology. British Archae-
   ological Report S 96, 97-117.
       1983 Concepts of time in Quaternary prehistory. Annual Review ofAnthro-
   pology 12, 165-92.
       1987 Breaking the time barrier. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 6,
   5-20;
Baines,J. 1985 Colour terminology and colour classification — Ancient Egyp-
   tian colour terminology and polychromy. Amencan Anthropologist 87, 282-97.
Bapty, I. and Yates, 'T. 1990 Archaeology After Structuralism. Routledge, London.
Barba, L. A. 1985 La quimica en el estudio de areas de actividad. In L.
   Manzanilla (ed.) Unidades Habitacionales Mesoamencanas y sus areas de actividad.
  UNAM, Mexico.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY      211

Barfield, L. 1994 The iceman reviewed. Antiquity 68, 10-26.
Barham, A. J. 1995 Methodological approaches to archaeological context
   recording: X-radiography as an example of a supportive recording, assess-
   ment and interpretive technique. In A. J. Barham and R. I. Macphail (eds)
   Archaeological Sediments and Soils. Institute of Archaeology, University College,
   London, pp. 145-82.
Barker, P. 1977 (2nd edition 1982) Techniques of Archaeological Excavation. Bats-
   ford, London.
Barnes, G. 1990 The ‘idea of prehistory’ in Japan. Antiquity 64, 929-40.
Barrett, J. 1994 Fragments ofAntiquity. Blackwell, Oxford.
——., Bradley, R. and Green, M. 1991 Landscape, Monuments and Society. The
   Prehistory of Cranbourne Chase. Cambridge University Press.
Barthes, R. 1970 (Translated 1975 by R. Miller) S$/Z. Cape, London.
       1977 Image-Music-    Text. Fontana, London.
Bechtel, W. 1990 Connectionism and the philosophy of mind: an overview. In
   W. G. Lycan (ed.) Mind and Cognition: A Reader. Blackwell, Oxford.
Bell, J. A. 1994 Reconstructing Prehistory. Temple University Press, Philadel-
   phia.
Bender, B., Hamilton, S. and Tilley, C. 1997 Leskernick: stone worlds; altern-
   ative narratives; nested landscapes. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 63,
   147-78.
Berlin, B. and Kay, P. 1969 Basic Colour Terms: Their Unwersality and Evolution.
   University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bernbeck, R. and Pollock, S. 1996 Ayodhya, archaeology and identity. Current
   Anthropology 37, Supplement, 138-42.
Binford, L. R. 1962 Archaeology as anthropology. American Antiquity 28,
    217-25:
—— 1967 Smudge pits and hide smoking; the use of analogy in archaeolo-
    gical reasoning. American Antiquity 32, 1-12.
        1977 For Theory Building in Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
—— 1980 Willow smoke and dogs’ tails: hunter-gatherer settlement systems
    and archaeological site formation. American Antiquity 45, 4-20.
        1981 Behavioral archaeology and the ‘Pompeii premise’. Journal of
   Anthropological Research 37, 195-208.
        1989 Debating Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
       and Binford, S. (eds) 1968 New Perspectives in Archaeology. Aldine, Chicago.
       and Sabloff, J. A. 1982 Paradigms, systematics and archaeology. Journal
   ofAnthropological Research 38, 137-53.
Bintliff, J. 1991 The Annales School and Archaeology. Leicester University Press.
        1993 Why Indiana Jones is smarter than the postprocessualists. Norwegian
   Archaeological Review 26, 91-100.
Bloch, M. 1991 Language, anthropology and cognitive science. Man 26,
    183-98.
212   BIBLIOGRAPHY

—1995 Questions not to ask of Malagasy carvings. In L. Hodder,
   M. Shanks, et al. (eds) Interpreting Archaeology. Routledge, London, 212-15.
Bourdieu, P. 1977 Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge University Press.
Bradley, R. 1990 The Passage ofArms. Cambridge University Press.
       1993 Altering the Earth: The Origins of Monuments in Britain and Continental
   Europe. Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, Edinburgh.
       1996 Journal of Maternal Culture 1.
Braun, D. P. 1977 Middle Woodland — (Early) Late Woodland Social Change in the
   Prehistoric Central Midwestern US. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University
   of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Brothwell, D. 1981 Digging Up Bones (3rd edition). Oxford University Press.
Brumfiel, L. 1991 Weaving and cooking: women’s production in Aztec Mex-
   ico. In J. Gero and M. Conkey (eds) Engendering Archaeology. Blackwell,
   Oxford, 224-54.
Butler,J. 1990 Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Routledge,
   New York.
       1993 Bodtes That Matter. Routledge, New York.
Calgano,J.M. 1981 On the applicability of sexing material by discriminant
   function analysis. Journal of Human Evolution 10, 189-98.
Carver, M. 1989 Digging for ideas. Antiquity. 63, 666-74.
       1990 Digging for data: principles and procedures for evaluation, excava-
   tion and post-excavation in towns. Theory and Practice ofArchaeological Research
   2, 255-302 (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology, Polish Academy of
   Sciences).
Castells, E. 1996 The Rise of the Network Society. Blackwell, Oxford.
Chadwick, A. 1998 Archaeology at the edge of chaos: further toward reflexive
   excavation methodologies. Assemblage. (online journal) 3. http://www.
   shef.ac.ukslashassem/3/3chad.htm.
Champion, T. C. 1991 Theoretical archaeology in Britain. In I. Hodder (ed.)
   Archaeological Theory in Europe: The Last Three Decades. Routledge, London,
   pp. 129-60.
Childe, V. G. 1925 The Dawn of European Cwilisation. Kegan Paul, London.
       1936 Man Makes Himself: Collins, London.
—— 1949 Social Worlds of Knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Chippindale, C. 1990 Who Owns Stonehenge? Batsford, London.
Clark G. 1934 Archaeology and the state. Antiquity 8, 414-28.
       1939 (Revised edition 1957) Archaeology and Society. Methuen, London.
Clark,J.E. 1987 Politics, prismatic blades, and Mesoamerican civilisation. In
  J. K. Johnson and CG. A. Morrow (eds) The Organisation of Core Technology.
   Westview Press, London, pp. 259-84.
Clarke, D. L. 1968 Analytical Archaeology. Methuen, London.
       1972 Models in Archaeology. Methuen, London.
—— 1973 Archaeology: the loss of innocence. Antiquity. 47, 6-18.
                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY     213

Clifford, J. and Marcus, G. 1986 Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of
   Ethnography. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Cohen,J. and Swidler, N. 1997 Painting a ‘new’ face on CRM: integrating
   traditional culture and archaeology. Society for American Archaeology Bulletin.
   Sob pderSe
Coles,J. 1979 Experimental Archaeology. Academic Press, London.
Collingwood, R. G. 1946 Idea of History. Oxford University Press.
Condori, C. M. 1989 History and pre-history in Bolivia: what about the
   Indians? In R. Layton (ed.) Conflicts in the Archaeology of Lwing Traditions.
   Unwin Hyman, London, pp. 46-59.
Conkey, M. and Gero, J. 1997 Programme to practice: gender and feminism
   in archaeology. Annual Review ofAnthropology. 26, 411-37
       and ‘Tringham, R. 1996 Archaeology and The Goddess: exploring the
   contours of feminist archaeology. In A. Stewart and D. Stanton (eds)
   Feminsms in the Academy: Rethinking the cite University of Michigan
   Press, Ann Arbor.
——with Williams, S. H. 1991 Original narratives: the political economy of
   gender in archaeology. In M. di Leonardo (ed.) Gender at the Crossroads of
   Knowledge. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Conolly, J. 1996 Catalhoyuk knapped-stone report. In I. Hodder (ed.) On the
   Surface. McDonald Institute, Cambridge.
Courbin, P. 1988 What is Archaeology? University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Crown, P. and Fish, S. 1996 Gender and status in the Hohokam Pre-Classic to
  Classic transition. American Anthropologist, 93, 803-17.
Daniel, G. 1962 The Idea of Prehustory. Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Davis, M. B. 1983 Holocene vegetational history of the eastern United States.
   In H. E. Wright (ed.) Late Quaternary Environments of the Umted States. Uni-
   versity of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp. 6-81.
Dawkins, R. 1997 Chmbing Mount Improbable. Penguin, London.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. 1984 Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrema.
   Athlone, London.
Denzin, N. K. 1989 Interpretive Interactionsm. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
      and Lincoln, Y. S. 1994 Handbook of Qualitatwe Research. Sage, London.
Derrida, J. 1978 Writing and Dhifference. Routledge and Kegan Paul,
  London.
Diaz-Andreu, M. and Champion, T. 1996 Nationalism and Archaeology in Europe.
  University College London Press.
Dietler, M. 1994 ‘Our ancestors the Gauls’: archaeology, ethnic nationalism,
   and the manipulation of Celtic identity in modern Europe. Amencan Anthro-
  pologist 96, 584-605.
Dobres, M.-A. 1995 Gender and prehistoric technology: on the social agency
  of technical strategies. World Archaeology 27, 25-49.
214   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dunnell R. C. 1989 Aspects of the application of evolutionary theory in
  archaeology. In C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (ed.) Archaeological Thought in Amenca.
  Cambridge University Press, pp. 35-49.
Dunnell R. C. 1992 Is a scientific archaeology possible? In L. Embree (ed.)
  Metaarchaeology: Reflections by Archaeologists and Philosophers. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 75-97.
Edmonds, M. 1993 Interpreting causewayed enclosures in the past and
  the present. In C. Tilley (ed.) Interpretative Archaeology. Berg, Oxford, pp.
  995142.
Egg, M., Goedecker-Ciolek, R., Groenman-Van Waateringe, W. and Spindler,
   K. 1993 Die Gletschermumie von Ende der Sterzeit aus den Otztaler Alpen. Jahrbuch
   des Romisch-Germainischen Zentralmuseums. 39, RGZM, Mainz.
Emele, M. 1998 The assault of computer-generated worlds on the rest of
   time. Challenges and opportunities for documenting film-making 1n virtual
   reality. In T. Elsaesser and K. Hoffmann (eds) Cain, Able or Cable — Film
   Culture in Transition. University of Amsterdam Press.
Engelstad, E. 1991 Images of power and contradiction: feminist theory and
   post-processual archaeology. Antiquity 65, 502-14.
Erickson, C. L. 1988 Raised field agriculture in the Lake Titicaca Basin:
   putting ancient agriculture back to work. Expedition 30, 8-16.
Evans, C. 1998 Constructing houses and building context: Bersu’s Manx
   roundhouse campaign. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society.
Evershed, R., Heron, C., Charters, S. and Goad, L. 1992 The survival of food
   residues: new methods of analysis, interpretation and application. In
   A. Pollard (ed.) New Developments in Archaeological Science. Oxford University
   Press, 187-208.
Featherstone, M. 1991 Consumer Culture and Post-Modernism. Sage, London.
      , Lash, S. and Robertson, R. (eds) 1995 Global Modernities. Sage, London.
        and        1995 Introduction. In M. Featherstone, S. Lash and R.
   Robinson (eds) Global Modernities. Sage, London.
Ferguson, L. 1991 Struggling with pots in colonial South Carolina. In
   R. McGuire and R. Paynter (eds) The Archaeology of Inequality. Blackwell,
   Oxford, pp. 28-39.
Flannery, K. and Marcus, J. 1976 Formative Oaxaca and the Zapotec Cos-
  mos. American Scientist 64, 374-83.
      and       1983 Cloud People. Academic Press, New York.
      and        1993 Cognitive archaeology. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3,
   260-70.
Foley, R. 1981 Offsite Archaeology and Human Adaptation in Eastern Africa. British
   Archaeological Report International Series 97, Oxford.
——— 1987 Another Unique Species. Longman, Harlow.
Forte, M. and Siliotti, A. 1997 Virtual Archaeology. Thames and Hudson,
   London.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY     215
Fotiadis, M. 1994 What is archaeology’s ‘mitigated objectivism’ mitigated by?
   Comments on Wylie. American Antiquity 59, 545-55.
Foucault, M. 1977 Discipline and Punish. Vintage, New York.
Foucault, M. 1981 The History of Sexuality. Vol. 1: An Introduction. Penguin,
   Harmondsworth.
Fowler, P. 1992 The Past in Contemporary Society: Then, Now. Routledge, London.
 Friedman,J.and Rowlands, M. 1978 The Evolution ofSocial Systems. Duckworth,
    London.
 Fritz,J.and Plog, F. 1970 The nature of archaeological explanation. American
    Antiquity 35, 405-12.
 Frodeman, R. 1995 Geological reasonings: geology as an interpretive and
    historical science. Geological Society ofAmerica Bulletin 107, 960-8.
 Fukuyama, F. 1992 The End of History and the Last Man. Penguin.
 Gardin, J.-C. 1980 Archaeological Constructs. Cambridge University Press.
 Garfinkle 1967 Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
 Garn, S., Lewis, A., Swindler, D. and Kerewsky, R. 1967 Genetic control of
    sexual dimorphism in tooth size. Journal of Dental Research 46, 963-72.
 Gates, B. 1995 The Road Ahead. Viking Penguin, New York.
 Gathercole, P. and Lowenthal, D. 1989 The Politics of the Past. Unwin Hyman,
    London.
 Geertz, C. 1973 The Interpretation of Cultures. Basic Books, New York.
Gero,J. 1985 Socio-politics of archaeology and the women-at-home ideology.
   American Antiquity 50, 342-50.
—— 199la Genderlithics. In M. Conkey andJ. Gero (eds) Engendering Archae-
    ology. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 163-93.
         1991b Who experienced what in prehistory? A narrative explanation
    from Queyash, Peru. In R. Preucel (ed.) Processwal and Postprocessual Archae-
    ologies. Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 126-89.
         1996 Archaeological practice and gendered encounters with field data.
   In R. Wright (ed.) Gender and Archaeology. University of Pennsylvania Press,
   Philadelphia, pp. 251-80.
        and Conkey, M. 1991 Engendering Archaeology. Blackwell, Oxford.
Gibbs, L. 1987 Identifying gender representation in the archaeological record:
   a contextual study. In I. Hodder (ed.) The Archaeology of Contextual Meanings.
   Cambridge University Press, pp. 79-89.
Giddens, A. 1979 Central Problems in Social Theory. Macmillan, London.
        1984 The Constitution of Society: An Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
   University of California Press, Berkeley.
Gifford-Gonzales 1991 Bones are not enough: analogues, knowledge, and
   interpretive strategies in zooarchaeology. Journal ofAnthropological Archaeology
    L0y245=54
Gillespie, A. and Robins, K. 1989 Geographical inequalities: the spatial bias
   of the new communications technologies. Journal of Communication 39:3.
216   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gimbutas, M. 1982 The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe. Thames and Hudson,
   London.
Goedecker-Ciolek, R. 1994 Konservierung der Beifunde einer Gletschermu-
   mie vom Ende der Steinzeit. I — Bekleidung. Arbectsblatter fiir Restauratoren
   2:94, 05275
Golson,J.and Gardner D. S. 1990 Agriculture and sociopolitical organisation
   in the New Guinea Highlands. Annual Review ofAnthropology 19, 395-417.
Gosden, C. 1994 Social Being and Time. Blackwell, Oxford.
Gould, S. J. and Lewontin, R. 1979 The spandrels of San Marco and the
   Panglossian paradigm: a critique of the adaptationalist programme. Proceed-
   ings of the Royal Society London B205, 581-98.
Grdaslund, B. 1987 The Birth of Prehistoric Chronology. Cambridge University
   Press.
Grenville, J. 1997 Medieval Housing. Leicester University Press, London.
Gumerman, G. and Gell-Mann, M. 1994 Understanding Complexity in the Pre-
   historic Southwest. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity.
   Proc. Vol. XVI, Reading.
Hall, M. 1998 Cape Town’s District Six and the archaeology of memory.
   Paper presented at the World Archaeological Congress, Croatia.
Halton, E. 1995 The modern error: or, the unbearable enlightenment of
   being. In M. Featherstone, S. Lash and R. Robertson (eds) Global Modern-
   ites. Sage, London, pp. 260-77.
Hamilton, C. 1996 Faultlines: the construction of archaeological knowledge at
   Catalhéyiik in 1996. Paper presented at Theoretical Archaeology Group
   Conference, Liverpool (see http://catal.cam.arch.ac.uk/catal/catal.html).
Harris, E. C. 1989 Principles ofArchaeological Stratigraphy. (2nd edition) Academic
  Press, London.
       , Brown III, M. R. and Brown, G. J. 1993 Practices of Aarchaeological
   Stratigraphy. Academic Press, London.
Hastorf, C. 1991 Gender, space, and food in prehistory. In J. Gero and
   M. Conkey (eds) Engendering Archaeology. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 132-62.
       and Johannessen, S. 1991 Understanding changing people/plant rela-
   tionships in the prehispanic Andes. In R. Preucel (ed.) Processual and Post-
  processual Archaeologies. Occasional Paper 10, 140-55. Southern Illinois
   University.
Hawkes, C. 1954 Archaeological theory and method: some suggestions from
   the old world. American Anthropologist 56, 155-68.
HBMC 1991 The Management of Archaeological Projects. Historic Buildings and
   Monuments Commission (English Heritage), London.
Heidegger, M. 1927 Sein und Zeit. Neomarius Verlag, Tiibingen.
Hesse, M. 1995 Past realities. In I. Hodder, M. Shanks et al. (eds) Interpreting
  Archaeology. Routledge, London, pp. 45-7.
Higgs, E. 1972 Papers in Economic Prehistory. Cambridge University Press.
                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY      217
  Higgs, E. and Jarman, M. 1975 Paleoeconomy. In E. Higgs (ed.) Paleoeconomy.
      Cambridge University Press, 1-8.
  Hill, J. D. 1992 Can we recognise a different European past? Journal of
     European Archaeology 1, 57—75.
          1995 Ritual and Rubbish in the Iron Age of Wessex. Tempus Reparatum,
      Oxford.
  Hill,J.and GunnJ.1977 The Individual in Prehistory. Academic Press, New York.
  Hobsbawm, E. 1994 The Age of Extremes. Michael Joseph, London.
  Hodder, I. 1982a Symbols in Action. Cambridge University Press.
          1982b Theoretical archaeology: a reactionary view. In I. Hodder (ed.)
     Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, pp. 1-16.
  —— 1982c The Present Past. Batsford, London.
  —— 1986 Reading the Past. Cambridge University Press.
  —— 1987 Archaeology as Long-Term History. Cambridge University Press.
  —— 1989 Writing archaeology: site reports in context. Antiquity 63, 268-74.
  —— 1990 The Domestication of Europe. Blackwell, Oxford.
  —— 1991 Interpretative archaeology and its role. American Antiquity 56, 7-18.
  —— 1992 Theory and Practice in archaeology. Routledge, London.
  ——— 1993 The narrative and rhetoric of material culture sequences. World
     Archaeology 25, 268-82.
         (ed.) 1996 On the Surface. British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara and
     McDonald Institute, Cambridge.
          1997 Always momentary, fluid and flexible: towards a self-reflexive
     excavation methodology. Antiquity 71, 691-700.
         and Evans, C. 1999 Excavations at Haddenham. English Heritage and
     McDonald Institute.
         and Shand, P. 1988 The Haddenham long barrow: an interim state-
     ment. Antiquity 62, 349-53.
         , Shanks, M., Alexandri, A., Buchli, V., Carman, J., Last, J. and Lucas,
     G. (eds) 1995 Interpreting Archaeology. Routledge, London.
 Hole, F. and Heizer, R. F. 1973 Prehistoric Archaeology: A Bnef Introduction. Holt,
     Rinehart and Winston, London.
 Hudson, K. 1981 A Social History ofArchaeology: The British Experience. MacMil-
    lan, London.
 Huffman, T. 1984 Expressive space in the Zimbabwe culture. Man. 19, 593-
    612.
 Hull, K. L. 1987 Identification of cultural site formation processes through
    microdebitage analysis. American Antiquity 52, 772-83.
 Hunter, J. and Ralston, I. 1993 Archaeological Resource Management in the UK: An
    Introduction. Alan Sutton, Stroud.
 Inizan, M. 1992 Technology of Knapped Stone. CNRS, Paris.
Jenkins, D. 1994 Interpretation of interglacial cave sediments from a hominid
    site in North Wales. In A. J. Ringrose-Voase and G. S. Humphreys (eds) Soz/
218   BIBLIOGRAPHY

    Micromorphology: Studies in Management and Genesis. Elsevier, London, pp. 293—
    302.
Johnson, M. 1989 Conceptions of agency in archaeological interpretation.
   Journal ofAnthropological Archaeology 8, 189-211.
        1996 An Archaeology of Capitalism. Blackwell, London.
Jones, W. 1996 Dictionary of Industrial Archaeology. Sutton, Stroud.
Jorgensen, L. B. 1992 North European Textiles Until av 1000. Aarhus University
    Press.
Joukowsky, M. 1980 A Complete Manual of Freld Archaeology. Prentice Hall,
    Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Joyce, R. 1994 Dorothy Hughes Popenoe: Eve in an archaeological garden. In
    C. Claassen (ed.) Women in Archaeology. University of Pennsylvania Press.
 Kester, G. 1994 Access denied: information policy and the limits of liberalism.
   Afterimage 21:6.
Kinnes, I. 1992 Non-Megalithic Long Barrows and Alhed Structures in the British
   Neolithic. British Museum Publications, London.
Knapp, A. B. 1992 Archaeology, Annales and Ethnohistory. Cambridge University
    Press.
        and Meskell, L. 1997 Bodies of evidence in Cypriot prehistory. Cambridge
   Archaeological Journal 7:2, 183-204.
Kohl, P. 1993 Limits to a postprocessual archaeology (or, The dangers of a
    new scholasticism), In N. Yoffee and A. Sherratt (eds) Archaeological Theory.
    Who Sets the Agenda? Cambridge University Press, pp. 13-19.
        and Fawcett, C. (eds) 1995 Nationalism, Politics, and the Practice ofArchaeology.
    Cambridge University Press.
Kosso, P. 1991 Method in archaeology: middle range theory as hermeneutics.
   American Antiquity 56, 621-7.
Kristiansen, K. 1981 A social history of Danish archaeology (1805-1975). In
    G. Daniel (ed.) Towards a History ofArchaeology. London, 20-44.
Kroker, A. and Weinstein, M. A. 1994 Data Trash: The Theory of the Virtual Class.
    St Martin’s Press, New York.
Kuhn, T. S. 1962 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago
   Press.
Kus, S. 1992 Toward an archaeology of body and soul. In J.-C. Gardin and
   CG. S. Peebles (eds) Representations in Archaeology. Bloomington, pp. 168-77.
Lacan,J. 1977 Eerits: A Selection. (edited by A. Sheridan) Methuen, London.
Lampeter Archaeology Workshop 1997 Relativism, objectivity and the politics
   of the past. Archaeological Dialogues 4, 164-98.
Landow, G. P. 1992 Hypertext. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Langford R. F. 1983 Our heritage — your playground. Australian Archaeology. 16,
    16,
Laqueur, T. 1990 Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to Freud. Harvard
   University Press.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY      219

Lathrap, D. W. 1983 Recent Shipibo-Conibo ceramics and their implications
   for archaeological interpretation. In D. K. Washburn (ed.) Structure and
   Cognition in Art. Cambridge University Press, pp. 25-39.
Latour, B. 1988 Mixing humans and nonhumans together: the sociology of a
  door closer. Social Problems 35, 298-310.
       and Woolgar, S. 1986 Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts.
   Princeton University Press.
Layton, R. 1989 Conflict in the Archaeology of Living Traditions. Unwin Hyman,
   London.
Lechtmann, H. 1984 Andean value systems and the development of prehis-
   toric metallurgy. Technology and Culture 25, 1-36.
Lemonnier, P. 1986 The study of material culture today: towards an anthro-
  pology of technical systems. Journal ofAnthropological Archaeology 5, 147-86.
Lennstrom, H. A. and Hastorf, C. A. 1995 Interpretation in context: sampling
   and analysis in paleoethnobotany. American Antiquity 60, 701-21.
Leone, M. 1982 Childe’s offspring. In I. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural
  Archaeology. Cambridge University Press, pp. 179-84.
       1984 Interpreting ideology in historical archaeology: the William Paca
   garden in Annapolis, Maryland. In D. Miller and C. Tilley (eds) Ideology,
   Power and Prehistory. Cambridge University Press.
——., Potter, P. and Shackel, P. 1987 Toward a critical archaeology. Current
  Anthropology 28, 283-302.
      et al. 1995 Can an African-American historical archaeology be an
  alternative voice? In I. Hodder, M. Shanks, et al. (eds) Interpreting Archaeology.
  Routledge, London, pp. 110-24.
Leroi-Gourhan, A. 1964 La Geste et la Parole. Michel, Paris.
Lincoln, Y. S. and Guba, E. G. 1985 Naturalistic Inquiry. Sage, Beverly Hills,
   CA.
Little, B. 1994 Consider the hermaphroditic mind: comment on ‘the interplay
   of evidential constraints and political interests: recent archaeological
   research on gender’. American Antiquity 59, 539-44.
Llobera, M. 1996 Exploring the topography of mind: GIS, social space and
   archaeology. Antiquity 70, 612-22.
Lloyd, S. 1963 Mounds of the Near East. Edinburgh University Press.
Lowenthal, D. 1985 The Past is a Foreign Country. Cambridge University Press.
Lubbock, J. 1865 Prehistoric Times as Illustrated by Ancient Remains and the Manners
   and Customs of Modern Savages. Williams and Northgate, London.
Lyotard, J.-F. 1984 The Postmodern Condition. University of Minnesota Press.
       1991 The Inhuman. Polity Press, Cambridge.
Marcus, G. 1995 Ethnography in/of the World Systems: the emergence of
   multi-sited ethnography. Annual Review ofAnthropology 24, 95-117.
       and Fischer, M. 1986 Anthropology as Cultural Critique. University of Chi-
  cago Press.
220   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Matthews,    W., French,    C., Lawrence,     T. and Cutler, D.       1996   Multiple
  surfaces: the micromorphology. In I. Hodder (ed.) On the Surface. McDonald
  Archaeological Institute and the British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara,
  pp301-42:
McGlade,J.and van der Leeuw, S. 1997 Time, Process and Structured Transforma-
  tion in Archaeology. Routledge, London.
McGuire, R. 1992 A Marxist Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
       and Saitta, D. 1996 Although they have petty captains, they obey them
   badly: the dialectics of prehispanic western Pueblo social organisation.
  American Antiquity 61, 197-216.
Mellaart,J. 1967 Catal Huyuk. Thames and Hudson, London.
Merriman, N. 1991 Beyond the Glass Case. Leicester University Press.
Meskell, L. 1995 Goddesses, Gimbutas and New Age archaeology. Antiquity
   69, 74-86.
—— 1996 The somatisation of archaeology: institutions, discourses, corpor-
   eality. Norwegian Archaeological Review 29, 1-16.
       1997 Electronic Egypt: the shape of archaeological knowledge on the
   net. Antiquity 71, 1073-6.
—— 1998 Intimate archaeologies: the case of Kha and Merit. World Archae-
   ology 29, 363-79.
Metcalfe, D. and Heath, K. M.          1990 Microrefuse      and site structure: the
  hearths and floors of the Heartbreak Hotel. American Antiquity 55, 781-96.
Middleton, W. and Price, T. 1997 Chemical analysis of soils from modern and
   archaeological house floors by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emis-
   sion Spectroscopy. Journal ofArchaeological Science.
Miller, D. 1982 Artifacts as products of human categorisation processes. In
   I. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge University
   Press, pp. 89-98.
       1985 Artefacts as Categones. Cambridge University Press.
—— 1997 Maternal Cultures. University College London Press.
       and Tilley, C. 1984 Ideology, Power and Prehistory. Cambridge University
   Press.
Mithen, S. 1996 The Prehistory of the Mind: A Search for the Origins ofArt, Science and
   Religion. Thames and Hudson, London.
Mithen, S. 1998 Creatwity in Human Evolution and Prehistory. Routledge,
   London.
Mizoguchi, K. 1992 A historiography of a linear barrow cemetery: a structur-
   ationist’s point of view. Archaeological Review from Cambridge 11, 39-50.
Molleson, T. 1994 Can the degree of sexual dimorphism provide an insight
   into the position of women in past populations? Dossier de Documentation
   Archaeologique 17, 51-67.
Molyneaux, B. 1997 The Cultural Life ofImages: Visual Representation in Archaeology.
   Routledge, London.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY      221

Montelius, O. 1885 Om tids bestiimning inom bronsdldern med sarskild hansyn till
   Skandinavien. Kongl. Vitterhets Historie och Antiqvitets Akademiens Han-
   dlingar, 30.
Moore, H. 1990 Paul Ricoeur: action, meaning and text. In C. Tilley (ed.)
   Reading Material Culture. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 85-120.
—— 1995 The problems of origins: poststructuralism and beyond. In
   I. Hodder et al. (eds) Interpreting Archaeology. Routledge, London, pp. 51-3.
Morris, I. 1991 The archaeology of ancestors: the Saxe/Goldstein rien
   revisited. Cambndge Archaeological Journal 1, 147-69.
Miiller, S. O. 1884 Mindre Bidrag til den fovbdstduiske Archaeologis methode.
   Aarboger for Nordisk Oldkyndighed of Historie, 161-216.
Munsen, P. J. 1969 Comments on Binford’s ‘Smudge pits and hide smoking’.
   American Antiquity 34, 83-5.
Negroponte, N. 1996 Being Digital. Hodder and Stoughton, London.
Nicholas, G. P. 1997 Archaeology, education, and the Secwepemc. Society for
   American Archaeology Bulletin 15:2, 8-11.
Olsen, B. 1990 Roland Barthes: from sign to text. In C. Tilley (ed.) Reading
  Maternal Culture. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 163-205.
Olsen, B. 1991 Metropolises and satellites in archaeology. In R. Preucel (ed.)
   Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies. Southern Illinois University, Centre
   for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional Paper 10, 211-24.
Orme, B. 1981 Anthropology for Archaeologists: An Introduction. Duckworth,
   London.
Paddaya, K. 1995 Theoretical perspectives in Indian archaeology: an histor-
   ical view. In P. Ucko (ed.) Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspective. Routledge,
   London, pp. 110-49.
Palattella, J. 1995 Formatting patrimony: the rhetoric of hypertext. Afiernmage
   23%
Paranjpe, M. 1990 The invasion of ‘theory’: an Indian response. New Quest 81,
   [Siri
Parker Pearson, M. 1982 Mortuary practices, society and ideology: an eth-
   noarchaeological study. In I. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology.
   Cambridge University Press.
— 1993 The powerful dead: archaeological relationships between the living
   and the dead. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3, 203-29.
Patrik, L. 1985 Is there an archaeological record? In M. Schiffer (ed.) Advances
   in Archaeological Method and Theory 8. Academic Press, New York.
Patterson, T. C. 1995 Toward a Social History of Archaeology in the United States.
  Harcount, Brace, Font Worth, ‘Texns.
Petrie, F. 1904 Methods and Aims in Archaeology. London.
Pinsky, V. and Wylie, A. (eds) 1989 Cntical Traditions in Contemporary Archaeology.
   Cambridge University Press.
Pitt-Rivers, A. H. L. F. 1887 Excavations in Cranborne Chase (4 vols).
222     BIBLIOGRAPHY

Pitt-Rivers, A. H. L. F. 1894 Excavation of the South Lodge Camp, Rush-
   more Park: an entrenchment of the Bronze Age. Wiltshire Archaeological and
   Natural History Magazine 27, 206-22.
       1896 The Evolution of Culture and other Essays. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Popper, K. 1992 The Logte of Scientifie Discovery. Routledge, London.
Porter, D. 1997 Internet Culture. Routledge, New York.
Preucel, R. and Hodder, I. (eds) 1996 Contemporary Archaeology in Theory. Black-
  well, Oxford.
Quine, W. V. 1992 Pursuit of Truth. Harvard University Press, Gambridge, MA.
Ranger, T. and Hobsbawm, E. 1983 The Jnvention of Tradition. Cambridge
   University Press.
Rao, N. 1994 Interpreting silences: symbol and history in the case of Ram
  Janmabhoomi/Babri Masjid. In G. Bond and A. Gilliam (eds) Social Con-
   struction of the Past: Representation ofPower. Routledge, London, pp. 154-64.
Rathje, W. and Murphy, C. 1992 Rubbesh! The archaeology of Garbage. Harper
      Collins, New York.
       and Thompson, B. 1981 The Milwaukee Garbage Project. American Paper
   Institute, Solid Waste Council of the Paper Industry, Washington, D. C.
Reilly, P. and Rahtz, S. 1992 Archaeology and the Information Age. A Global
   Perspective. Routledge, London.
Renfrew, A. C. and Bahn, P. 1991 (2nd edition 1996) Archaeolegy. Thames and
   Hudson.
Renfrew, C. 1973 Before Ciwilisation. Cape, London.
      1989 Comments on ‘Archaeology into the 1990s’. Norwegian Archaeological
  Review. 22, 33-41.
——and Zubrow, E. 1994 The Ancient Mind: Elements of Cognitive Archaeology.
  Cambridge University Press.
Richards, C. 1991 The late Neolithic house in Orkney. In R. Samson (ed.) The
   Social Archaeology of Houses. Edinburgh University Press.
—— 1996 Henges and water. Joumal of Material Culture. 1, 313-36.
Ricoeur, P. 1971 The model of the text: meaningful action considered as text.
   Social Research. 38, 529-62.
Rick, J. and Hart, D. 1997 Panoramic virtual reality and archaeology. Society
  Sor Amencan Archaeology Bulletin 15, 14-19.
Rosen, A. M. 1986 Cities of Clay: The Geoarchaeology of Tells. University of
   Chicago Press.
Rowlands, M. 1984 Objectivity and subjectivity in archaeology. In M. Spriggs
   (ed.) Marxist Perspectives in Archaeology. Cambridge University Press.
—— 1993 The role of memory in the transmission of culture. World Archae-
   ology. 25, 141-51.
Said, E. 1978 Onentalism. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Salmon, M. 1982 Philosophy and Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Schiffer, M. 1976 Behavioural Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY     223
——~ 1987 Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record. University of New
   Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
—— 1988 The structure of archaeological theory. American Antiquity 53,
  461-85.
Schlanger, N. 1990 Techniques as human action: two perspectives. Archae-
   ological Raew from Cambridge 9, 18-26.
Schnapp, A. 1993 La Conquéte du Passé. Editions Carré, Paris.
Schutkowski, H. 1993 Sex determination of infant and juvenile skeletons.
   AFPA 9, 199-205.
Scruton, R. 1982 A Dictionary of Political Thought. Macmillan, London.
Shankland, D. 1996 The anthropology of an archaeological presence. In
   1. Hodder (ed.) On the surface. British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara
   and McDonald Institute of Archaeology, Cambridge.
Shanks, M. 1992 Experiencing the Past: On the Character ofArchaeology. Routledge,
   London.
——and McGuire, R. 1996 The craft of archaeology. American Antiquity 61,
   75-88.
—— and Tilley, C. 1987 Reconstructing Archaeology. Cambridge University Press.
Sharer, R. J. and Ashmore, W. 1993 Archaeology: Discovering our Past. Mayfield,
   Mountain View.                                 .
Shennan, S. 1986 Central Europe in the third millennium gc: an evolutionary
   trajectory for the beginning of the Bronze Age. Journal of Anthropological
  Archaeology 5, 115-46.
      1989 Cultural transmission and cultural change. In S. E. van der Leeuw
  and R. Torrence (eds) What’s Naw? Unwin Hyman, London, pp. 330-46.
Sherratt, A. 1961 Plough and pastoralism. In I. Hodder, G. Isaac and
   N. Hammond (eds) Pattern of the Past. Cambridge University Press.
       1982 Mobile resources: settlement and exchange in early agricultural
   Europe. In C. Renfrew and S. Shennan (eds) Ranking, Resource and Exchange.
   Cambridge University Press.
       1990 The genesis of megaliths. World Archaeology 22, 147-67.
—— 1993 What would a Bronze Age world system look like? Jounal of
   European Archaeology 1.2, \-58.
—— 1995 Reviving the grand narrative. Archaeology and long-term change.
  Journal of European Archaeology 3, 1-32.
Smith, L. 1994 Heritage management as post-processual Archaeology. Anti-
   quity 68, 300-9.
Smith, M. A. 1955 The limitations of inference in archaeology. Archaeological
  Newslett 6, 3-7.
Sorensen, M. L. S. 1997 Material culture and typology. Current Swedish Archae-
   ology 5, 179-92.
Spector, J. 1993 What This Awl Means. Minnesota Historical Society, St Paul.
Sperber, D. 1975 Rethinking Symbolism. Cambridge University Press.
224   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Spindler, K. 1993 The Man in the Ice. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
Stanislawski, M. B. 1978 Hopi and Hopi-Tewa ceramic tradition networks. In
   I. Hodder (ed.) Spatial Organisation of Culture. Duckworth, London.
Swidler, N., Dongoske, K. E., Anyaon, R. and Downer, A. S. (eds) 1997 Natwe
   Americans and Archaeologists. Altamira Press, Walnut Creek.
Tarlow, S. 1992 Each slow dusk a drawing down of blinds. Archaeological Review
  from Cambridge 11, 125-40.
Thieme, F. P. 1957 Sex in Negro skeletons. Journal ofForensic Medicine 4, 72-81.
Thomas,J. 1987 Relations of production and social change in the Neolithic of
   north-west Europe. Man 22, 405-30.
        1990 Same, other, analogue: writing the past. In F. Baker andJ.Thomas
   (eds) Writing the Past in the Present. St David’s University College, Lampeter,
   pp:l8s23:.
—— 1993 Discourse, totalisation and “The Neolithic’. In C. Tilley (ed.) Jnter-
   pretative Archaeology. Berg, Oxford, pp. 357-94.
—— 1995 Where are we now?: archaeological theory in the 1990s. In P. Ucko
   (ed.) Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspective. Routledge, London, pp. 343-
   62.
—— 1996 Time, Culture and Identity. Routledge, London.
       and Tilley, C. 1993 The axe and the torso: symbolic structures. In
   C. Tilley (ed.) Interpretative Archaeology. Berg, Oxford, pp. 225-324.
Thomas, S. 1996 On the use of hypertext in archaeological site interpretation.
   Paper presented at TAG, Liverpool, December 1996.
—— 1997 Archaeology and Subjectwity. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Univer-
   sity of Cambridge.
Tilley, C. 1989a Archaeology as theatre. Antiquity 63, 275-80.
        1989b Discourse and power: the genre of the Cambridge inaugural. In
   D. Miller, M. Rowlands and C. Tilley (eds) Domination and Resistance. Unwin
    Hyman, London, pp. 41-62.
—— 1990 Reading Material Culture. Blackwell, Oxford.
—— 1991 The Art ofAmbiguity: Material Culture and Text. Routledge, London.
—— 1993 Interpretatwe Archaeology. Berg, Oxford.
—— 1994 The Phenomenology of Landscape. Berg, London.
Tixier, J. 1974 Glossary for the Description of Stone tools. Newsletter of Lithic
   Technology, Special Publication | (Translated by M. Newcomer).
Treherne, P. 1995 The warrior’s beauty: the masculine body and self-identity
   in Bronze-Age Europe. Journal of European Archaeology 3, 105-44.
Trigger, B. 1980 Gordon Childe: Revolutions in Archaeology. Thames and Hudson,
    London.
        1984 Alternative archaeologies: nationalist, colonialist, imperialist. Man
    199355770)
——— 1989 Hyperrelativism, responsibility, and the social sciences. Canadian
   Review of Sociology and Anthropology 26, 776-97.
                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY     225

—— 1995 Archaeology and the integrated circus. Critique of Anthropology 15,
   219-35
—— 1998 Archaeology and epistemology: dialoguing across the Darwinian
  chasm. American Journal ofArchaeology 102, 1-34.
Tringham, R. 1991 Households with faces: the challenge of gender in pre-
  historic architectural remains. In J. Gero and M. Conkey (eds) Engendering
  Archaeology. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 93-131.
       1994 Engendered places in prehistory. Gender, Place and Culture 1:2, 169-
   203.
——— 2000 Expressing the feminist practice of archaeology through hyperme-
  dia opera. In M. Conkey and A. Wylie (eds) Practicing Archaeology as a Feminist.
   School of American Research Press.
Tschauner, H. 1996 Middle-range theory, behavioural archaeology, and post-
  empiricist philosophy of science in archaeology. Journal of Archaeological
  Method and Theory 3, 1-30.
Turner, B. S. 1994 Orientalism, Postmodernism and Globalism Routledge, London.
Ucko, P. 1987 Academic Freedom and Apartheid: The Story of the World Archaeological
   Congress. Duckworth, London.
      (ed.) 1995 Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspectwe. Routledge, London.
van der Leeuw, S. 1989 Risk, perception, innovation. In van der S. Leeuw and
   R. Torrence (eds) What’s New? Unwin Hyman, London, pp. 300-29.
      and Torrence, R. (eds) 1989 What’s New? Unwin Hyman, London.
van Reybrouck, D. 1998 Imaging and imagining the Neanderthal: the role of
   technical drawings in archaeology. Antiquity 72, 56-64.
Watson, P. J., Leblanc, S. and Redman,        C. 1971 Explanation n Archaeology
  Columbia University Press, London.
—— 1986 Archaeological interpretation, 1985. In D. J. Meltzer, D. Fowler
   and J. A. Sabloff 1986 American Archaeology. Past and Future. Smithsonian
   Institution Press, Washington, pp. 439-58.
       and Kennedy, M. C. 1991 The development of horticulture in the
   eastern woodlands of North America: women’s role. In J. Gero and
   M. Conkey (eds) Engendering Archaeology. Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 255-75.
Watson, R. A. 1991 What the New Archaeology has accomplished. Current
   Anthropology. 32, 275-91.
Wheeler, M. 1956 Archaeology from the Earth. Oxford University Press.
White, J. P. and Thomas, D. H. 1972 What mean these stones? Ethno-
   taxonomic models and archaeological interpretations in the New Guinea
   Highlands. In D. Clarke (ed.) Models in Archaeology. Methuen, London, pp.
   PHecNs ®
Williamson, T. and Bellamy, L. 1983 Ley Lines in Question. World’s Work,
   Kingswood.
Wolf, E. R. 1982 Europe and the People Without History. University of California
   Press, Berkeley.
226   BIBLIOGRAPHY

Wylie, A. 1982 Epistemological issues raised by a structuralist archaeology. In
   I. Hodder (ed.) Symbolic and Structural Archaeology. Cambridge University
   Press, pp. 39-46.
       1985 The reaction against analogy. In M. Schiffer (ed.) Advances in
   Archaeological Method and Theory 8, 63-111. Academic Press, New York.
       1989 Archaeological cables and tacking: the implications of practice for
   Bernstein’s ‘Options beyond objectivism and relativism’. Philosophy of the
   Social Sciences 19 1-18.
       1992 The interplay of evidential constraints and political interests: recent
   archaeological research on gender. American Antiquity 57, 15-35.
       1994 On ‘capturing facts alive in the past’ (or present): response to
   Fotiadis and to Little. American Antiquity 59, 556-60.
Yates, T. 1989 Habitus and social space. In I. Hodder (ed.) The Meanings of
   Things. Unwin Hyman, London, pp. 249-62.
—— 1990 Jacques Derrida: ‘there is nothing outside of the text’. In C. Tilley
   (ed.) Reading Material Culture. Blackwell, London, pp. 206-80.
       1993 Frameworks for an archaeology of the body. In C. Tilley (ed.)
   Interpretative Archaeology. Berg, Oxford, pp. 31-72.
Yoffee, N. 1994 Memorandum to Murray Gell-Mann concerning: the com-
   plications of complexity in the prehistoric southwest. In G. Gummerman
   and M. Gell-Mann (eds) Understanding Complexity in the Prehistoric Southwest.
   Addison Wesley, New York, pp. 341-58.
       and Sherratt, A. (eds) 1993 Archaeological Theory: Who Sets the Agenda.
   Cambridge University Press.
York, P. 1980 Style Wars. Sidgwick and Jackson, London.
 Index




Abhinavagupta, 158                    Anyon, R., 7
aboriginals, 8, 115, 158, 205-6       archaeobotanists, 10
Adams, M., 2, 6, 170, 171, 172        Archaeologia, |
Africa, 151, 152                      archaeological objects see objects
agency, 71, 131                       archaeological process, 178-9
   origins, 175                       archaeological reasoning, 30-65
   postprocessual archaeology, 12,       analogy and comparison, 45-9,
      B53                                  107
   processual archaeology, 13           data-led, 51-2, 62, 63
agriculture, 59, 175                    diversity, 10-11, 57
agrios, 143                             method is interpretation
Alpine Ice Man, 13, 137-45, 175-6         dependent, 52-3
analogy, 45-9, 107                      multiple working hypotheses, 57-8
Analytic Philosophy, 22, 24-5, 29       narratives, 53-6, 63
Anandavadhana, 158                       pre-understandings, 32, 33, 34-42,
Andes, 164                                 495i y.52,, 53, 62865
animal bones identification, 11, 16      productive tensions, 58-9
  Haddenham causewayed                   whole-part relationships, 32-45,
     enclosure, 35, 36, 37                 53, 56, 62
Annales school, 130                   Archaeological Resource
Annapolis, 187                             Management, 170-3
anthropology, 10, 67, 157             archaeological writing, 173-4
   Catalhoyiik, 97-8, 192, 194        archaeology
antiquarianism, 1, 195                  boundaries of, 6-7, 195-6, 198-9
228   INDEX

archaeology (contd.)                      past as other, 154
  object of, 1.2.9 sl 5sk2                reinterpretation of sites, 60
  philosophy of, 3, 22-9                  structurationist theories, 5, 132,
  social relevance, 14                       133, 134, 135, 136
  spatio-temporalization of, 63,       Barthes, R., 158, 180, 181, 183, 186
     178-80, 187                       Baudrillard, J., 162
  specialisms, 9-13                    Beaker Culture, 70
  systems view of archaeological       Bechtel, W., 76
    process, 3, 4                      beer can studies, 9
  universal methods, 2-3, 5-6, 153,    being, 14
      205                              Bell|p of 22
Archaeology from the Earth, 2          Bellamy, L., 6
architectural reconstruction, 9        Bender, B:; 6, 92, 95
Arizona, 73                            Berlin, B., 85
Arizona Archaeological Council, 7      Bernbeck, R., 162
Arnold, B., 59                         Bersu, 11
Arnold, D., 85                         Bharata, 158
Arroya Seco, 69                        Binford, L. R., 2, 13, 39
artifacts see objects                     explanation, 70
Ashmore, W., 99                           hunter-gatherrer settlement
Asia, 152                                  systems, 46
Assemblage, 182                          hypothesis testing, 20, 21
Auel, Jean, 6, 56                        lack of authority and control, 19
Australia                                matrilocal residence hypothesis,
   archaeological methods, 205             20
   reburial debate, 7, 196               Middle Range Theory, 3, 27
   see also aboriginals                  processual archaeology, 3, 12
authorship, 173-4, 199                   threat of multivocality, 6
automization, 77                       Binford, S., 20
Avebury, 204                           Bintliff, J., 6, 19, 130
Aymara, 158                            black shales studies, 107
Ayodhya, 162                           bladelets, 89-90
                                       blades
Bahn, P., 3, 98, 100-1, 200               distinction from bladelets, 89-90
Bailey, G., 130                           distinction from flakes, 89
Baines, J., 85                         Bloch, M., 75
Bakhtin, M., 183                       body/mind duality, 133
Bapty, I., 8, 78, 125, 181, 182, 184   Bolivia, 158
Barba, L. A., 17                       Bourdieu, P., 77, 132
Barfield, L., 138                      Bradley, R., 130, 133, 134
Barham, A. J., 110, 111                Braun, D. P., 91
Barker, P., 21,'33, 80)82-3,:121       Bridge Creek Limestone, 107
Barnes, G., 9                          Britain
Barrett, J., 70, 126, 130                 class representation, 75
   fragmentation of texts, 182            development corporations, 15
                                                                      INDEX   229

  Haddenham causewayed                    information technology, 120-7,
    enclosure, 34-40, 49, 51, 99             190<15492-3
  Haddenham long barrow, 54, 55,          interactivity, 96-8, 188, 189-90,
    57                                       193,195            ;
  prehistory, 132-7                       methodology, 96-8, 120-7,
  regional traditions, 9-10, 164            188-93
  social milieux, 2                       micromorphology, 112, 113
  trowel types, 50                        midden dump, 52
British Telecom-MCI,      185             multivocality, 192, 195
Bronze Age, 135, 174                      narratives, 192-3
Brooke;.G,,: 265170 cdi tinh 72           pre-understandings, 40-2, 49
Brothwell, D., 115                        recursive excavation process, 102
Brumfiel, L., 78                          reflexivity, 96-8, 120-7, 188-93,
building ‘fill’, 86                          194
burial sites                              team boundaries, 124-5, 181, 198
   contextual information, 90-1           video records,..122,,123=>4,.191,
   Haddenham long barrow, 54, 55,            194, 195
     Dd                                   virtual reality, 125, 126, 193, 195
   Hohokam, 45                            World Wide Web presence, 124-5,
   individual rites, 143                     192, 195
  plant remains, 88                     catalogue lists, 53
   see also reburial debate             causality, 70, 131, 183
Butler,
      J., 179                           causewayed enclosures, Haddenham,
                                             34-40, 49, 51, 99
Calgano, J. M., 115                     cave excavations, 9
Cambridge Disney Professor              Centre for Art and Media-
  Inaugural Lecture, 173                     Technology, 124
Cambridge Palaeoeconomy School,         ceramic study groups, 10
    24                                  ceramics
camcorders, 150                            identification, 16
Canada, Native Americans, 7                micro-sampling, 17
Cape Town, 163                             residence patterns, 20
capitalism, 175, 201                    ceramics specialist, 11
Garver, M.;/6;-21;:22;.80,; 121,128     Chadwick, A., 6, 83, 120
Castells, E., 148, 149-50, 151, 152,    Champion, T. C., 12, 162, 179
      159; 201                          change, 63, 129-31
Catalhoyiik, 119                        Chaos Theory, 146, 183
  anthropologists, 97-8, 192, 194       charcoal identification, 114
  contextuality, 120-1, 188, 189, 194   Childe, V. G., 8,.12, 14, 143, 174
  diaries}-#21=3,11 919 194; 195        Chile, 205
  diverse excavation methods, 193,      Chimera Web, 125, 184
     195                                Chippindale, C., 6
  faultlines interpretation, 103-4      Civate group, 138
  global process versus local           Clark, Graham,        14, 170, 199, 205
     heritage, 165-9, 176-7, 187        Clark,J. E., 89
230   INDEX

Clarke, D. L.                           consumer culture, 148, 150, 153,
  indiscipline, 19                          154, 201
  loss of innocence, 12, 153            contextuality, 43, 176, 179
  phases of archaeology, 58               analogy and comparison, 47-9
  systems view of archaeological          Catalhéyiik, 120-1, 188, 189,
     process, 3, 4                           194
   universal methods, 2, 7                construction by theory, 85-6
Classical archaeology, 9, 10, 90          effect on interpretation, 68
Clifford, J., x1                          effect on pre-understandings, 50
climate change, 51                        effect on questions asked, 50, 51
Coca-Cola, 201                            fixed definition of, 93
codification, 2, 83, 95, 117-18, 170,     general and the particular, 70-1,
      189, 191                              Powis
cognitive processual archaeology, 5,      globalism, 165
      13                                  meaning, 48, 85, 103, 194
cognitive psychology, 76                  and objects, 84, 86-92, 194
Cohen, J., 53                             postprocessual archaeology, 153
coherence, 33-45, 60-1, 62, 178           single context recording
   narratives, 53, 56                       techniques, 10, 31, 93-4, 121,
  productive tensions, 58                   igil:
Coles,J., 9, 26, 46                        soil context, 85-6, 118
Collingwood, R. G., 12, 34              Continental Philosophy, 12, 23, 25
commercialism, heritage, 202-3, 204     contingency, 129, 130, 173, 175
communication technologies, 149,        contract archaeology, x, 31, 117
     [50;-f51=2; 202                       competitive tendering, 83, 197
comparison, 45—9                           impact on field methods, 3
competitive tendering, 83, 197             resource management, 170,
A Complete Manual of Field                   171-3
  Archaeology, 81                          single-context recording, 121
complexity theory, 129                  corporate agreement, 59
computers, 117—18, 127-8, 149-50,       Courbin, P., 3, 20-1
      164-5                             Creationists, 6, 195
   Catalhoytik, 120-7, 190-1, 192-3     creativity, 42, 71-2, 178
   see also World Wide Web              Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway,
Condori, Mamani, 158, 206                     107
Conkey, M.                              Critical Theory, 184
  feminism, 5, 8, 123                   Crown, P., 44-5
  interactivity, 187                    cultural diversity, 201
  matrifocal society, 154               Cultural Resource Management, 2,
  Mother Goddess cults, 6                    163," 1970-35189 207
  multivocality, 195                    cultural transforms, 21, 27, 28
  origins, 8, 175                       culture, choice of, 179
  sexing, 114                           Cumra, 168-9
Conolly,J., 89, 90                      ‘cut’ category, 94
conservation, 15, 148                   Cyprus, 137
                                                                       INDEX   231

Daniel, G., 15, 105                         objects and aims of archaeology,
Darwinism, 47, 129                            9515; 7
data, x, 84-92                              origins, 175
   collection of, xi                        postprocessual archaeology, 5,
   definition, 84                              154, 156
   influence on reasoning, 51-2, 62,      Dobres, M.-A., 75, 132
      63                                  domination, 63, 156, 209
   link between coherence and               digital technologies, 185-6
      correspondence, 33-45, 53, 56,      domus, 135, 143
      58, 60-1, 62, 178                   dress, symbolic meaning, 74
  significance identification, 49         Druids, 6, 204
   and theory, 1, 2, 24, 30, 40, 59-62,   Dunnell, R. C., 5, 24, 47, 129
      64-5, 80-4, 200                     Durham University, 171
   see also pre-understandings
Davis, M. B., 114                         Eco, U., 162
de-centring, 181—2                        Ecofeminist groups, 154, 163
Deir el Medina, 137                       Edmonds, M., 35
Deleuze, G., 114                          Egg, M., 138
Denmark, 90                               Egyptians, ancient, 18, 137
Denzin, N. K., 60                         electronic planning, 118
Derrida,   J., 73, 158, 181, 182, 183,    Emele, M., 174
      186                                 empiricism, 1, 30
description                               empowerment, 161, 162-3, 164-5,
   and evaluation, 24                         176
   and interpretation, 66-9, 80-3, 99,    Engelstad, E., 5, 156, 186
      102                                 English Heritage, 172
development corporations, 15, 17          environmental conservation, 15, 148
dialectics, 25, 65, 80, 132               Epipalaeolithic, 89
diaries, 31, 96, 182                      Erickson, C. L., 50
   Catalhéytik, 121-3, 191, 194, 195      ethnoarchaeology, 26-7, 30
Diaz-Andreu, M., 162, 179                 ethnographic analogy, 45-6
Dietler, M., 162                          ethnography, x, xi, 73, 112
differance, 156                           ethnomethodology, 13
difference, 153-4, 176                    ethnotaxonomy, 85
   analogy and comparison, 46,            Etienne, Saint, 18
      47-9                                European Court of Human Rights,
   globalism, 151                              151
   poststructuralism, 156                 European Heritage Sites, 162, 202
digital photography, 118, 124             evaluation, and description, 24
digital technologies, 180-7               Evans, C., 11, 38, 55
ditches, dating of, 88                    events, and structure, 131
diversity, 6-8, 17-19, 173-6, 196         Evershed, R., 17
   in archaeological reasoning,           evolutionary theory, 129-30
      1OxkIgS7                            excavation
   global, 152-61, 176, 178, 201             changes in field methods, 3
232     INDEX

excavation (contd.)                       Forte, M., 126, 183
   classical archaeology, 9               Fotiadis, M., 23-4, 159
      destructive nature of, 26, 55, 93   Foucault, M., 170, 186
      emphasis on, 103                      decentred subject, 182
      historical examples, 18               description, 67
      and interpretation, 81-3, 92-8,       historical ruptures, 129
     103, 190                               non-linearity, 183
  Palaeolithic archaeology, 9               sexing, 114
  unifying theme, 18-19                      text as networks and links, 180
  variations in methods, 2, 10, 164,      Fowler, P., 162
     193;8195                             fragmentation, 149, 153
  see also recording systems                globalism, 150, 161, 201
existentialism, 25                          information technology, 165,
experimental archaeology, 26, 29, 30,         20142
     46, 82                                 of texts, 182
experimental geology, 106-7               Friedman, J., 199, 200
explanation, 24                           Frey p22
   and interpretation, 69-70              Frodeman, R., 22, 24, 26, 32, 106,
                                              107
facts see data                            Fukuyama, F., 149
farming tools, 9                          funding, 50
faunal specialists, 10
Fawcett, C., 6, 19, 159                   Gaia movement,    163
Featherstone, M., 150, 151, 154           garbage bag investigation, 73-4
feminism, 5, 8, 14                        Gardin, J.-C., 3, 20
   diaries, 123                           Gardner, D. S., 13
   multivocality, 183, 195                Garfinkle, A., 68
   narratives, 53                         Garn, S., 115
   origins, 175                           Gates, Bill, 150-1
Ferguson, L., 78, 154                     Gathercole, P., 184
Fischer, M., 157                          Geertz, C., 63, 67
Fish, S., 44-5                            Gell-Mann, M., 129
fitting, concept of, 33-45, 59-62,        gender
      64-5                                  bias and data description, 69
fixity, 63, 178-9, 191                      Hohokam, 44-5
flags, symbolic meaning, 74               gender archaeology, 23
flake side-scrapers, 90                   general understandings, 70-1, 79, 178
flakes, distinction from blades, 89       geoarchaeology, 108-12
Flannery, K., 130, 199                    geology, 18, 105-8
flexible work, 150, 201                   geophysical prospection, 26
fluidity, 63, 93-4, 133, 173, 176         Germany, regional traditions, 9
Foley R..013,/197                         Gero,J., 61, 147
folklore, 1                                 Arroya Seco, 69
foraging societies, 46                      feminism, 5, 8
Forster, E. M., 33                          field diaries, 123
                                                                    INDEX     233

   multivocality, 195                    Hall, M., 163
   sexing, 114                           Halton, E., 154
   social context, 68                    Hamilton, Carolyn, 58, 97-8
   tool types, 90                        Harris, E. C., 109, 110, 119, 120
Gibbs, L., 114                           Harris matrix, 109, 110, 111, 112,
Giddens, A., 77, 132, 133                     119, 120
Gillespie, A., 185                       Hart; D32)26
Gimbutas, M., 154, 186-7, 206            Hastorf, C., 78, 88, 114
global archaeology, mapping, 205-7       Hawkes, C., 21
global economy, 161                      Heath, K. M., 17
globalism, 148-77                        Heidegger, M., 32, 132
   diversity, 152-61, 176, 178, 201      Heizer, R. F., 2
   fragmentation, 165, 201-2             Hempel, C., 22
  heritage, 161—9, 202-5                 heritage, x, 6
  homogenization, 150-1, 161, 201,         aims to reach wider audience, 15
     205                                   commercialism, 202-3, 204
   information flows, 200-2                global versus local, 162, 165-9,
   multivocality, 183                         176-7, 187
  versus local heritage, 162, 165—9,       interpretive centres, 148, 163, 187
      176-7, 187                           mapping, 202-5
goddess groups, 154, 155, 186-7            modern and postmodern, 161—5
  conflict with archaeologists, 6, 195     postprocessual archaeology, 5, 12
  identity formation, 203                  reflexivity, 173, 184
  symbolism, 163                           theme parks, 7, 154, 155-6, 162,
Goedecker-Ciolek, R., 138, 141                163
Goldstein, L., 90                        hermeneutic circle, 28, 32-3, 64,
Golson, J., 13                                106, 178
Gosden, C., 5, 14, 132, 135              hermeneutic, double, 25, 28, 105
Gould, S. J., 107, 129                   hermeneutic, single, 25, 28, 105
grand narratives, 5, 13, 146-7, 149,     hermeneutic spiral, 33, 39, 43, 51
     LSS 73                              hermeneutics, 25, 29, 30, 32-3
Grdaslund, B., 86                          geology, 106
Greece, regional traditions, 9-10        Hesse, M., 22
Greenland Ice Sheet Project, 107         Higgs, Eric, 21, 51, 52, 56
Grenville, J., 68, 69, 92                Pill,J.D., 35, 37, 48, 154
ground stone, 16                         Historic Buildings and Monuments
Guattari, F., 114                             Commission, 171
Guba, E. G., 60                          historical archaeology, 71, 137
Gumerman, G., 129                        historical ruptures, 129
                                         history, postprocessual archaeology,
Haddenham causewayed enclosure,                12
    99                                   Hobsbawm, E., 130, 149
  data-led reasoning, 51                 Hodder, I.
  pre-understandings, 34-40, 49             agrios, 143
Haddenham long barrow, 54, 55, 57           archaeological writing, 173
234   INDEX

Hodder, I. (conéd.)                      Cultural Resource Management,
  Catalhéyiik, 96, 119, 120, 126,           170
     165, 188                            ethnographic information, 27
  causal mechanisms, 70                  geology, 107
  contextuality, 153                     multiple working, 57-8
  ethnographic analogy, 46               narrow perspective critique, 56
  fragmentation of texts, 182            postprocessual archaeology, 153
  Haddenham causewayed
      enclosure, 34, 37, 38            Ice Man, 13, 137-45, 175-6
  Haddenham long barrow, 55            identity formation, 154, 155-6, 201,
  hermeneutic spiral, 33                    202, 208
  material culture and language, 74       based on heritage, 203-4
  narratives, 53, 175                     influence of World Wide Web, 206
  objectivity, 24                      imagination, 71—2
  objects, 32                          India, 158, 162, 205, 206
  postprocessual archaeology, 5, 12,   individualism, 135-7, 147, 150, 153
    132                                   Alpine Ice Man, 13, 137-45
  reading the past metaphor, 63        industrial archaeology, 9
  regional traditions, 9               information, increased importance
  relativism, 159                           of, 149
  reproduction of structures, 135      information age, 148, 201
  rhetoric, 61                         information networking, 149-52,
  site reports, 183                         180-7
  state interest, 170                  information superhighway, 185
  systems analysis, 47                 information technology, 117-28,
  theories of change, 130                   148, 149-52, 178-82 20829
  theory and data, 200                    Catalhoyiik, 120-7, 190-1, 192-3
Hohokam, 44-5                             empowerment, 164-5
Holes, 2                                 extension of markets, 161
homogenization                           fragmentation, 165, 201-2
  globalism, 150-1, 161, 201, 205         see also World Wide Web
  heritage, 202                        infra-red photography, 26
  information technology, 165          Inizan, M., 89
Hopi-Tewa, 204                         interactivity, 176, 179
Hudson, K., 2                             Catalhoyiik, 96-8, 188, 189-90,
Huffman, T., 130                             LOSS
Hull. Ks Lydd                             digital technologies, 185, 186-7
Hunter, J., 19, 207                       heritage, 173
hunter-gatherer settlement systems,       Internet, 124-5, 150, 185
     46                                   team boundaries, 198-9
hunter-gatherers, 12                   Internet, 150, 151-2, 183, 185,
hypertext, 125-6, 181-7, 192-3, 195,        186-7, 202
      199                                 Catalhoyiik, 124-5
hypothesis testing, 20-2, 30, 50,      interpretation
      59-60, 62, 64-5                     and coding, 95
                                                                       INDEX   235

  and description, 66-9, 80-3, 99,      Lacan,
                                             J., 114, 158
     102                                Lampeter Archaeology Workshop,
  and excavation methods, 81-3,             103, 159
    92-8, 103, 190                      landfills studies, 9
  and explanation, 69-70                Landow, G. P., 180
  influence on method, 52-3             landscape archaeology, 19
  material culture, 66-79               landscapes, 133-4
   momentary nature of, 43              Langford, R. F., 158
   postprocessual archaeology, 12       language
   theories of change, 131                and material culture, 74-5, 76
   see also archaeological                 post-structuralism, 78
       reasoning; hermeneutics          Laqueur, T., 114
interpretive centres, 148, 163, 187     Laramide orogeny, 107
intersubjective agreement, 59, 62       Lash, S., 151, 154
intertextuality, 181                    Lathrap, D. W., 20
                                        Latour, B., 76, 106, 107
Japan                                   layers, 16, 18, 108-12
  regional traditions, 9, 124, 164      Leblanc, S., 14, 22
  trowel types, 50                      Lechtmann, H., 130
Jarman, M., 21, 51                      leisure industry, 202-3, 204
Jenkins, D., 17                         Lemonnier, P., 76
Johannessen, S., 114                    Lennstrom, H. A., 88
Johnson, M., 70, 71, 137, 175           lenses, excavation of, 16
Jones, W., 9                            Leone, M., 5, 14, 184, 187
Jorgensen, L. B., 141                   Leroi-Gourhan, A., 75
Joukowsky, M., 81, 121                  Lewontin, R., 107, 129
Joyce, R., 53, 125, 174, 180            ley line hunters, 6
                                        libraries, 186
Kay, P., 85                             Lincoln, Y. S., 60
Kelt,J., 130, 131                       Linearbandkeramik,       134
Kennedy, M. C., 46                      linearity, 171, 172
Kester, G., 185                         lithics, 10, 16, 89-90
Knapp, A. B., 51, 114, 130, 136, 137,   Little, B., 23, 160
     200                                Little Rapids site, 53
knowledge                               Llobera, M., 126
   historical nature of, 32, 33         Lloyd, Seton, 2
   practical versus linguistic, 76-7    local, versus global, 162, 165-9,
Kony P96919,-139                              LIGHTS O87
Kosso, P., 27                           long-term continuities, 130, 137
Kristiansen, K., 2, 8                   Lowenthal, D., 162, 184
Kroker, A., 185, 186                    Lubbock,   J., 105
Kuhn, T. S., 25                         Lyotard, J.-F., 17, 149, 164-5, 183-4
Kuis/$3°53; 147; 174
                                        McDonalds, 201
labour market, 149, 150, 161            McGlade, J., 28, 129
236     INDEX

McGuire, R., 6, 26, 132                      sexing, 114
  contract archaeology, 83                   subject/object split, 51, 200
      dialectical thought, 65             metal detector users, 6, 7, 195, 196
  Marxism, 5, 199, 200                    Metcalfe, D., 17
  mediation, 64                           MHP party, 168
  multivocality, 161                      micro-faunal specialists, 10
  objects and aims of archaeology, 17     microdebitage, 17
  puebloan societies, 44                  micromorphology,      11, 16-17, 112,
  testing, 21                                  3
  theory-ladenness of facts, 80           Microsoft, 185
Madagascar, 75                            middens, 16, 52, 86
Maghreb, 89                               Middle Range Theory, 3, 27-8, 29,
magnetic values, 108                           60, 64-5
magnetometer surveys, 26                  Middleton, W., 17
Marcus, G., xi, 157, 197                  Miller, D., 9, 74, 76, 85, 183
Marcus,J., 130, 199                       mind
Marx, Karl, 186                              phenomenology, 132
Marxism, 5, 65, 199, 200                     postprocessual archaeology, 13
material culture, 132, 199                mind/body duality, 133
   interpretation, 66-79                  Minnesota, 53
   postprocessual archaeology, 5          Mississippi valley, 20
matrilocal residence hypothesis, 20       Mithen, S., 13, 72
Matthews, W., 16, 112, 113                Mizoguchi, K., 130
meaning                                   modernism, 149, 152, 153, 174
   change through time, 133                 heritage, 161-5
   different perspectives on, 72-8        Molleson, T., 115-16
   importance of context, 48, 85, 103,    Molyneaux, B., 123, 192
      194                                 Montelius, O., 8, 86
   origins, 175                           monuments, 133-6
   postprocessual archaeology, 12,        Moore, H., 175, 182
      153, 156                            Morris, I., 90
      relational nature of, 103, 194      Mother Goddess cults, 6, 195
      reproduction of structures, 133-6   Miiller, S. O., 86
media society, 149, 201                   multi-national corporations, 185, 201
mediation, 63-4                           multi-sited archaeology, 197-8, 208
Mellaart, James, 119, 166                 multiple working hypotheses, 57-8
memory, 130                               multivocality, 43, 63, 133, 159-61,
Merriman, N., x, 163, 187                      179, 183
Meskell, L.                                  Catalhdyiik, 192, 195
   goddess claims, 6, 154, 206               feminism, 183, 195
   individual bodies, 71, 136, 137           heritage, 6, 173
   interactivity, 187                        postprocessual archaeology, 5, 12
   Internet, 186                            team boundaries, 199
   New Age groups, 14                     Munsell charts, 84, 111
      nostalgic use of heritage, 163      Munsen, P. J., 20
                                                                    INDEX     237
Murphy, C., 9, 73                       nostalgia, 161, 163, 179
Museum of London, 98-9, 100-1           Numa, 18
museums, x, 163, 184, 187
myth, |                                 objectivity, 64, 72, 103-4, 200
Mytilordes mytilordes, 107                data-led reasoning, 51-2
                                          intersubjective agreement, 59
Nagarjuna, 158                            and relativism, 23-4, 159-60
narratives, 53-6, 63, 95-6, 174           see also processual archaeology
   Catalhéyiik, 192-3                   objects, 15-17, 74-5
   geology, 107                           Catalhdyiik, 189-90
   non-linearity, 183-4                   construction by theory, 84-5
   origins, 175                           and contexts, 84, 86-92, 194
   stratigraphic relations, 119-20        fixed definition of, 93
nationalism, 162, 179                      hermeneutic understanding of,
Native Americans, 7, 53, 91, 155,             32-5
     157, 203, 205                         re-assignment of, 118
natural transforms, 21, 27, 28          observations
Negroponte, N., 148                        effect on what is being recorded, 26
neo-Darwinian archaeology, 5, 129,         and theories, 24, 27-8
     146, 205                           obsidian, 166
neo-Marxism, 199, 200                   Occident, 156
Neolithic                               Olsen, B., 50, 181, 203
   Alpine Ice Man, 13, 137-45           ontology, 14
   axes, 15                             operational chains, 75-6
  critical analysis of, 175             Opovo, 125, 184
  Haddenham causewayed                  oral traditions, 7, 53
     enclosure, 34—40, 49, 51, 99       Oriental other, 156
  Haddenham long barrow, 54, 55,        origins, 8, 174-6, 181
     57                                 Orkney, 135
  Linearbandkeramik,         134        Orme, B., 9, 45
   see also Catalhéyiik                 other, 179
net metaphor, 180                         past as, 154, 156-7
New Age groups, 14, 154, 155, 159         textualization of, xi
New Archaeology, 2, 12, 14, 22, 157,
     205                                Paddaya, K., 158
niche marketing, 161, 202               palaeoeconomy, 51, 52
Nicholas, G. P., 53                     palaeoethnobotany, 88-9
non-linearity, 129, 173, 183-4          Palaeolithic archaeology, 9, 10, 51
norms, 131                              Palattella, J., 185, 186
North America                           Pancan, 88
  excavation techniques, 164            Papua New Guinea, 13, 73
  processual archaeology, 59            Paranjpe, M., 158, 206
  puebloan societies, 44                Parker Pearson, M., 90-1, 132
  reburial debate, 7, 162, 196, 205-6   part-whole relationships, 32-45, 62,
  social milieux, 2                          103, 106, 178
240   INDEX

sex, 114-16                                social identity, 2
Shand, P., 55                              social structure, 50
Shanks, M., 6, 26                          Society of Antiquaries of London, 1
  aim of archaeology, 14, 17               soil context, 85-6, 118
  archaeological theory specialisms,       sondages, 82
     12                                    Sorensen, M. L. S., 86
  causal mechanisms, 70                    Spain, 205
  commitment to social engagement,         Spector,  J., 61, 125
     153                                      archaeological writing, 174, 187
  contract archaeology, 83                    catalogue list, 53
  data as resistance to theories, 51         narratives, 53, 184
  experiencing the past, 14                  New Age groups, 14
  focus on individual and agency, 153        virtuality, 183
  fourfold hermeneutic, 25                 Sperber, D., 75
  fragmentation of texts, 182              Spindler, K., 13, 138, 139, 141, 145
  material culture and language, 74        Spitalfields remains, 115-16
  mediation, 64                            sponsorship, 165-7, 206-7
  modern beer cans study, 9                Stanislawski, M.‘B., 20
  postprocessual archaeology, 5, 12,       stone tools, 73, 105
     132                                   Stonehenge, 204
  reflexivity, 184                         story-telling see narratives
  rhizomes, 183                            stratigraphical relations, 39-42, 105,
   testing, 21                                  ELO~12)1 118-20
   time, 130                               structurationist theories, 5, 77, 131,
Sharer, R. J., 99                                132, 133-38
Shennan, S., 47, 129, 143, 183             structured deposition, 34-5
Sherratt, A., 6, 135, 138, 140, 143, 146   style wars, 153
Sherwood Forest, 163                       subject, death and re-birth of, 182
sickle blades, 90                          subjectivity, 24, 51-2, 64, 72, 103-4,
sieving see screening                            200
signs, 74-5, 150                           Sumerians, 18
Siliotti, A., 126, 183                     superposition, 18
similarities, 46, 47—9                     surveillance systems, 185
single context recording                   Swann’s Way, 74-5
    techniques, 10, 31, 93-4, 121, 171     Swidler, N., 53, 157
skills, 50                                 symbolic interactionism, 13
slavery, 154                               symbols, 74-5, 135, 153
Smith, L., 5, 164, 186                     systems analysis, 47
Smith, M. A., 24
social differentiation                     Tarlow, S., 137
   Haddenham causewayed                    ‘Tasmanian Aboriginal Community,
      enclosure, 37-8                            158
   Hohokam, 44-5                           technical operations, 75-6
   use of lithics, 90                      Techniques ofArchaeological
social evolution, 35                          Excavation, 82
                                                                   INDEX     241

telematics, 185                           archaeological writing, 173, 174
television, 150, 201                      causal mechanisms, 70
temporalization, 63, 178-80, 187          commitment to social engagement,
Terminal Skeptical Crisis, 21               153
testing see hypothesis testing            data as resistance to theories, 51
texts                                     decentring of subject, 182
  interpretation of, 32, 57, 63           field methods, 6
  intertextuality, 181                    focus on individual and agency,
  as networks and links, 180-7               ye)
  postprocessual archaeology, 6           fourfold hermeneutic, 25
   readerly and writerly, 181             fragmentation of texts, 182
textualization                            interactivity, 187
   archaeological methods, 31             interpretation, 5, 66-7
   of the other, xi                       material culture and language, 74
theme parks, 7, 154, 155-6, 162, 163      modern beer cans study, 9
Theoretical Archaeology Group             narratives, 53
     (ARQ), 12                            non-linearity, 183
theory, 12-13                             phenomenology, 14, 126, 132
  context construction, 85-6              postprocessual archaeology, 5, 12,
  and data, 1, 2, 24, 30, 40, 59-62,         132
    64-5, 80-4, 200                       reflexivity, 184
  object construction, 84-5               reproduction of structures, 133,
  and observations, 24, 27-8                134, 135, 136, 200
  spatialization, 63                      rhetoric, 62
  and technology, 180-7                   texts as networks, 180
  see also grand narratives;              time, 130
      hypothesis testing; Middle        fame, 130-1, 159
     Range Theory                       Time-Warner, 185
Thermoluminescence,       111           Tixief, J89
Thieme, F. P., 115                      tool types, 90
Thomas, D. H., 73                       tools
Thomas, J., 143                            archaeological, 50
  archaeological theory, 12                farming, 9
  critical analysis of Neolithic, 175      stone, 73, 105
  past as other, 154                    Torrence, R., 199
  phenomenology, 5, 126, 132            tourism, 202-3, 204
  reproduction of structures, 133,      tradition, 130
    134, 135, 200                       translation, 63
Thomas, Sue, 14, 72, 88, 125, 126,      Treasure Hunting, 6
      186                               Treherne, P., 135, 136, 137, 143
Thompson, B., 9, 73                     Trigger, B., 62, 152
Tilley, C.                                creative imagination, 72
   aim of archaeology, 14                 interpretation, 43
  archaeological theory                   multivocality, 6
     specialisms, 12                      Native Americans, 157, 205
242   INDEX

Trigger, B. (contd.)                   Walther’s law, 107
   origins, 175                        warrior elite, 135
   postprocessual archaeology, 5       Watson, P. J., 13, 14, 21, 22, 46
  relativism, 23, 159                  Watson, R. A., 3, 22
Tringham, R.                           Weinstein, M. A., 185, 186
  archaeological writing, 174          Wessex Anarchists, 204
  Chimera Web, 125, 184                Wheeler, M., 2, 10, 22, 158
  interactivity, 187                   White,J. P., 73
  Mother Goddess cults, 6              whole-part relationships, 32-45, 62,
  narratives, 53, 184                       103, 106, 178
   New Age groups, 14, 154                and narratives, 53, 56
trowel types, 50                       Williams, S. H., 8, 175
Tschauner, H., 27, 60                  Williamson, T., 6
Tucson, 73                             Wolf, E. R., 8
Turner, B. S., 7, 132                  Wolle, Anja, 120
                                       women
Ucko, P., 158, 203, 206                  at Catalhoyiik, 167-8
uncertainty, 66-7, 71, 153, 173, 178     ethnographic analogy, 46
uniformitarianism, 107                   Hohokam, 44-5
unilinear evolution, 59                wood analysis, 114
United States                          Woolgar, S., 106, 107
  black communities, 154               work patterns, 150, 201
  development corporations, 15         World Archaeological Congress, 203
  landfills studies, 9                 World Heritage Sites, 162, 202
  trowel types, 50                        The World of Robin Hood, 163
  see also Native Americans;           World Wide Web, 124-5, 192, 195,
      North America                         196, 206
universality                              Chimera Web, 125, 184
   postprocessual archaeology, 5-6,    Wylie, A., 23-4, 45, 156, 159
      153, 205
   processual archaeology, 2-3, 205    X-radiography, 111-12
                                       X-ray photography, 26
van der Leeuw, S., 28, 129, 199
van Reybrouck, D., 192                 Yates, TeGha07 125
variability, 153                         difference, 156
VCRs, 150, 201                           intertextuality, 181
video records, 96, 122, 123-4, 191 >     language, 78
      194, 195                           object of archaeology, 9
Vienna School, 24                        readerly and writerly texts, 181
Vietnam war, 208                         reflexivity, 184
virtual reality, 182, 183                sexing, 114
   Catalhéytik, 125, 126, 193, 195     Yoffee, N., 6, 63, 129-30, 153
von Daniken, E., 6                     York, P., 153

walkmen, 150, 202                      Zubrow, E., 5
This provocative introduction examines the most important new school of
archaeological thought and practice to have emerged over the last two decades
and provides students with an assessment of the impact and importance of
recent theoretical debates. Written by a leading figure in the field of
theoretically-informed archaeology, the book provides an interpretation of the
archaeological process, reassessing the origins and aims of archaeology, and
setting forth an innovative agenda for the future.

In particular the author argues for a plural and diverse perspective and for a
new ‘reflexive’ methodology: one that opens archaeology up to critique and
interaction between different communities. This approach has implications not
only for the interpretation of evidence, but for the kind of evidence that is
sought in excavating, and the manner of its recovering and recording. It has
implications too for the role of archaeology and heritage within new global
environments and in the context of new information technologies.


lan Hodder is Professor of Archaeology at the University of Cambridge and a
Fellow of the British Academy. He is general editor of the Blackwell Social
Archaeology series, author of Reading the Past (1986), Symbolic and Structural
Archaeology (1982), The Domestication of Europe (Blackwell 1990) and co-
editor with Robert Preucel of Contemporary Archaeology in Theory: A Reader
(Blackwell 1996).




Cover design by Workhaus

Printed in Great Britain

Visit our website at
http://www. eo               co.uk                 >


  lyI‘MM
     | iy                  iil                   ui
BLACKWELL
      |   Publishers         |
                                                 ||)
                                                   Will
                                               9 °78063
