Ethnogenesis: Who were the Celts?


	The whole race, which is now called Gallic or Galatic, is madly fond of war, high spirited and quick to battle, but otherwise straightforward and not of evil character. And so when they are stirred up, they assemble in their bands for battle, quite openly and without forethought, so that they are easily handled by those who desire to outwit them; for at any time or place and on whatever pretext you stir them up, you will have them ready to face danger, even if they have nothing on their side but their own strength and courage.

	 Strabo280 IV.iv.2



	Physically the Gauls are terrifying in appearance, with deep-sounding and very harsh voices. In conversation they use few words and speak in riddles, for the most part hinting at things and leaving a great deal to be understood. They frequently exaggerate with the aim of extolling themselves and diminishing the status of others. They are boasters and threateners and given to bombastic self-dramatization, and yet they are quick of mind and with good natural ability for learning. They also have lyric poets whom they call Bards. They sing to the accompaniment of instruments resembling lyres, sometimes a eulogy and sometimes satire. They also have certain philosophers and theologians who are treated with special honour, whom they call Druids.

	 Diodorus Siculus281 V.31



	I think it would be helpful now to return to Europe and select one major area and one important problem for examination in rather greater detail. I have chosen to consider the so-called Celtic languages because the issue of their origin has become almost inseparable in the literature from that of the origin of the Celts themselves. To the extent that the two questions can indeed be distinguished, the first is linguistic and the second relates to a people or peoples: it is ethnic. The discussion thus offers the opportunity of considering one of the most interesting and currently neglected of topics in the whole field of prehistoric archaeology (neglected, that is to say, in the West although not by our Russian colleagues282): that of ethnogenesis.





The Celts


	The image of the warlike Celt or Gaul (since the two terms are almost interchangeable among the classical authors) is a familiar one, graphically illustrated by a number of statues283 of the same period of the ‘Dying Gaul’ displaying a memorable mixture of fierceness and manly pathos. The Celts and Gauls were well described in their homelands by the authors quoted and by others, including Julius Caesar. Several of the languages of those Celts, or those immediately descended from them, survive today, including Irish, Welsh, the Gaelic spoken in Scotland, and Breton, while others such as Manx and Cornish were still current until a few centuries ago. The term ‘Celtic’ has several other overtones, referring also to the Celtic church, notably in those western lands which had never been conquered by the Romans, during the first millennium ad. With the Celtic revival in the nineteenth century came a new awareness of Celticity, and a determination to value and safeguard the Celtic heritage. The Welsh festival, the Eisteddfod, dates from that period.

	Archaeology and linguistics were not slow to document the Celts and to consider their origins. Serious efforts were made to record the languages in the seventeenth century, by such scholars as Edward Lhwyd, and in the eighteenth century it was realized that the languages spoken by the Celts and Gauls in classical times were related to the more recent languages in those lands, and these to each other, so that it is meaningful to speak of a Celtic language group. Not long after the existence of an Indo-European family of languages was recognized, it was perceived that the Celtic languages belonged as a group within the family of the same general kind as the Romance languages or the Germanic languages and so on.

	The origin of the Celts was naturally sought, and this was rightly seen to be both a linguistic and an archaeological problem. The prevailing model for culture change at the time was essentially a migrationist one, so it was inevitable that archaeologists should speak of ‘waves’ of migrating Celts. The Celtic languages had been classified into P-Celtic (including Welsh and Breton) and Q-Celtic (including Irish and Scottish Gaelic), and therefore these were seen as the result of successive waves of invaders. It was generally recognized that the Hallstatt culture, which preceded La Tène, was represented by Celtic-speaking peoples. The question then arose as to whether its late bronze age predecessor, often described as the Urnfield culture, was an immigrant one, bringing the first Celtic speakers to western Europe, or whether much earlier archaeological cultures in the area, perhaps the Corded Ware culture, should instead be regarded in this way.





		 			 FIG. 9.1 Map by Duval indicating notional Celtic lands.





	These questions look very different today and it is interesting to try to see how a processual approach would cope with the problem. Moreover the perspective developed in the previous two chapters, arguing for a much earlier presence in Europe of people speaking an Indo-European language than has been generally thought, is clearly relevant. We shall see that in the case of the Celts it harmonizes rather well with ideas which have been developing recently in the field of historical linguistics.

	First it is necessary to ask rather more precisely, who were the Celts? That is to say what do we mean by that term, and what did the classical authors mean? This brings us at once to the very interesting and very difficult concept of ethnicity. What do we mean by an ethnic group? And how far may such groups be recognized archaeologically? The question is clearly a very important one when we are discussing the archaeology of languages, especially since language is often one of the defining elements of the notion of ethnicity.

	In the case of the Celts, the term ‘Celtic’ has clearly come to mean many things: we can define at least eight senses in which it is used. In the first place it refers to people whom the Romans designated by that name. Second it can indeed refer to people who called themselves by it. Third it can designate a language group, as defined by contemporary linguistics. Fourth, it has come to label an archaeological complex in west central Europe which embraces a number of archaeologically defined cultures, such as the Marnian of north France. Fifth, it can refer to an art style. Sixth, the term is often used to speak of the warlike, independent spirit of the Celts, as reflected in the passages from the two classical authors quoted here. In addition, it is common to refer to the elaborate art of Ireland during the first millennium ad as Celtic, in the same sense that one speaks of the Celtic church. And then there is the whole series of uses of the term within our contemporary society, where it refers to qualities or features broadly supposed to derive from the earlier ones which we have been discussing: the Celtic heritage.

	We are here concerned with the ways in which the term Celtic is applicable to peoples and lands at the time of the Greeks and Romans, and to ask to what extent it is permissible to speak in terms of ‘the Celts, the first great nation north of the Alps whose name we know’.284





Ethnicity — a Processual View


	One of the most notable features of the prehistoric archaeology of the earlier part of this century, was to develop a perspective which laid stress on regional variations, which was interested in the archaeological record in terms of space as well as of time. This was an important part of Gordon Childe’s methodology who (as we saw in Chapter 2), applied it some sixty years ago to the Indo-European question.285 He defined the term ‘culture’ in a technical, archaeological sense, as a ‘constantly recurring assemblage of artefacts’. He then went on to take a further, deceptively simple step, which lies at the root of many subsequent problems, in equating the notion of culture, so defined, with that of ‘people’. He never defined with complete clarity just what was meant by ‘a people’, but it is clear that he had much the same in mind as was meant by many anthropologists of his day, namely what today — and sometimes already then — would be termed an ethnic group.

	In general, as we have seen, Childe distinguished carefully between these ideas and any notion of genetically determined physical characteristics. There is no confusion here with the question of race, and this can be set to one side — although it is inconveniently the case that the terms ‘ethnicity’ and ‘ethnic’ are often used in the modern world in a racial sense rather than in a social one.

	At this point it is necessary to make several important distinctions in terms of ethnicity, language, religion, political organization and material culture. They do not necessarily co-vary, nor need they be expected to.

	The political organization or polity may be defined as a self-governing group of people, generally occupying a well-defined area. This does not mean that they define the group in territorial terms — often the group is defined rather in terms of kin relationships. When we are speaking of a polity we are not necessarily thinking of a sedentary group: a hunter-gatherer band may be regarded as a polity as much as a city state or an empire, so long as it functions as a unit and does not fall within the jurisdiction of a larger group for administrative or legal purposes.

	Ethnicity is something rather different, although in the modern world of nation-states the effective polity (the state) is often in effect an ethnic group also: we tend to speak of the French or the Germans or the Swiss without really thinking carefully whether we are speaking of nationality or ethnic affiliation. On the other hand, we are very clear that it is still meaningful to speak of the Welsh, or even of the Welsh nation, while not imagining or suggesting that we are dealing with a separate political unit. Ethnicity and political organization do not always coincide, although they often may. Many polities may together form a single ethnic group — as for instance in the case of the Greek city states. Equally a large polity such as the Roman empire can embrace many ethnic groups.

	In talking of ethnic groups,286 then, we mean groups of people who recognize themselves as distinct, and who see this distinction as part of their birthright. Many definitions have been offered in the anthropological literature: one of the most convenient was quoted by the British ethnologist Dragadze:287

	Ethnos . . . can be defined as a firm aggregate of people, historically established on a given territory, possessing in common relatively stable particularities of language and culture, and also recognizing their unity and difference from other similar formations (self-awareness) and expressing this in a self-appointed name (ethnonym).

	This seems to me a very convenient definition: it refers to the historical realities of kinship and descent, to the spatial aspect, the community of language, and to other features which will often include religion. Then it rightly stresses that for a group to be a real ethnic group, it must be aware of itself as such. The group will therefore have a name for itself — an ethnonym.

	Since we are particularly interested in linguistic questions, it should be noted that language and ethnos are not equivalent. Different ethnic groups can speak the same language — for instance the different peoples in the world today who speak Arabic, some of whom have very different histories and backgrounds and would not necessarily consider themselves as one. It is also possible, although less common, for a single people to contain within it groups speaking different languages. That would be true for nobles and commoners in traditional Tonga in the Pacific, or for the Royal Family and the commoners in Hanoverian England.

	Where Childe may have erred in discussing these matters is in too readily equating the ‘cultures’ which he defined with ‘peoples’ — that is to say, with ethnic groups. Material culture embraces all the artefacts made and used by humans, and it cannot always be broken down into discrete spatial units, as Childe tried to do. In some cases, when the prehistoric map is divided up by the modern archaeologist into ‘cultures’, he or she is making a series of arbitrary decisions. In some cases the archaeological cultures supposedly identified are simply the result of the taxonomic efforts of the archaeologist: they need have no further reality than that. So these ‘cultures’ may not have had any great reality at the time in question.

	Moreover it should be noted that ethnicity is a matter of degree. Some ethnic groups are very conscious of their separateness, and emphasize it in all manner of ways, some of them involving dress, and distinctive jewellery and distinguishing decoration, which can sometimes be observed archaeologically. Others are less aware of ‘belonging’ and take no special care to distinguish themselves from other groups. They may indeed not be aware of the existence of languages apart from their own, and may have no special name to distinguish what outsiders — such as colonial administrators or visiting anthropologists — regard as an ethnic group. The British anthropologist, Jack Goody,288 described one such group in Africa, known as the Lo Wiili, who do not really think in these terms: the name by which they are known is not their own name for the group, because they don’t have such a name, nor is there in fact any stable and well defined group. This is, then, a good example of what seems to be, to a large extent, an externally bestowed ethnicity.

	There are, of course, plenty of examples of real ethnicity in early times. Ancient Greece offers an excellent case, where the independent city states recognized that together their people were Hellenes, although Hellas as a territorial-political concept was not achieved until much later. Only Greeks for instance were allowed to compete together at the Olympic Games. There can be no doubt that the concept of Greekness did play a crucial role in influencing social and political development in the Aegean.

	We should note too that ethnicity can work at more than one level. In Greece, the citizens of many of the city states were fiercely loyal to their city, and it is quite appropriate to think of the Athenians or the Naxians as in some sense ethnic groups. In other parts of Greece, where city states had not developed, there were tribal units, for which the Greek word is the one from which the modern concept of ethnicity comes — ethnos. But the members of these ethne were conscious too that they were Greeks, and at the time of the Persian invasions, were willing to go to war in support of this concept.

	This may seem rather a lengthy discussion of a single concept, but it does have a bearing on how we think about the Celts. Moreover the whole question of ethnic formation is an increasingly important one for archaeology, and it also affects the linguistic questions. It is a necessary preliminary to look at the way the Greeks and Romans spoke of the Celts, since there is no reason to think that they were any more clear-minded or rigorous in their handling of ethnic questions than more recent writers.





The Celts as seen by the Greeks and Romans


	The earliest accounts which we have of the people who inhabited the Celtic lands — whatever one may mean by that term — come from the classical historians and geographers. In the last century these accounts were often taken at their face value, without any careful consideration about what these writers were setting out to do, or what their sources were.

	To write a systematic geography, with an account of lands and peoples, is no easy task. Our understanding of the geographical descriptions of the ancients is very much enhanced by considering the formation of the Greek ethnographic tradition, as the Irish classical scholar J. J. Tierney289 has done with particular reference to the Celts. The Histories of Herodotus, written in the fifth century bc, represent the first extended geographical descriptive treatments which have come down to us. It is necessary to keep this background in mind, since we are interested in the meaning of such terms as Keltoi/ Celtae and Galatai/ Galli in their Greek and Latin forms respectively. To quote Tierney:290

	But if we wish to envisage this question clearly it is necessary to realize that the distinct ethnographic unit is rather like the chameleon, that in fact, these entities do not exist. . . . But nevertheless, the ancients had to use names, group names, to denote the various barbarian tribes surrounding the Mediterranean basin, and it was on the basis of such group names, established on however slender foundations, that Greek ethnographic writing grew and developed. We should then make a primary distinction between the actual ethnographic situation on the one hand, which may be described in the most general terms as a gradual shading off from civilization and culture to barbarism, and on the other the rather schematic representation (or lack of representation) of these facts in the generalized statements and more or less well-founded assertions of ethnographers.

	It seems, in fact that by some earlier geographers, notably Ephorus, the barbarian world was conceived descriptively as divided into four, corresponding to the points of the compass, as seen from Greece. To the north were the Scythians, to the east the Persians, to the south the Libyans and to the west the Celts. This point is well made by Tierney in his discussion of the emergence of the Germans in the ethnographic writing of the first century bc as a distinct ethnographic unit.291

	In Pytheas the Scythians extend as far west as the Baltic and the North Sea, and this is the universal view of later writers. To Posidonius, when giving an ethnographic sketch of Northern Europe, therefore, the only question which would occur in regard to such tribes as the Cimbri and Teutones or the Germani would be whether their affiliations were rather Celtic than Scythian.

	The whole question is an interesting one, because it has been conclusively shown that the main descriptive accounts which have come down to us from geographers such as Strabo and Diodorus Siculus and even Caesar, were drawn largely from the earlier account, which has not survived in its entirety written by Posidonius in Book 23 of his History. Posidonius lived from 135 to 51 bc and the detailed information which we now have available comes to us in passages written after that date.

	It follows from this discussion that for some geographical writers, and perhaps for all of them, the term Celtic was in the first place a rather broad geographical designation, relating to all the inhabitants of northern and western Europe, whatever their nature. It later came to have a much more precise geographical designation, equating with the Roman province of Gaul, so that in this later sense the Galli or Keltoi were distinguished from the inhabitants of Iberia and from those of the islands of Britain and Ireland. We may question whether the early writers saw anything very inherently ‘celtic’ about them: they were just describing the natives of the region, following the rather standard descriptive order292 as established by Herodotus:

	 I The Country, including (1) Boundaries, Measurements, Shape, (2) Nature of the Land, (3) Rivers, (4) Climate, (5) Animals;

II The People, including (1) Population, (2) Antiquity and Ancient History, (3) Way of Life, (4) Customs;

III The Wonders of the Country.

	It should be noted that language as such did not loom large in the description. As T. G. E. Powell remarked: ‘Languages, other than their own, were not esteemed by the Greeks and linguistic distinctions between the barbarians would therefore not have come into consideration’. However, it is necessary to disagree in part when Powell goes on to say:293

	It seems reasonable to suppose that the Celts were distinguishable to Herodotus on descriptive grounds, even if he never saw any representatives, in the same way as other barbarian peoples might be identified. The term Celts is therefore justifiable in a proper ethnological sense, and should not necessarily be restricted to mean Celtic-speaking, which is a concept of academic thought of quite modern times.

	His point about language is undoubtedly true, but it is open to doubt how far the Greeks or Romans really saw the Celts as an entity with a meaning beyond the designation of the inhabitants of certain lands in the north-west. What really interests us, of course, is what Tierney would term ‘the actual ethnographic situation’: what were the ethnic groups in the area at the time in question. Here what concerns us is how the people whom we are discussing viewed themselves, ‘recognising their unity and difference from other similar formations and expressing this in a self-appointed name (ethnonym)’, as our definition of ethnicity puts it. There is no doubt that the classical authors report a number of tribal names which are probably perfectly accurate. What is open to question is whether the inhabitants of these areas themselves had any notion of a larger unit than their own local tribe. As the distinguished student of the Celts, Henri Hubert, wrote of the Irish294

	Did the islanders really call themselves Celts? That is another question and was probably not asked. It is extremely doubtful whether the inhabitants of Ireland ever gave themselves a name of the kind. Moreover the Irish seem to have exhausted the resources of their ethnographical sense when they described themselves in reference to themselves and distinguished the elements of which they were composed.

	It is now appropriate to turn briefly to the terminology used in the three systematic descriptions which have come down to us. As we have seen, each is thought to have been based largely on the History of Posidonius.

	The first of these is Caesar, writing in Latin in the middle of the first century bc. His concern is with Gaul and Britain, and so he offers no description of Iberia. As is well known, he begins his work as follows:295

	Gaul is a whole divided into three parts, one of which is inhabited by the Belgae, another by the Aquitani, and a third by a people called in their own tongue Celtae, in the Latin Galli. All these are different one from another in language, institutions and laws. The Galli are separated from the Aquitani by the river Garonne, from the Belgae by the Marne and the Seine.

	In a later passage, in Book VI, he gives a systematic description of the customs of Gaul and Germany, but this does not offer much further insight into the definition of the broader ethnic units.

	Diodorus Siculus, writing in Greek shortly after Caesar, deals first with various islands, including Britain. There is no suggestion that Britain is Celtic or Galatian:296

	And Britain, we are told, is inhabited by tribes which are autochthonous and preserve in their ways of living the ancient manner of life.

	In his description of the nearby mainland he first tells one of those agreeable little genealogical tales297 by which the Greeks overcame difficulties of nomenclature. He speaks of the region Keltika, which was visited by the hero Herakles, who fathered a child by the daughter of its ruler. The son was called Galates, and he called his subjects Galatai after himself ‘and these in turn gave their name to all of Galatia’, Galatia being the Greek equivalent of the Latin Gallia or Gaul. Diodorus goes on to say that ‘Gaul is inhabited by many tribes of different size; for the largest number some two hundred thousand men, and the smallest fifty thousand’. He gives a description of the ways of the Galatai (Gauls), but includes one interesting passage when he returns again to this question of nomenclature:298

	And now it will be useful to draw a distinction which is unknown to many: The people who dwell in the interior above Massalia, those on the slopes of the Alps and those on this side of the Pyrenees mountains are called Celts (Keltoi), whereas the peoples who are established above this land of Celtica in the parts which stretch to the north, both along the ocean and along the Hercynian Mountain, and all the peoples who come after these, as far as Scythia, are known as Gauls (Galatai); the Romans, however, include all these nations together under a single name, calling them one and all Gauls (Galatai).

	In making this distinction, Diodorus may be following Caesar, but it is interesting that he makes no mention of the Germans. When he comes to Spain he has another interesting point about nomenclature:299

	Now that we have spoken at sufficient length about the Celts we shall turn our history to the Celtiberians (Keltiberes) who are their neighbours. In ancient times these two peoples namely the Iberians (Iberes) and the Celts (Keltoi) kept warring among themselves over the land, but when later they arranged their differences and settled upon the land altogether, and when they went further and agreed to intermarriage with each other, because of such inter-mixture the two peoples received the appellation given above.

	The third and most lengthy description is that of the geographer, Strabo, writing in Greek around the time of Christ. In western Europe, he deals first with Iberia, in a long description rich in interesting detail, in which mention is made of the Celtiberians, seen as the end product of an incursion of Celts into the country. After dealing with Iberia in Book III, he turns to Transalpine Celtica in Book IV, and repeats the division into Aquitani, Belgae and Celtae. Later he makes a specific and important point about nomenclature:300

	This then is what I have to say about the people who inhabit the dominion of Narbonitis, whom the men of former times named ‘Celtae’ (Keltai); and it was from the Celtae, I think, that the Galatae (Galatai) as a whole were by the Greeks called ‘Celti’ (Keltoi) — on account of the fame of the Celtae, or it may also be that the Massiliotes as well as other Greek neighbours, contributed to this result on account of their proximity.

	This interesting passage perhaps offers the clue to the wider use of the term Celt. It is perfectly plausible that the first barbarians with whom the Greek population of the colony of Massalia (Marseilles) came into contact belonged to a tribe with the ethnonym ‘Keltoi’ or the equivalent, and that the Greeks used this term to designate all barbarians from the region in general. The story does carry the implication that the inhabitants of the region in general did not apply the term ‘Celts’ to themselves, but that this was an externally imposed ethnonym.

	From this brief inspection of the principal classical sources, we can draw a number of important conclusions. Many of them are in a sense negative, since the classical authors were not primarily interested in native perceptions of ethnicity, nor in linguistic variation, but they are still important because many prevailing views about the Celts today come from precisely these written sources.

	In the first place, there is no evidence that the inhabitants of Britain or Ireland ever called themselves Celts or Gauls. When Strabo speaks of Britain he clearly distinguishes between its inhabitants and those of the mainland:301 ‘The men of Britain are taller than the Celti. . . .’ And Caesar, in another famous passage, states:302

	The inland part of Britain is inhabited by tribes declared in their own tradition to be indigenous to the island, the maritime part by tribes that migrated from Belgium (ex Belgio) to seek booty by invasion. Nearly all of these latter are called by the names of the states (civitates) from which they sprang when they went to Britain.

	Once again we find the natives operating at tribal level, in terms of nomenclature. As Anne Ross has put it:303

	There is no evidence that the inhabitants of Britain ever called themselves Celts, and Caesar only reports Celtae in one third of France.

	Caesar himself, although referring to Celtae in one third of France, does not suggest clearly that there was, in the eyes of the natives themselves, a single ethnic unit of Gauls or Celts occupying the whole province. Strabo, in the interesting passage quoted above offers what is perhaps the clue to the problem in suggesting that it was the first Greek settlers in the south of France, at Massalia, who took the name of the local tribe, the Keltoi, and applied it to the entire barbarian hinterland. As the Irish linguist, David Greene, conveniently sums up the matter:304

	We cannot even be sure that Celtic-speaking peoples are meant when Classical writers use the names Keltoi or Galatae, for these ethnic names were used with considerable looseness — indeed we do not know what Keltoi and Galatae meant originally, but there is no evidence that they are Celtic words, or that any Celtic-speaking peoples ever called themselves by those names.

	The conclusion must thus be the strong suspicion that the term ‘Celts’ is not a proper ethnic term, in the sense derived earlier, but was imposed on a wide variety of barbarian tribes by classical geographers, following Posidonius. The outcome of the discussion, then, is not to deny that there was indeed a language group, which since the eighteenth century has been termed ‘Celtic’, nor that there are significant archaeological observations to be made about the material culture and way of life at the relevant places and times. But these different and valid perceptions should not be confused by lumping them all together as ‘Celtic’. As the philologist, Myles Dillon, has said:305

	By Celts I mean people who spoke a Celtic dialect, not people who buried their dead in urn-fields or had leaf-shaped swords or any particular kind of pottery. Language is the test. This is not an infallible statement of known truth; it is merely an agreed use of the term upon which linguists insist.





The Celtic Languages


	The foregoing discussion has led to the conclusion that the archaeology and the linguistic evidence must not be allowed to become confused through the too-ready application of a terminology, borrowed rather trustingly from the classical writers writing in the tradition of Posidonius. If we focus now on the linguistic evidence, especially as it relates to the end of the first millennium bc and the beginning of our era, a good deal is known.

	From central Europe westwards, across the whole territory north of the Alps, Celtic languages were apparently spoken. The position in the Alpine region was more complicated, although it is clear that a Celtic language was spoken in northern Italy. The eastern extent of the distribution of Celtic speakers is also rather difficult to define. In the north, in Scandinavia, we have very little clear evidence, but it is in that region that the Germanic languages later make their appearance. The distinction between Gauls and Germans seems to have first been made by the early geographers around 70 bc, but there were no doubt linguistic distinctions to be drawn earlier.

	In Iberia it is clear that the central and western part of the country was inhabited by people speaking a Celtic language, and these have been convincingly equated with the Celtiberians of the classical writers. In the north, however, there seem to have been the ancestors of the modern Basques, speaking a non-Indo-European language. And in the lands along the eastern seaboard of the peninsula coins and other inscriptions have been found indicating the presence of people speaking another, and probably non-Indo-European, language, Iberian.

	It is perhaps paradoxical that the Celtic languages which we know best, namely those which survive today, or at least did so until recent times, are those of which we know least from classical times. The explanation, however, is a simple one, and it relates to the spread of literacy. It was precisely in those lands which first became literate, namely Iberia and Gaul, that Roman influence predominated. So did the Latin language, and they speak today Romance descendants of Latin.

	The Celtic languages survived best in the areas which the Romans did not reach, or at least did not dominate. So that the languages of the Continental Celts, as they are termed, are known to us only from a limited number of inscriptions. The languages of the Insular Celts are much less well attested for the very early period, but are richly documented today, and in the case of Ireland have yielded a fascinating literature, first set down in writing in the sixth century ad, but with roots stretching far back beyond that time.

	Very little would be known about the Celtic languages, in fact, if it were not for the British Isles, which were dominated at the time of the Romans by Celtic speakers. At that time British was spoken in Britain and Irish in Ireland,306 although scholars prefer to use the terms Brithonic and Goidelic respectively, and they can to some extent be reconstructed from the modern languages which have descended from them.

	The Goidelic dialects of more recent times are Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Manx, although the last two have a separate history only since the sixteenth century. It should be noted that Scottish Gaelic is thought to have come to be spoken, first in western Scotland and then more widely, as a result of a movement of a band of settlers from north Ireland in the fifth century ad. They are credited with setting up the Kingdom of Dalriada, so this might correspond to a language displacement caused by élite dominance.

	The inhabitants of Scotland, until the wider dispersal of Gaelic, are generally referred to as Picts, following a number of references in late classical and subsequent writers. Much has been written about them, but once again there can be serious doubts about their nature and indeed their unity. The simplest interpretation is that this term was used for convenience to designate much of Scotland and its inhabitants, and that it does not have any very special ethnic significance. What language was spoken in Scotland, or what languages, is far from clear. We have evidence of personal names, and of place names, as preserved by classical writers and in early medieval sources (including the Pictish Chronicle, a list of kings in a Latin text put together in the middle of the ninth century), and in the place names of more recent times. There is some evidence to be derived from these sources which would not contradict the view that they represent a northern dialect of Brithonic, perhaps not unlike that spoken further south before the dominance of the Romans.

	There is, however, an interesting series of very short and difficult inscriptions, also termed Pictish and mainly written in the Ogam alphabet, which was probably invented in Ireland in the fourth century and imported to Scotland with the Dalriadic settlers in the fifth. These have been interpreted in all manner of ways, sometimes as Celtic, and sometimes as written in a language which is not Celtic but nonetheless Indo-European. The leading living authority, K. H. Jackson,307 has however written:

	The inscriptions, of which some certainly, probably all, date from the late-Pictish period, appear to be written in a quite unknown language, not Celtic and evidently not Indo-European at all, though they contain some Celtic names and two Gaelic loan words.

	He is led to the conclusion that:

	There were at least two languages current in northern Scotland before the coming of the Irish Gaels in the fifth century. One of them was a Gallo-Brittonic dialect not identical with the British spoken south of the Antonine Wall, although related to it. The other was not Celtic at all, nor apparently even Indo-European, but was presumably the speech of some very early set of inhabitants of Scotland.

	Any evidence for a non-Indo-European language is of particular interest in our consideration of Indo-European origins, and this conclusion of Jackson’s can be shown to harmonize rather well with the view of Indo-European origins proposed here.

	Whereas the Pictish language remains something of an enigma, the rich Irish sources constitute our principal source of information about the early Insular Celtic languages. The earliest manuscript texts written entirely in Irish date from the twelfth century onwards, but an earlier form, termed ‘Old Irish’ is seen in the glosses written into Latin manuscripts of the eighth and ninth centuries, nearly all preserved on the continent. Prior to these there are some three hundred Irish inscriptions, written in the Ogam alphabet, dating from about the fourth century ad. They are in an earlier form of the language, sometimes termed ‘Primitive Irish’, and as Dillon puts it: ‘They are in a form of language still close to Latin, and quite different from the earliest manuscript form, in which the original final syllables have been lost or reduced. ‘ We should note, however, that the supposed relationship with Latin depends on an interpretation308 of the development of the Indo-European groups in which there was an ‘Italo-Celtic’ stage of evolution, prior to the separation of the two, a view which is now not so widely held.

	The earliest preserved Irish poetry dates from the sixth century. It is in verse, generally written in praise of famous men. A common origin has been claimed for this Irish heroic verse with the metres of Greek and Vedic, and that it therefore represents an ancient Indo-European inheritance,309 although that view has met with criticism. Be that as it may, the poems certainly reflect a heroic society, glorying in feats of arms. The following quatrain310 refers to Bran Berba whose death is set in 795 ad:

	Bran the Brown, protection of the host, a fierce raider;

harsh spear, glorious one, strong by heredity;

heir to wisdom, sun of warriors, full tide;

a bloody wolf, dog of the pack, who does not wrong.

	And again, for Fedlimid, who died in 847:

	Fedlimid the king

for whom it was the work of a single day

To leave Connacht kingless without a battle,

and to lay Meath in ruins.

	The Brithonic dialects are Welsh, Cornish and Breton. Cornish and Breton can be distinguished from Welsh in the few documents which survive from the eighth to the eleventh century, but it is only much later that Breton and Cornish are found in texts of any length.

	The Welsh literature, like the Irish, is notable. The most famous of the early poems is ‘The Gododdin’, preserved in a manuscript of thirteenth century date, but dated by scholars either to the seventh or the ninth century. It begins with a splendid lament311 for a young warrior, whose name we are not told:

	A man in courage but a boy in years

Brave in the din of battle

Swift horses with long manes

Under the graceful youth

A light broad shield

On the crupper of a swift horse.

Clean blue swords,

Fringes of fine gold.

Before his wedding-feast

His blood streamed to the ground.

Before we could bury him

He was food for ravens.

	The principal early sources for the Goidelic and Brithonic languages are thus Irish and Welsh respectively. Very little is known of the Brithonic language spoken in England prior to the Romans and the Saxons, the principal source of information being in the place names surviving into later times.

	The two groups, Brithonic and Goidelic, are sometimes termed P-Celtic and Q-Celtic, since in Brithonic the sound qu- appears as p-, whereas in Goidelic it remains as q, later becoming k. Thus the numeral ‘four’ and the pronoun ‘who’ appear in Welsh as pedwar and pwy, and in Irish as cethir and cia.

	Inevitably there has been much speculation about the origins of the two groups, and most scholars have spoken in terms of successive migrations. These were conventionally set in the first millennium bc, often equated with the supposed immigrants responsible for the inception of the Iron Age in the islands, but, as we shall see, this view has lost ground with the general rejection of such a migrationist inception for iron working and other contemporary developments in Britain and Ireland.

	Continental Celtic is a series of languages which had no survivors after the early first millennium ad. The sources of information are therefore exclusively of two kinds: inscriptions and names. Thousands of proper names have been preserved, local and ethnic, divine and personal, from a series of different sources, including the classical authors and words preserved or quoted in other European languages. Numerous inscriptions have been preserved in Ancient Gaul, as well as in north Italy and Iberia. The lack of long literary texts has made the progress of research difficult, and one Irish scholar, Prionsias MacCana, has been rather dismissive of the entire enterprise:312

	Here survive only the merest vestiges of the language and its linguistic culture and yet the student finds that a surprisingly numerous succession of eminent scholars have laboured to save what, in the nature of things, can be only a meagre harvest, assiduously sifting and re-sifting the same slender and highly ambiguous materials, dotting each other’s is and crossing — and occasionally uncrossing — each other’s ts.

	But this judgment singularly fails to do justice to the systematic nature of the enterprise. For Gaul we have the major survey by Joshua Whatmough, The Dialects of Ancient Gaul,313 for northern Italy a number of important studies on the so-called Lepontic languages,314 and for Iberia a series of works, notably by Antonio Tovar,315 following the decipherment of the Iberian script more than sixty years ago by Manuel Gómez-Moreno.

	The inscriptions of Gaul are numerous and informative: some, like the calendar of Coligny,316 have been known and quite well understood for some time, and others are continually coming to light. Gaulish is recognized by most authors as having affinities with Brithonic. It is P-Celtic, although the importance of that specific classificatory criterion should not be over-stressed.

	In Iberia, the picture is very much more complicated and there have been scholars who have doubted the Celticity of Hispano-Celtic (as Celtiberian is more logically termed). Such doubts have been laid to rest, however, by the discovery of a bronze tablet at Botorrita317 in north-central Spain, twenty kilometres south of Saragossa, bearing on both faces a long inscription written in the Celtiberian script. The interpretation is not entirely clear: it may be the text of a contract relating to land ownership or land-tenure, but the discovery of so long a text has had a major impact on the understanding of Hispano-Celtic, establishing it as a further major branch of Continental Celtic.





		 			 FIG. 9.2 The Botorrita tablet, a long inscription in the Celtiberian script.





	The linguistic situation in Iberia is a complicated one which is worth discussing a little further.318 In addition to Hispano-Celtic in the centre and west, a further language, Lusitanian, which is Indo-European and perhaps Celtic, is known from the north-west. Basque,319 which is not an Indo-European language, survives to this day in the north of the peninsula. At the extreme south-west, in the Algarve in southern Portugal, there are a number of inscriptions of a rather different form than the Iberian, and perhaps older. These are sometimes termed Tartessian and may conceivably represent a further non-Indo-European language. Such is certainly claimed for the Iberian language, known from inscriptions and coins found along the eastern coasts of Spain; there is now enough material available to allow some comparison of grammar and morphology, and the old idea that this was an early predecessor of Basque is no longer maintained.





		 			 FIG. 9.3 The early linguistic population of Iberia, showing areas occupied by speakers of non-Indo-European Iberian (shaded) and Tartessian (stippled). Celtic names are in capitals (after Tovar).





	Looking to the eastern Celtic area, it is difficult to say much about Celtic-speaking groups very far east of the river Rhine.320 Place names in the Roman province of Dalmatia have been claimed as Celtic, but some scholars feel that they are difficult to distinguish from names in the (Indo-European) Illyrian language, and criticism has also been made of supposed identifications of personal names from Pannonia, the modern Hungary.321 Very often the claims for a Celtic population in those areas are backed up by discussion of objects found there which are in the La Tène art style.

	Mention should also be made of a supposed Celtic-speaking population in Galatia,322 in Anatolia, which a number of classical authors report. It is told that, after the death in 281 bc of Lysimachos, one of the generals of Alexander the Great who had governed the whole Thracian area after Alexander’s death, there was considerable disorder, of the kind which one might today be tempted to term a system collapse. It is reported that Celtic bands proceeded south and were only narrowly prevented from plundering the great Greek sanctuary of Delphi in 279 bc. Some of these marauders then served as mercenaries in the armies of contending leaders in Macedonia, and later in Anatolia, in the region subsequently known as Galatia (following the equivalence of the Greek terms Keltoi and Galatai). The linguistic significance of the travels of these bands of freebooters and mercenaries has been disputed. As Greene323 puts it:

	That the Galatians were at one time Celtic-speaking is testified to only by a handful of proper names, for their few surviving inscriptions are in Greek, and it is difficult to take seriously the statement of St Jerome that the Galatians of his time spoke a language which was almost the same as that of the Treveri, who gave their name to Trier in the Rhineland; it is hard to believe that this was not a purely historical statement, since it will be remembered that St Jerome was writing in the fourth century ad, when the Celtic dialects were on the point of extinction everywhere on the Continent of Europe.

	Whatever the status of the Galatian Celts, they have little significance for the origin of the Celtic languages, since it has never been suggested that a Celtic language was spoken in Anatolia prior to the supposed arrival of these intruders in the late third century bc.

	The picture which we thus have of the Celtic languages, when they first become known to us, is of a major linguistic group in central and western Europe. In Iberia certainly, and perhaps in Scotland, we glimpse peoples speaking languages which were non-Indo-European, and who are generally supposed to have been already in those lands prior to the arrival of the first Celtic speakers.





The Art and Archaeology of the Celts


	We have seen that it is perfectly possible, using the available linguistic evidence to indicate the territories which were occupied by peoples speaking Celtic languages at about the time of Christ. It is consequently quite a simple matter to study the material culture324 of those times and places, and to take particular note of the remarkable art style which we find there. There is no doubt that ‘Celtic’ art is one of the great glories of prehistoric Europe.325 It can only be fully appreciated if we are willing to set aside the representational canons of classical Greek art, or indeed of Roman art, and to respond visually to a style which is more imaginative and decorative than these, and which delights in flowing line to the exclusion of careful depiction. The art of these northern barbarians certainly does have a coherence and integrity which many today find at least as appealing as the more measured achievements of the Romans.

	To the extent that much of it was produced by people speaking Celtic languages, it is perhaps permissible to call it ‘Celtic’. But there is no guarantee that all of it was produced by Celtic-speakers: some quite famous pieces, often claimed as ‘Celtic’, such as the famous Gundestrup326 cauldron, may have been produced far to the east, among Thracians and Dacians. Nor is it the case that all the regions which we know to have been Celtic-speaking were producing fine works in the La Tène art style. These points are not mere pedantry, if we are considering Celtic origins, because the origins of the languages and the origins of the material culture and the origins of the art are not necessarily the same. That is why it is necessary to take issue with Stuart Piggott, when he writes in his excellent book The Druids:327

	That this was a unit not only in the sense of sharing a common language, or variant dialects of a single tongue, is shown by the recognition of the Celts as a ‘people’ by the classical world (as distinct as, for instance, Scythians or Ethiopians), and by the evidence of common traditions in material culture perceivable to the archaeologist today.

	This is an oversimplification as dangerous in its consequences as that of laying great emphasis on the supposed ‘Celtic spirit’ of those supposedly warlike peoples, which has recently been very effectively questioned by the British archaeologist N. Merriman.328

	One of the most obvious features of the archaeology of central Europe in the iron age is the emergence of a prominent élite in south Germany and in southern France, documented most clearly by a splendid series of ‘princely graves’. These are very notable in what archaeologists term the Hallstatt C and D periods, from about 700 to 500 bc. Major fortified hill forts are found at the same time, and it has been plausibly argued that one of the factors favouring the development of these chieftain societies was contact with the already quite highly civilized lands to the south:329 contacts with Etruria and with the Greek colony of Massalia, founded about 600 bc. It has been suggested that local petty chieftains managed to control the supply of prestige luxury goods deriving from these centres, and through this dominance over trade were able to enhance their own positions, and to accumulate much wealth as well as influence, reflected in the rich gravegoods (containing many imports) accompanying their burials.

	There seems to have been some sort of recession after 500 bc, but in the La Tène period which followed we again see princely graves, and by this time many of the prestige goods are of local manufacture, some of them masterpieces in that very non-classical art style which we have come to call La Tène. Eminent scholars such as Jacobsthal have discussed the development of this art style in considerable detail, and although it owed much to classical influences from the south, and perhaps something to the animal art of the steppe lands far to the east, it really does seem to be a local development.330 We can discern beautifully incised, elegant linear decoration for instance on the backs of the polished bronze mirrors of south Britain, which is very much further afield. There is no doubt that it was significantly influenced by the earlier art of the south German homeland area.

	When we come to examine the origins of this art and this material culture, we find them both to be locally rooted. The Hallstatt iron age can be seen to have evolved from the late bronze age Urnfield cultures of the same area, which are also widely seen in southern France and in eastern Europe. It has been traditional among many archaeologists to account for these urnfields in terms of some sort of migration, perhaps from further east. But the evidence for this has never been very satisfying, and most archaeologists would discount it today. There is no doubt that, during the developed bronze age the then very widely prevalent custom of inhumation burial, often under a burial mound or tumulus, was replaced by one of cremation, where the ashes were placed within an urn, and the cremated and inurned remains of the community buried in cemeteries or urnfields. This change in burial custom occurred over a very wide area, and there is no reason to think that changes in one area took place quite independently and in ignorance of changes in others. These regions were in contact at the time — our evidence of prehistoric trade demonstrates this. Changes of belief and custom in one area would no doubt be influential in others, but this does not need to imply any significant movement of people, other than in the normal course of trading and other contacts. Certainly there is no reason to suggest any significant process of language displacement of the kind discussed in Chapter 6. Archaeologists today are much more inclined to think in terms of models of interaction, where contact between neighbouring and politically independent communities proved influential for the development of customs and beliefs. Such peer-polity interactions331 were probably responsible for the development of the networks of contacts which facilitated the custom of using beaker drinking vessels as prestige objects around 2300 bc. This is seen today as a more acceptable explanation than migrations of ‘Beaker Folk’, for which in reality there is no good evidence.

	In recent years the earlier view that the British Isles were profoundly influenced during the iron age by a series of migrations from the continent has been almost universally abandoned. There is no good archaeological evidence for such migrations, although there were clearly important cross-channel political and trading contacts which had significant effects. The local insular development of the British variant of the La Tène art style no doubt came about through the effect on the islanders and their smiths of the prestige objects in the La Tène style which were traded to Britain. It is not necessary to go further than this.332





		 			 FIG. 9.4 The evidence of Celtic place names: names ending in -dunum. ○ indicate those attested from Antiquity, L those of Roman date, + those attested from the Middle Ages, • those documented only more recently (after Rix).





	Turning now to Iberia, the presence of Celtic-speaking people there has often, similarly, been explained in migrationist terms. The great Spanish scholar, Pedro Bosch-Gimpera, forty-five years ago wrote an influential paper,333 ‘Two Celtic waves in Spain’, in which the first wave, thought to arrive around 900 bc, was to be associated with what he called the urnfield culture seen in Catalonia. The second wave was linked with the Hallstatt cultures of the iron age of France and Germany which, as he correctly observed, could be seen as the ancestors of the La Tène culture in those areas.

	These ideas seem less plausible today than they did when they were first put forward — but they have not yet been subjected to the same severe reassessment that the comparably migrationist ideas once applied to the British Isles have experienced. It may be that when they are more rigorously scrutinized they will fare no better. Certainly from the artistic standpoint, Iberia is very different. There, on the Mediterranean coastland in the region which we know to have been the home of the non-Celtic-speaking Iberians, there are remarkable artistic developments,334 which are associated in part with the trading activities of the Phoenicians. Much of the artistic and cultural originality of iron age Iberia can be interpreted in this way, and La Tène art is not prominent there, not even in the lands which we know, from the distribution of inscriptions and from the study of place names, were occupied by people speaking the Hispano-Celtic language.

	This point simply emphasizes again that language and art style should not be too readily equated, and that their origins are likely to be very different one from another.





Celtic Origins


	The question ‘Who were the Celts?’, for all its apparent, indeed deceptive, simplicity has turned out to be a rather complicated one. I will now try to draw together the various strands and relate them to the theory of Indo-European origins proposed in Chapter 7. There it was suggested that the first persons to reach Europe speaking an early Indo-European language were the first farmers, and that the spread of early Indo-European speech was to be equated with the gradual but steady spread of farming throughout Europe. The various enclaves of non-Indo-European languages which survived are mainly to be interpreted as having been spoken by pre-farming groups already in Europe who came to adopt the farming economy and who subsequently retained their own speech. Etruscan and Iberian (and possibly Pictish) would represent the descendants of such groups into classical times, and Basque as far as our own day. Nothing which has been said so far about the Celts is dependent upon this theory, however, and only parts of what follow make such assumptions. The essential point, that we have to distinguish carefully between the Celtic languages, the art and archaeology of the time, the ethnic designations of the Greek and Roman geographers and the real ethnic perceptions of the people themselves, should be applicable to any systematic analysis of the problem.

	It is my argument that most previous treatments of this question have been bedevilled by the assumption that the Celts had to come from somewhere else, or at least that their parent Proto-Indo-European language must have arrived as recently as the end of the neolithic period, as so many scholars from Schrader to Gimbutas have argued. Recently a number of historical linguists, including Antonio Tovar, Karl Horst Schmidt and Wolfgang Meid have taken an altogether more processual view of Celtic linguistic formation. But even they have had, perforce, to rely upon what have been said to be the findings of archaeology, namely the familiar theory of the incursion of groups of Indo-European speakers during the third millennium bc, deriving from the west Russian steppes. As we have seen, this theory cannot be regarded with confidence today as representing ‘the findings of archaeology’, although it is of course entitled to as much serious consideration as any other. My own theory will certainly not be welcomed by all archaeologists as an acceptable and well-documented one, and there are several problems in historical linguistics to be overcome before it will satisfy many of them. It may nonetheless claim to represent ‘the findings of archaeology’ as much as the Kurgan theory. I believe that historical linguists would be very much wiser to proceed as far as they are able in interpretation within the framework of their own discipline before relying too heavily upon any supposed archaeological consensus: for at present there is none.

	To illustrate this problem, and to begin our analysis of the question of origins, it is convenient to quote at length from one of the best recent surveys of the Continental Celtic languages, by Karl Horst Schmidt. Naturally I have no criticism to make of his philological arguments, but it is permissible to point out that, in common with most other historians of the Celtic languages, he bases his discussion at a very early stage on a specific archaeological interpretation:335

	According to Archaeology and Prehistory, the Celts descend from a mixture of the Bronze Age Tumulus Culture (1550–1250 bc) and the Urnfield Culture (thirteenth century bc). Originating in what is now Eastern France, North Alpine Switzerland, and South-Western Germany, they spread over the whole of Europe and Asia Minor during the Hallstatt (from the eighth century) and La Tène (from the fifth century) periods of the Iron Age. The date of the first Celtic settlement in Ireland is uncertain; in N. K. Chadwick’s opinion it may go back to the Bronze Age before 1000 bc. The first immigrations to the Iberian Peninsula, to the English Channel, and probably to England as well, took place during the Hallstatt period in the eighth/ seventh century bc. The latest Hallstatt chieftains’ tombs and the early La Tène culture, expanding to the north into the territory between Champagne and the Rhine, Nahe and Mosel are followed by La Tène B–C Culture (fourth to second century bc) with so-called ‘Flachgräberfriedhöfen’ or ‘flat’ cemeteries. This period is characterized, as Kimmig has expressed it, by ‘unity of cultural occupation over wide areas, displaying contemporary links with historical observations on the ethnic affiliations of the cultural material’. This period is marked by the widest expansion of the Celts, who had invaded Italy, the Balkan Peninsula, and Asia Minor and had settled in Bohemia, Upper Silesia and Hungary. The conquest of France is reflected in its name, Gaul. Celtic migrations of the La Tène period reached Britain, Ireland and Spain, encountering older Celtic strata in the population in Ireland and on the Iberian Peninsula.

	It should be noted that there is no criticism to be made of the archaeology as such quoted in this passage. Wolfgang Kimmig is one of the most distinguished archaeologists for the period, and his views336 of the development of the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures may be followed with the greatest confidence. The difficulty comes with the equation of the archaeological and linguistic data.

	No one really disputes, I think, that the primary meaning of the terms Celt and Celtic for the modern scholar must be linguistic ones. As Myles Dillon337 writes:

	The Celts were distinguished in various ways, by social organization, dress, methods of warfare, for these are matters of which early historians took account, but the main distinction, then, as now, will have been that of language. . . . Indeed this definition by language is the only useful one, for by reference to it we can speak meaningfully of Celtic archaeology or Celtic religion. But if we do not admit language as the criterion, these terms involve a circular argument.

	This advice has been lost sight of in many treatments. For while archaeology does indeed tell us that at the time Celtic was spoken in eastern France, north alpine Switzerland and south-western Germany in the first century bc the material culture known today as La Tène was in use in those lands, it does not and cannot, by its nature, assign any special priority to the La Tène cultural assemblage in this matter. Celtic languages were spoken over a wide area at this time, and not all of these lands display the same material culture as seen in that particular region. Kimmig is quite right, according to our present knowledge, in tracing Hallstatt and La Tène antecedents back to the Urnfield cultures and so back to the Tumulus cultures of the bronze age. The archaeology is impeccable. But we may ask what logic leads to the assertion that the Celts originated in the Tumulus cultures of these or neighbouring areas. There is absolutely nothing in the linguistics, so far as I know, to confer priority on the east France/north Switzerland/south-west Germany region. From the archaeological standpoint it is indeed a special region, the home of the richest iron age chieftains’ graves, and very possibly in addition the original home of the La Tène art style. However our picture of the development and indeed the spread of that art style now has very little to do with the movement of significant numbers of people. We no longer think of it as transported across Europe or to Britain, or indeed to Ireland, by a series of migrations, nor even of smaller bands of warrior élites, intent on subjugating their neighbours. There is therefore no particular case for associating the people of that region with any impetus towards the displacement of the languages spoken by their neighbours, though there is no doubt that they were influenced by them. The La Tène art style was indeed transmitted; but by a process of trade and of emulation, with smiths in one region no doubt eagerly copying the latest achievements of others.

	There is equally no warranty today for the statement that the first Celtic immigrations to England took place during the Hallstatt period in the eighth or seventh century bc. Twenty years ago, Grahame Clark in a celebrated article entitled ‘The invasion hypothesis in British prehistory’,338 questioned the migrationist view of British prehistory, and the iron age scholar, F. R. Hodson,339 held up for examination the then prevailing view that there had been three waves of immigrants to Britain during the iron age. Such a position has now been almost universally abandoned. Its former champions, of whom the most notable is Christopher Hawkes, have proposed more subtle models for the changes which took place. He has spoken of a process of ‘cumulative Celticity’,340 involving peaceful contacts over a very much longer period. Similar comments may be made for the Celts of the Iberian peninsula.

	In north Italy possibly the case may be different: there is direct historical evidence (mainly in the work of the Roman historian, Livy341) for an invasion of north Italy by Celtic tribes. In my own view, this too might be held up to question, but it is not necessary to do so here, and for present purposes his story, like that of the incursion of Celtic groups into Greece with their attack on Delphi, and ultimately to Galatia in Anatolia, may be accepted. Whether Celtic-speaking people ever settled in significant numbers in eastern Europe, including Hungary, still seems a matter for discussion. There is plenty of material there referable to the La Tène culture in archaeological terms, and plenty of works of La Tène art. However there is no principle which says that those who employed a La Tène material culture were necessarily Celtic-speaking, and the linguistic evidence from the area is not yet completely clear. As for the ‘conquest of Gaul’ by Celts, it is surprising to see so naïve an interpretation of the archaeological evidence accepted by so clear-sighted a philologist as Schmidt. There is nothing in the archaeology which puts Gaul in a secondary or derivative position in the field of Celtic speech.

	It was suggested in Chapter 7 that the first people speaking an early Indo-European language reached western Europe at the time of the first farmers. The Celtic languages would all be descended from this early Indo-European language or languages. There are radiocarbon dates associated with early farming in southern France around 6000 bc, associated with the so-called ‘impressed ware’, which is a widespread feature of early neolithic settlement in the west Mediterranean, and there are early dates for farming in Spain around 5500 bc, but the picture there is not yet a very complete one, and earlier dates are to be expected. The farming economy reached north-western France by shortly after 5000 bc, and south Britain by 4500 bc. Farming is also documented in Ireland by 4500 bc, and in the Orkney Islands, at the extreme north of Britain, by 3500 bc. At the same time, the spread of farming by the ‘eastern route’ up the Danube valley was occurring. Farming sites of the Danubian I culture (or Linear Pottery culture) are found in northern France by about 5000 bc, and are common in Germany and Holland by that time. It is not at present clear whether the first farmers seen in England should be traced back to this tradition or to the farmers of western France, whose domestic plants and animals may have been the lineal descendants of stock which had once grown in the west Mediterranean. Linguistically, however, if we follow this broad picture, it might be logical to expect some differences between this west European group and the central European. Both derived, of course, from the early farmers of Greece back around 6500 bc, but different cultural and linguistic traditions had no doubt been established over the succeeding fifteen hundred years. We must therefore expect that the farmers using Linear Pottery must, when they entered France, have been speaking a rather different dialect from that of their western cousins, whom they will soon have encountered. As we shall see, there are some points in our understanding of the linguistic background which might correlate with this picture.

	It is first worth noting, however, that several historical linguists have, recently, been able to adjust their thinking to a much earlier origin for the Celts than that set out above by Schmidt, who was following the archaeology of Kimmig. The move away from migrationist explanations in Britain, as we have seen, led Grahame Clark twenty years ago to question the validity of any of the supposed invasions to Britain between the coming of the first farmers and the Romans, with one single exception. That exception was the Beaker phenomenon, which at that time was still seen in migratory terms: it was still permissible to speak of ‘Beaker Folk’. This interpretation of the beaker phenomenon is no longer accepted in England, and most archaeologists do not now think in terms of beaker-bearing immigrants on any scale. For at least a decade, however, the ‘beaker immigrant’ hypothesis remained in favour, while the iron age waves of immigration had been rejected.

	The possible association of Indo-European speech with the introduction of beakers to the British Isles was adopted by Stuart Piggott, among other archaeologists, and taken up by Dillon, among other philologists. In 1972 he wrote:

	The Celtic settlement of the British Isles is more difficult to trace. It now seems that we must choose between two extremes. About 2000 bc came Bell-beaker people, whose burials are in single graves, with individual grave-goods. The remarkable Wessex Culture of the Bronze Age which appears about 1500 bc is thought to be based upon this tradition. The grave-goods there suggest the existence of a warrior aristocracy ‘with a graded series of obligations of service . . . through a military nobility down to the craftsmen and peasants’, as in the Homeric society. This is the sort of society which is described in the Irish sagas, and there is no reason why so early a date for the coming of the Celts should be impossible. As we shall see, there are considerations of language and culture that rather tend to support it. From the middle of the sixth century bc the Early Iron Age people, builders of the hill-forts so characteristic of the insular Celtic world, begin to appear. From then until the Belgic invasion, to which Caesar refers as having occurred not long before his time, there were successive waves of Celtic immigration into Britain. But the common opinion among archaeologists seems now to be that there were no large scale immigrations into the British Isles between 2000 and 6000 bc.

	I have quoted this passage at length because, although published seven years before the article by Karl Horst Schmidt, quoted earlier, it represents a development in the chronological argument, and is interesting too because it refers to social interpretations. It derives from the currently anti-migrationist (or at least no longer pro-migrationist) tradition of the British archaeological school, whereas Schmidt is relying on the more traditional archaeological position largely maintained today by the continental school of archaeology. It should be noted that the author still puts some emphasis on the supposed ‘successive waves of Celtic immigration’ in the early iron age, a concept which around that time was being replaced by Christopher Hawkes’s more flexible concept of ‘cumulative Celticity’.

	What is so interesting about Dillon’s treatment, however, is that this reassessment of the chronology leads to a very interesting change in the linguistic position:342

	If the earliest Celtic settlements date from the Bronze Age, the question whether the invaders were Goidels or Brythons does not arise. Linguistic features that distinguish the Brythons may be much later, some of them innovations (u > i; qu > p) which spread from a centre on the Continent and never reached the ‘lateral’ areas of Ireland and Spain.

	This line of reasoning opens up an entirely new perspective, and one where we begin to conceive of many of the fundamental linguistic changes occurring in situ, as it were, in the lands where we encounter the languages in historical times. Dillon is, in effect, here beginning to develop a theory for the differentiation between Q-Celtic (Goidelic, with Hispano-Celtic) and P-Celtic (Brithonic, with Gaulish) which does not depend on migrations of peoples. Instead of this Stammbaum or family tree approach he is contemplating something much closer to the wave theory for linguistic change, where innovations develop within one area, here Gaul and Britain, but do not extend to regions outside the locus of the wave (Iberia and Ireland).

	This I find a very fruitful approach, and one which it is tempting to extend to the Celtic phenomenon as a whole. I would prefer to see the development of the Celtic languages, in the sense that they are Celtic as distinct from generalized Indo-European, as taking place essentially in those areas where their speech is later attested. That implies an Indo-European-speaking population in France and in Britain and in Ireland, and probably in much of Iberia also, by before 4000 bc. Linguistic development would, of course, continue after that time. Some of the changes would be peculiar to only parts of the entire territory: that is the phenomenon of linguistic divergence which would result in the separation between the Goidelic and Brithonic languages, but other changes would take place in the territory as a whole.

	It is helpful to think of these changes in terms of Schmidt’s wave model. In some cases the wave would extend to the most distant Celtic-speaking regions, so that the Celtic languages would be evolving together. If the wave did not extend further, that would imply a process of linguistic differentiation for Celtic as a whole, serving to distinguish the Celtic languages from their neighbours, i.e. the Italic and Germanic languages. But it is not always necessary to think of a wave starting from a very specific centre. It is permissible to refer again here to the concept of peer-polity interaction in archaeology, and to the existence of long-distance trading networks which effectively established contacts over considerable areas. Developments could thus take place in step, so to speak, without our having to think of any one local region as a prime innovating centre. Just as in archaeology we have come to reject both dominance models and models of complete independence in favour of interaction models, so in historical linguistics we may perhaps think of a whole language area, like the one where early Celtic was originally spoken, moving in some senses together. So that while there would, all the time, be processes at work serving to separate out the individual dialects, yet simultaneously there would be others keeping them to some extent together, while nonetheless distinguishing them progressively from languages and dialects in other language groups, such as Italic or Germanic.





‘Cumulative Celticity’


	Here we can take up once again Christopher Hawkes’s evocative term ‘cumulative Celticity’, and use it in a more mutual and collective sense: ‘cumulative mutual Celticity’. Instead of always thinking of England as the recipient of these accumulating Celtic qualities, we would think rather of England and continental Europe as starting on a more equal footing, and developing together that cumulative mutual Celticity which results in the position which we see at the time of Christ. It is perhaps not necessary to see one region as always the donor and the other the recipient. In this perspective there need be no one, localized Celtic ‘homeland’. The homeland of the Celts would in fact be constituted by the full extent of the area where Celtic languages came to be spoken (always excluding such later offshoots as Galatia and perhaps Italy, if it is clear that Celtic speech there really was the result of demonstrable later migrations).

	This view of the linguistic development of the Celtic and Germanic languages has been put forward by the Spanish linguist, Antonio Tovar. (Although it should be noted that he accepts the conventional chronological picture, and hence the arrival of the first Indo-European speakers in Europe in the later third millennium bc.) Tovar343 discusses at some length the studies made by H. Krahe of the river names of central and western Europe, many of which have forms which can be interpreted as reflecting an early and undifferentiated form of Indo-European, at a time well prior to the formation of the individual Celtic languages. As Krahe344 put it in 1951:

	Non-Indo-German elements are not observable in the whole extensive area north of the well-defined line extending east and west from the Alps. That indicates that all the lands of Europe north of the Alps were an Indo-German territory from the earliest times.

	Krahe envisaged an early division of Indo-European into Hittite, Greek and Aryan, while in the central and western areas the individual languages which we later recognize had not yet separated but are represented rather in these undifferentiated place- and river-names. The picture as Tovar develops it thus rules out the suggestion of any new migrations to account for the western Indo-European languages (notably Celtic and Germanic):345

	It is in no way adventurous to think that Germanic and Celtic in their final forms were fashioned in the western territories of Europe following its domination by the Indo-German tribes.

	He argues, in the developmental process, for a combination of the Stammbaum (family tree) and wave theories. At an early stage the oldest Indo-European languages had separated, like the branches of a tree, while those languages which are recognized later were formed by waves spreading out from secondary centres. This is, of course, very much the picture which we have been developing here, with the very early separation of the ancestors of Hittite and Greek, and then a later process of differentiation, in Europe, for the European languages.

	The wave model process is further discussed in terms which harmonize very well with the archaeological peer-polity interaction model, which was mentioned earlier. Tovar thinks in terms of significant centres for the formation of individual languages where an innovation package (Neuerungsbündel) sets in train a process of linguistic development. Between such centres would be more conservative regions enjoying a peaceful linguistic life (ruhiges Sprachleben). He makes the specific point that extra-linguistic factors were amongst those which would explain the nature and behaviour of these centres346 — factors including war, religion and economy. My own mental picture of the process of linguistic development — or ‘crystallization’, to use another of Tovar’s metaphors — is very close to that. One can imagine regions in which the interaction networks were particularly intense and effective, separated from other such regions by areas less intensively networked. In favourable circumstances these intensive contacts could lead to dialect formation, and the effective separation between regions could result in linguistic differentiation. Rather than thinking of a wave emanating from a single centrally-placed location, I prefer to imagine an area within which the network linkages are particularly intense and effective. Such a reformulation of Schmidt’s wave model perhaps does no more than modify somewhat his original ideas.

	This approach has been developed in greatest detail by Tovar in relation to the late differentiation of the Germanic languages;347 and he is able to point to analogous processes at work in the formation of the High German (Hochdeutsch) and Castilian languages during the middle ages.

	This processual approach seems a very suitable one to apply to the development of the Celtic languages. It gives a more coherent account of the process of largely in situ development from the common, early western, Indo-European base postulated by Krahe. Indeed it seems quite appropriately denominated by the term of cumulative collective Celticity,348 adapted from Christopher Hawkes.

	It is only when it comes to chronology that there are severe differences. They arise, of course, because Tovar is following the traditional archaeological view, and is thus led to accept what appears in the perspective presented here as a very low chronology. Against this view, however, can be set the conclusions of Wolfgang Meid,349 who is otherwise quoted by Tovar with approval. He distinguishes a Late Period of Indo-European development, when individual languages can first be recognized. The earliest of these is Hittite, and its emergence around 2000 bc is a significant date, which allows him to place the Late Indo-European period in the third and second millennia bc. The Middle Period is set in the fourth and possibly the fifth millennia bc, while the previous Early Indo-European period lies in that long preceding period which is ‘lost in the mists of linguistic origins’ (im Nebelland der Glottogonie).350 Tovar and Meid consider that the undifferentiated Indo-European of central and western Europe belongs in that Late Period. Such a view corresponds very well with the one put forward here, and Meid’s chronology would not contradict an ultimately Anatolian origin somewhere before 6000 bc.

	The findings of a number of very eminent linguists can thus be made to harmonize quite effectively with the archaeological views propounded here — although it does not follow that those linguists themselves would accept them.





So who were the Celts?


	In the more precise sense advocated here and by most linguists the term ‘Celt’ is applied to those speaking a Celtic language. The Celtic languages are seen to emerge, by a process of differentiation or crystallization, from an undifferentiated early Indo-European language which was spoken in Europe north and west of the Alps, and may still be preserved in certain river names. Insular and Continental Celtic will have developed in the areas where they were spoken in the first century bc, and indeed if they are still spoken, where they have subsequently survived (although Scottish Gaelic and Breton may have moved to their present areas in around the fifth century ad by a process of élite dominance). The earliest Indo-European speakers will have reached these areas by 4000 bc, although the differentiation into individual languages may have taken place very much later. But in a very real sense, the undertaking of becoming Celtic began then, and continued through the workings of the process of cumulative Celticity. The Celtic languages may have reached Italy rather later, although there is no clear reason why the Lepontic language should not have taken part in this formation process. Later adventures, such as the sack of Rome, the attack on Delphi and the supposed movement into Galatia in Anatolia were not part of this process. Some of them may be seen as consequences of the system collapse at the end of the brief empire of Alexander the Great.

	In the broader sense, however, we are entitled to apply the term Celtic to the customs, material culture and the art of these Celtic-speaking communities. It is perfectly appropriate to contrast the order and discipline of classical art, for instance, with the linear movement and the imagination of La Tène art. Celtic art clearly ranks as one of the major art styles of the ancient world. The origins of that art and culture are to be found in the same lands and therefore among people speaking Celtic languages, as we have defined them.

	What is not admissible, however, is to restrict Celtic origins in any artificial narrow way to a specific area localized north of the Alps, as some have done. That is the area, certainly, where aristocratic chieftains of the iron age are first seen, and where La Tène art developed, but it has no specially privileged claim to be the unique and original homeland of the Celts.





10.



Indo-European Mythologies


	Seventy years ago, the founder of the periodical Études Celtiques, Joseph Vendryes,351 published an article entitled ‘Vocabulary equivalences between Indo-Iranian and Celtic’, in which he suggested the existence in these early languages of certain very similar terms relating amongst other things to ritual and religion and hence to religious traditions common to the two areas and languages. Following this evidence, it has been suggested that the brahmans (the priests mentioned in the Vedic Sanskrit texts of India), the Magi of the early Iranian Avesta, the flamines and pontifs of the Roman religion, and the druids of the early Celts played closely analogous roles in their different communities, and that these analogies were due to their common origin in still earlier Indo-European institutions. These are exciting proposals, and they were taken up with enthusiasm by many scholars. Comparable suggestions have been made about the early Irish and Indian law books:352 they consisted of canonical texts, invested with a sacred origin, and interpreted exclusively by a privileged caste. There were law schools in both countries and the relations between pupil and teacher were similar, with eventual rights of succession.

	Subsequently many similar comparisons have been made in the fields of social organization and mythology, as well as law and religion, where similarities in the forms of belief or behaviour in different regions can plausibly be used to suggest a common origin for each. In many cases it has been proposed that these similarities exist because of a shared background which is not simply linguistic, in the common Indo-European ancestral language, but also cultural. The assumption is often made that these similarities are to be traced back to those early Indo-European speaking communities which are responsible for the common linguistic heritage.

	This seemed very plausible when the historical reality underlying that common linguistic heritage was understood to be the relatively recent spread across Europe and parts of western Asia of well-organized tribesmen speaking an early Indo-European language. It seemed, at least at first sight, likely that this ‘spread’ was responsible not only for the modern distribution of the Indo-European languages, but also for a whole series of institutions, customs, beliefs and myths which could be seen as part of the common Indo-European heritage.

	Today, however, there are serious difficulties to holding such a view. For while the notion of the spread of farming, and with it of Indo-European speech, may adequately explain the linguistic communality, it will certainly not do for some of these supposedly shared social institutions. In 6000 bc these were very simple farming communities and we cannot assume that they already had the sort of specialized and differentiated social structure which we associate with the brahmans and druids, flamines and pontifs of very much later ages. The time has come to ask whether some of these institutional similarities may not be due to coincidences of various kinds, or to similarities in development rather than to a common origin in some supposedly proto-Indo-European social structure. To say this, however, has potentially devastating consequences for a major field of scholarship which has in recent years won very widespread acceptance.

	For most of the past fifty years, this particular field of study was dominated by the distinguished French student of early Indo-European culture, Georges Dumézil. In his early work, he compared the mythologies of Vedic India, early Rome and other Indo-European cultures, discussing the role of the Vedic brahman and the Latin flamen,353 following the lead which Vendryes and others had given. After 1938 he moved beyond this direct comparative mythology, and increasingly worked in terms of analogous structures to be perceived within the myths and the institutions of the lands in question, developing his notion of any underlying ‘tripartite ideology’, in many Indo-European thought structures.354

	This view has been documented in an impressive and very copious series of works, ranging far over the structure and mythology of most Indo-European societies. It is difficult to summarize355 the main points concisely, but they can be most effectively approached by beginning with the ancient Indo-European speaking communities of northern India.

	Classical Indian social organization was based upon a stratified system, consisting of four main castes: the brahmans or priests, the ksatriyas or warriors, the vaisyas or cultivators, and the low-grade sudras, who served the others. Dumézil deals primarily with the first three, the fourth being of very low rank. If one analyses the ancient Sanskrit religious literature, according to Dumézil, one can see the earliest Indian pantheon reflecting this caste organization. It is possible to discern three hierarchically ranked, functionally differentiated strata of gods. The highest of these contains the joint sovereign deities, Mitra and Varuna, whom Dumézil considers as collective representatives of the brahman caste, and embodying ‘the first function’, namely sovereignty and religious office. At the next level is Indra, the war god, embodying ‘the second function’, that of the warrior, as seen in the ksatriya caste. At the lowest level are several deities, including the Asvins and the goddess Sarasavati. These deities represent the ‘third function’, that of the food-producing class, the vaisyas, with which are associated various other attributes, including fertility and health.

	The interest of this tripartite functional scheme is that it can, supposedly, be shown to underlie the structure of other early Indo-European societies. Thus in early Rome Dumézil sees an expression of the tripartite system in the so-called archaic triad of divinities, Jupiter (sovereign deity), Mars (god of war) and Quirinus (patron of production). Similar classifications have been applied to Celtic society (where Caesar356 had spoken of druids, knights and common people) and later to Germanic society also. It is, of course, impossible to convey in so bald a statement the wide range of erudition which Dumézil brings to bear, and the great wealth of sources which he cites.

	For our present interest, however, there is a very real difficulty. The societies described in this tripartite functional scheme are hierarchically ordered. In the vocabulary of anthropology357 these are stratified societies; that is to say they show one of the principal attributes of what are termed state societies. Of course ancient Greece and Rome were indeed state societies at the times in question, and so was India by the time the caste system was fully formed, although the social organization at the earlier time when the Rigveda was composed is open to discussion. Early Celtic societies at the time of Caesar may generally be regarded as chiefdoms, in the terminology of the anthropologist, reflecting pronounced social ranking, but in general lacking the central institutions which are characteristic of state societies. It has been persuasively argued that state societies first emerged in Gaul during the first century bc and at that time or later in most other parts of the Celtic world.358 Whether the communities represented in the early Irish epics should be considered developed chiefdom societies or state societies would be a matter for discussion.

	The real difficulty lies in the previous stages of this social development. For even if the distribution of the Indo-European languages were due to a dispersal of peoples as late as the third millennium bc, there seems no way in the light of what we know of their archaeology, that these peoples could already have possessed such complex institutions. Even if we follow this relatively low chronology, and think in terms of the Kurgan cultures as the point of origin, as has been widely suggested, these were certainly not state societies, and there is very little evidence in their material culture for the prominent ranking of individuals which is characteristic of chiefdoms. This difficulty is of course much compounded if one follows the earlier chronology proposed here. If we are thinking in terms of the first farmers as the earliest Indo-European speakers of Europe, in the sixth and fifth millennia bc, we are speaking of what are generally regarded as egalitarian peasants. Their societies, as noted above, probably embodied no hierarchical ordering whatever: certainly their material culture does not reflect it. This does not mean that they were without some social organization, and no doubt individual communities often did have effective leaders, but there is no reason to suggest the existence in them of hereditary chieftains, and certainly none to warrant a specialized functional division of the population into warriors, priests and common people. These terms seem a complete anachronism.

	This is a difficulty which Dumézil never seems to have confronted, although it undoubtedly represents one of the most telling arguments against his entire system. He is not too specific about the practical meaning of these divisions.359

	(This structure) . . . naturally cannot teach us very much about the concrete form — or the different forms — in which this conception is achieved.

	But he does make clear in several places that some underlying historical reality is posited:360

	The most ancient Romans, the Umbrians, had brought with them to Italy the same conception which the Indo-Iranians also knew, and on which the Indians in particular had founded their social order.

	There is thus no doubt that he is thinking in this passage of the first Indo-Europeans to reach Italy, who, on the model proposed here, were some of the first farmers at a date before 5000 bc. Even on the Kurgan invasion theory, as propounded by Marija Gimbutas, we are dealing with a date well in advance of 2000 bc, and consequently with a society, in terms of what we know of early bronze age Italy, reflecting at most a modest chiefdom organization.

	These comments are not mere pedantry. They bring into question one of the most essential foundations of the whole edifice of Dumézilien scholarship: its historical reality. What we see of analogous social institutions and similarly stratified societies in India, Rome and Gaul in the first century bc, or a little earlier, was simply not common to these societies or to their predecessors in 2000 bc, let alone in 4000 bc.

	It is indeed curious that Dumézil never seems to have grasped this fundamental problem. For if the social institutions of Indo-European-speaking groups as far removed in space as the Celts and the Indians appear to have common forms traceable back to a common ancestor, it is obviously necessary to have some notion of what that ancestral society was, when it flourished and where it was located. This is a historical reality which Dumézil never quite seems to offer. The proto-Indo-Europeans are left as a very nebulous entity indeed. Now the critic may well feel that there is a good reason for this — that there never was an early proto-Indo-European society sharing these various social forms, and with those elements of shared mythology which Dumézil and his followers see as proto-Indo-European. And even if the protagonists of the ‘shared institutions’ view of early Indo-European society can with justice reply that they are not themselves archaeologists and cannot be expected to provide a satisfactory answer, they should at least contemplate the possibility that there may be no satisfactory answer, and that this concept of a shared proto-Indo-European mythology may itself be a construct of very recent formation.

	To adopt this solution here is not necessarily, however, to deny that interesting similarities existed between many of the societies in question at the time when they were first well documented. In addition to Vendryes and to Dumézil himself, Émile Benveniste361 has written a very thorough study, indicating a number of common institutions. However if we take a processual, anthropological viewpoint, it is not in the least surprising that societies on the brink of literacy in different parts of the world should show some general similarities of this kind. The early Indian society portrayed in the Vedic hymns, or Homeric Greece, or Celtic Ireland as depicted in the earliest writings, and the northern Europe of the Norse sagas can all, in a certain sense, be characterized as ‘heroic societies’ — but that does not necessarily mean that the ‘heroic’ features seen within them had common origins. These were all chiefdom societies (to use a term recently favoured by anthropologists). In many areas of the world, as social organization develops, we see emerging governmental institutions, associated with craft specialization. Religious roles likewise become more specialized, and are often linked with governmental ones. Polynesian society, for instance, as first depicted by Captain Cook, and now much better understood by contemporary anthropologists,362 shows many of the features described; this is certainly so for its social reality, if not necessarily for its religious structure. Moreover, in many of the countries in question, archaeology today actually allows us to follow the development of social complexity. This is particularly clear in northwest Europe, where we can trace the early origins of ranked societies among the neolithic monument builders363 (including the builders of Stonehenge) , and further developments are documented in the wealthy burials of the bronze age. There is a further striking development in the Hallstatt and La Tène iron ages of central Europe — here one might indeed begin to speak of warriors, and perhaps priests. Then, in the first century bc, as Carole Crumley and Daphne Nash364 have shown, we have state societies which no doubt possessed some degree of social stratification. Similar comments may be made for mainland Italy, where prominently ranked society is first seen in the first millennium bc. So too, for India.

	The solution here is to recognize that there are indeed structural similarities between these societies, but to question whether very many of these are the result of their common proto-Indo-European heritage. These were barbarian (i.e. non-urban), heroic societies. What we know of them has come to us in the main from epic poetry, whether the Rigveda, Homer or the Irish epics, in which warfare is glorified and the ‘second function’ is given free reign. We could make similar remarks if we were to compare them with chiefdom societies in Mesoamerica at the appropriate time.

	There are further problems, however, for it is not clear how many of the apparent equivalences in the various myths should indeed be regarded as equivalent at all. As Dumézil himself has stressed, an essential feature of his method (and in this it resembles all structuralist methods) is not to compare A in one place directly with A′ in another. That would be a prosaic and atomistic approach. It is rather the structural relationship between A, B and C in the first context which has to be compared with the relationship between A′, B′ and C′ in the second. In such cases, as many critics of structuralist method have pointed out, the basis for the claim of equivalence is very difficult to verify. As Ernest Gellner365 has put it, in relation to the binary opposites favoured by the followers of Lévi-Strauss:

	The structuralists seem to be far too willing simply to trust their intuitions in this matter and to expect their readers to extend this trust to them. Polar extremities no doubt abound in many texts, but has anyone ever put it to the test by locking diverse structuralists in insulated cubicles with the same text, and seeing whether they all emerge with the same binary opposites at the end?

	A related point has recently been made, in relation especially to interpretations of the Germanic myths, by R. I. Page366 in his paper ‘Dumézil revisited’. He writes, some scholars ‘have wondered — in considering his Norse work, at any rate — whether he builds upon facts or opinions’.

	The whole tripartite system, which Dumézil claims to be not only common to Indo-European groups, but also effectively exclusive to them, was subjected to a critical, indeed satirical review by John Brough.367 He adopted the ingenious, reductio ad absurdum approach of showing how a number of Old Testament texts seem to be open to interpretation in precisely the same tripartite terms which Dumézil claims are specifically (and exclusively) Indo-European, yet obviously the writers of the Old Testament were writing in a Semitic not an Indo-European tradition. It is only fair to say that Dumézil replied in detail to this criticism, indicating shortcomings in Brough’s analysis, and suggesting that a number of the elements which he discerned might indeed have been borrowed, through contact, from Indo-European traditions.

	Rather curiously, a somewhat similar and disquieting case has been used in an analogous way, but with very different intentions, by one of Dumézil’s own pupils and most ardent supporters, Atsuhito Yoshida.368 He has considered the early mythology of his native Japan with a Dumézilien eye and arrived at what seems at first a conclusion as bizarre as that reached by John Brough for the Old Testament:

	Japanese mythology is articulated, in effect, as much in its entirety as in its details, following the framework offered by the ideology of the three functions of the Indo-Europeans. Moreover it contains a great number of themes whose origins undoubtedly go back to Indo-European sources.

	He has suggested that the historical explanation for these supposed Indo-European elements in early Japanese mythology is contact between (Indo-European) Scythian nomads and the (non-Indo-European) inhabitants of Korea, whence they would have been transmitted to Japan at the time of early state formation in the sixth century ad. This is, as so often, a matter where a non-specialist is not in a position to assess the evidence properly, but the story seems inherently implausible. It is pertinent to note that the notion of Korean immigrants playing a decisive role in the formation of the early Japanese state has recently been questioned by qualified experts.369 One is therefore left with the uneasy suspicion that the tripartite aspect of Japanese mythology is as fortuitous as that deliberately and frivolously conjured up for the Semitic by Brough, and totally unconnected with Indo-European systems. However this time the claim has come from an authorized analyst, working within the Dumézilien canon, and cannot be rejected as a frivolous exercise, as was Brough’s example. It is difficult here to escape the view that some of the claims of the Dumézil school have been overstated. In these circumstances we are not obliged to consider incompatibilities between it and the view of Indo-European origins advanced here as a decisive refutation of the latter.

	These remarks are not intended as adverse reflection upon the enormous contributions which Dumézil made to the wider study of mythology. Indeed it is specifically through a broadly structuralist approach that he has been able to examine more effectively than hitherto the relationships embodied within the various myths. But it should be noted that the other great French scholar and student of myth, Claude Lévi-Strauss, has generally attributed structural homologies of the kind that we have been discussing to more general factors, and not to a specific, historical communality of origin. It may be, then, that they should not be allowed to weigh too heavily within the field of historical linguistics.

	Very much the same point has been made in answer to those who have endeavoured to recognize a characteristically Indo-European system of kinship.370 The British social anthropologist, Jack Goody,371 has specifically taken issue with the frequent claim that early Indo-European society was of a ‘patriarchal’ character, a claim based principally on the existence of common kin terms in the various languages. It may be also that the arguments which have been made in favour of close resemblances between the early legal systems of Ireland and Indian372 could be clarified by an analogous analysis. Some of the features in question may be common to many early legal systems which had only recently come to rely upon a written law code. This again is a specialist field where the amateur cannot properly comment, but it would be interesting to see the matter examined in this wider comparative light.

	It is when we come to specific items of vocabulary that the shared Indo-European elements are less easily dismissed. While several of the relationships and similarities indicated by Dumézil and his followers may be fortuitous, and others the result of parallel developmental processes, and others again perhaps very general structural similarities of the kind discussed by Lévi-Strauss on a global level, this can hardly be so when the word in question evidently has a common, proto-Indo-European origin. Benveniste,373 for instance, has discussed in considerable detail the well-known relationship between the Latin word rex (king) along with the Irish ri on the one hand and the Sanskrit root raj-, ancestral to the modern Indian raja, on the other. Of course it must be admitted that there are some linguistic resemblances between unrelated tongues that occur by chance; the Persian word bad, having the same meaning as the English word, is apparently not related to it: this is a case of accidental homonymy. But such is emphatically not the case for this instance or for the others cited by Benveniste. The problem here, however, is not with the word itself, since we expect plenty of words with common roots among the Indo-European languages. The difficulty is rather with the concept, the meaning. For king, in the sense of head of state, is not a term to be expected among the egalitarian communities from which both the Irish and Vedic Indian societies (as well as the Roman) evolved.

	There is, however, nothing to exclude the possibility that the common source word in Proto-Indo-European meant ‘leader’, or ‘prominent man’, without in any way implying the institution of kingship or even of chieftainship of a formal, hereditary kind. As social complexity and eventually a stratified society developed, so the term for the most prominent man may have been, in one or two instances, retained and upgraded, although not, we should note, in the majority of the later Indo-European languages. In this way, to find the same word in one or two languages designating this rather advanced social concept need not cause surprise.

	Comparable arguments may be applied to the occurrence of related words for certain deities: for Zeus, the name of the Greek god, for the Vedic, Dyau, and for the Latin, Jupiter. The common root word may have been an early divine term of some kind: its existence does not imply an equivalence between the pantheons of the areas at the time in question, or even the existence in them of a formal pantheon at all. As Dumézil himself374 puts it:

	The most incontestable equation has shown itself to be deceptive: in the Vedic Dyau, the ‘sky’ is quite differently conceived than in the Greek Zeus or the Roman Jupiter, and the comparison teaches us almost nothing.

	It is difficult, therefore, to learn a great deal through the methods of vocabulary analysis about the social institutions of those groups speaking an early form of Indo-European before this differentiated into different language families. Our problem is not simply one of vocabulary change, it is also one of changes of meaning. Yet it must be admitted that looking through the pages of Benveniste’s major work one does indeed find a rich vocabulary of words which undoubtedly have common roots.

	The interesting possibility has also been raised375 that early metrical forms of verse seen in archaic Irish and in Vedic Sanskrit, as well as in Homeric Greek, appear to be related. That is an attractive suggestion, although one which it may prove difficult to evaluate rigorously. It is inherently likely that our first farmers will have had an oral literature, perhaps including lyric verse, as do many peasants in different parts of the world. It is therefore possible that some specific metrical forms could have been preserved over the millennia. But it is still a remarkable similarity.

	In each of these cases, however, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the specialist in the field in question has been profoundly influenced by the prevailing historical consensus. The notion of a warlike, early Indo-European society, propagated by nomadic horsemen in the course of their wanderings has of course been a very attractive one. And coupled as it was with the substantial body of archaeological data set out by Childe and later by it appeared to offer an authoritative historical Gimbutas, framework within which specialists in kinship, in law, in social institutions and so forth could operate. This was all perfectly legitimate, for there is no doubt that the observations in these various special fields were indeed perfectly compatible with that historical explanation for the Indo-European phenomenon which set the homeland of the early Indo-Europeans in the steppes of western Russia somewhere just prior to the beginning of the bronze age.

	Such compatibility between the observations in these different fields of scholarship and the traditional view of early Indo-European origins should not be too readily cited, however, in support of that traditional view. For, as I have sought to show, if a different explanation be offered for the distribution of the Indo-European languages, and one which offers a much greater time depth, very few serious difficulties are presented by these important adjacent fields of scholarship. The compatibilities can quite readily be adjusted. Most of the apparent difficulties are in fact a product of the acceptance of the traditional historical view, and suitable adjustments can be made if that is rejected and replaced by the alternative offered here.

	Certainly a number of the arguments offered by Dumézil and his colleagues do appear very difficult to reconcile with the chronology. It is necessary then to suggest, as I have indicated above, that many of the similarities or apparent similarities recognized by Dumézil are not in fact to be explained in terms of a common origin in some proto-Indo-European cultural milieu. That, then, is the conclusion which I offer here. It seems to me that Dumézil, by avoiding the issue of the concrete historical reality lying behind the various similarities between cultural forms which he seeks to recognize, has allowed himself a much freer hand and perhaps a less disciplined methodology than might have been prudent. As a result, many of his interpretations will have to be called into question, and perhaps some more cautious explanations offered for some of the similarities which are recognized among the myths and the social institutions of different societies where Indo-European languages were spoken.

	There is also some more positive work of interpretation to be undertaken. For while my view does not seem compatible with a common Indo-European background of priest, kings and warriors, the question does still remain as to what precisely the shared cultural background might be. If we take the view that in many areas the spread of Indo-European languages was indeed due to the demographic processes associated with the development of agriculture, it is certainly pertinent to ask what common cultural elements these early farmers brought with them in addition to their language. There may well have been some common institutions, and a shared belief system, although it was a belief system of peasant farmers, not of warlike nomads with a highly ranked social structure. I do not doubt that a sensitive analysis and interpretation of the shared early vocabulary, insofar as it can be constructed, of very much the kind undertaken by Benveniste, can answer some of the relevant questions.

	We can see now, however, that such a work of interpretation will need to make rather fewer prior assumptions about the general nature of that society. And it will certainly need to attempt a reconstruction which is compatible with the world of early peasant farmers. That seems a major new task for Indo-European scholarship, and a not unworthy one, if we are to seek some clearer picture of our common Indo-European origins. But it is a task where greater methodological awareness, and perhaps greater caution will need to be exercised.





11.



Archaeology and Indo-European Origins: An Assessment


	No other article I have ever written in my life was so difficult for me as this one. Here I argue with famous and respected scientists with numerous high merits in linguistics. This time, too, they have accomplished an enormous task, working sometimes in absolutely untouched areas of science. Why is it that the results of their efforts have to be so severely criticised? Obviously, when dealing with so important and incredibly difficult problems as this one, a linguist should exercise even more rigour than usual, and a historian should abstain from speculations and try to represent real people in concrete historical conditions. Then all impossible solutions will disappear, and the only possible one will emerge.

	 I. M. Diakonov, 1984, 75



	The diffidence expressed by the distinguished Soviet academic in the above passage is certainly appropriate in the field which he, and we, are considering. For these are questions which have been much discussed in the past by generations of leading scholars, and the. position presented here disagrees with most of them. One should not underestimate, then, the controversial nature of the views which I have presented, nor the difficulties which they may encounter in their more detailed application. The subject matter is vast, embracing the full sweep of the languages today classified as Indo-European, as well as the complex prehistoric archaeology of much of the Old World, from western Europe through to Anatolia, the Levant, central Asia, the Indian sub-continent and indeed, in the deserts of Sinkiang, to what is today part of the People’s Republic of China. That someone who can make no claim to be a linguist should dabble in such matters certainly smacks of temerity. And when the inevitable consequences of the views advanced are to call into question several large, and now quite well-developed, fields of scholarship, the enterprise may even seem not a little foolhardy.

	We have seen in earlier chapters how the conventional view has been built up in a system of logic where the historical linguists generally accept some of the premises offered by the prehistoric archaeologists, and the archaeologists accept those of the linguists. Amongst those premises are several crucial ones which have rarely been called into question, and it is there that the fatal flaw in the logic of the entire inferential edifice may lie. No one person can today be a specialist in all the fields which are directly relevant to a serious study of these questions. Yet the results are of fundamental importance to a whole series of such fields of study. If the views presented here, and the arguments which sustain them, carry some weight, then their consequences are of urgent relevance for all those areas of inquiry. They certainly have a significant bearing on the whole way we think about European and Indian societal origins. In a sense the implications of the approach go even deeper: they bear on the way in which we consider the relations between archaeology and language anywhere. So in conclusion I shall consider some of the implications which arise from the view advocated which bear more widely on language groups quite unrelated to the Indo-European, and which are thus in a sense applicable on a world-wide basis.



	In previous chapters a fresh approach to the study of early language origins was advocated which would at the same time consider anew the processes by which languages develop and change, with due respect for the recent advances in sociolinguistics, and at the same time take a processual approach to the prehistoric archaeology. It was argued that while we cannot expect to find direct evidence in the archaeological record for a specific prehistoric language or language group, we can indeed study processes of demographic and social change. It is these processes of change which we may seek, however hypothetically, to correlate with language change in those areas.

	Whatever the limitations of the specific suggestions for the Indo-European languages which then followed, I would certainly argue that the approach advocated offers in effect the only valid way to go about studying early language origins. So that while critics may quite reasonably quarrel with the proposals set out in Chapter 7, I should be surprised if they did not find those of Chapter 6 reasonably acceptable.

	In proposing a specific solution I found it difficult to accept the arguments put forward for profound population and language changes across the whole of Europe at the beginning of the bronze age, somewhere in the third millennium bc. (The arguments, derived from ‘linguistic palaeontology’, which supposedly supported such changes were criticized in Chapters 2 and 4.) The main objection to this solution was archaeological: that there does not seem to be any sufficiently profound and widespread shift in the archaeological record at that time to justify such a conclusion. If the evidence of the Beaker phenomenon and of Corded Ware were accepted, as it was until recently, as indicating widespread migrations of people, then the case might still be tenable. But archaeologists today, as we have seen, are less and less inclined to make such an interpretation.

	In surveying European prehistory I do not believe that we can see any one process, nor any series of processes at once sufficiently profound in social and demographic consequences and so widespread geographically as to suggest a viable background for such radical linguistic changes, until we go right back to the time of the spread of farming. Of course there remain other possibilities, even if that point is accepted. It would still be logically possible for the changes in question to have occurred before the spread of farming, a possibility which takes the argument back to the palaeolithic era. And of course it is possible to argue, as some have done, that an explanation in terms of the spread of some early Indo-European language or languages is not the right approach. Some different, in some senses more static, model could be proposed.

	The language-farming theory carried with it the hypothesis that farming came to Europe (we shall refer again to Iran and India later) not simply through the acquisition by the pre-existing mesolithic population of the various areas of the necessary plant and animal species, but rather through successive displacements, over the generations, of peasant farmers. No individual needs to have moved more than a few kilometres in the search for new farmland, yet the gradual, cumulative effect of such displacements, as Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza showed in their elegant wave of advance model, is the spread of a new population whose descent can in the main be traced back through the successive farming generations to the original early farming areas and their population at the time.

	This argument, stated so baldly, has certainly the merits of simplicity, but it should be recognized for what it is — a ‘homeland’ model. The critic may well say that we have done little more than resuscitate an Urvolk, an original group of proto-Indo-European speakers, in an Urheimat, a homeland, in a rather unexpected place. To some extent such an observation is not unreasonable: I have indeed argued that before about 6000 bc there were, in the eastern part of Anatolia, and perhaps in some adjacent lands to the east and south-east, and probably nowhere else, people speaking languages ancestral to all the Indo-European languages of today. So that is indeed a kind of ‘homeland’ model, but it is certainly not a migrationist model of the old-fashioned and traditional kind. It does not assume a sudden and unexplained eruption from some rather ill-defined nuclear area, linked perhaps in some way to warlike nomad pastoralists. On the contrary, it links the spread of early Indo-European languages to a well-defined demographic process itself closely correlated with the adoption of a farming economy. The development of nomad pastoralism is indeed relevant, but it is argued that this may have happened rather later, first on the western part of the Russian steppes, relying on domestic animals previously used in the settled farming communities of that area. To the extent that one can speak of a directional process here, nomad pastoralism seems to have spread from eastern Europe eastwards rather than the converse. In any case the subsequent adoption of a nomad pastoralist economy in parts of eastern Europe west of the Russian steppes was not a process which radically affected Europe as a whole.

	This hypothesis, as I have outlined it, is clearly vulnerable in at least one important respect; for it is far from clear that, in western Europe at any rate, the spread of farming economy was indeed accompanied by the movement, even over short distances, of peasant farmers. In south-eastern Europe, as we have seen, such an argument can much more readily be accepted: most students of the early neolithic period in Greece agree that the new cereal crops, as well as the domesticated sheep, goat and probably cattle were imports to the area from Anatolia. At the moment it is perfectly plausible to see the phenomenon of village life there, and indeed the villagers themselves, as something which came across the Aegean. That is to say that we are indeed speaking of the movements of small groups of farmers in their boats, with their plants and animals. The wave of advance model seems appropriate also for the transmission to the Balkans, and particularly so for the spread of the earliest farmers of the Danube with their Bandkeramik pottery up to the North Sea and almost to the English Channel.376 It is likely that the first farmers to reach England came across the channel in small boats, just as their remote ancestors had crossed the Aegean some two thousand years earlier. We should nonetheless note here that an alternative case can be made, albeit resting so far on very scant evidence, that south-east Europe was itself part of the nuclear zone in which the wild prototypes of the essential domesticates could be found, and where the initial domestication process took place.377

	In the west Mediterranean, however, it is much easier to question the wave of advance model and to stress the resilience of the pre-existing mesolithic populations, and the very long time which the process of ‘acculturation’ — i.e. the adoption of a farming economy — took. Indeed most of the best qualified recent writers stress these features,378 and prefer to think in terms of largely indigenous processes. As Whittle379 writes:

	The gradual nature of change in most of the western Mediterranean remains at present the most striking feature of these two millennia (of early farming) and the contrast with other parts of Europe is notable. Depending of course on one’s view of the origins of the south-east Italian communities, all the observed changes can be seen in the context of local rather than external events.

	Certainly it can be conceded that the process was a complex one, and that the adoption or development of farming did not occur in any steady or smooth way as the result of a uniform spread from the south-east. The wave of advance model was never intended to offer a detailed description of the process as it occurred in local regions, but rather to offer an understanding of the general underlying mechanism. It should be noted that those pre-existing mesolithic communities which adopted a farming economy, speaking presumably some non-Indo-European language, would themselves be expected to undergo, other things being equal, the same process of population increase as other peasant farmers occupying hitherto uncultivated lands. The model of partial acculturation would thus predict the presence of large pockets of other local languages remaining among those Indo-European languages whose presence was ultimately due to the spread of the farmers themselves.

	The early reality in the west may well have been some such mosaic, where due to regional differences some areas adopted farming rapidly as a result of a ‘spread’ of the economy, and others developed more gradually, retaining a human population not significantly augmented by incomers. The most convenient explanation for the presence in central Italy of an important non-Indo-European language, Etruscan, comes from adopting this view. The same is true for Basque, and for those other early, non-Indo-European languages of Iberia of which we have a glimpse from the fragmentary inscriptions of the last few centuries bc.

	Indeed it is important to realize that the picture as we have it today is a palimpsest, whose foundations may have been established in the early farming period, but whose detail is the product of many processes over subsequent millennia. These processes will inevitably have involved the extinction of several dialects and languages without leaving any significant record for us. There must have been Indo-European languages which did not survive, and there must also have been languages associated with pre-existing populations (and hence on my hypothesis, non-Indo-European) which survived for centuries and millennia before becoming extinct as the result of other social, demographic and linguistic processes. Basque and Etruscan are only, as it were, the tips of icebergs protruding into our present knowledge: many other non-Indo-European languages will have survived through several subsequent millennia, but for us they are nonetheless now lost beneath the waters of time.

	The picture outlined here is thus not necessarily incompatible with the more sophisticated view of the origins of European farming adopted by many recent writers, and it is certainly consonant with a recognition of the regional diversity involved, and of the complexity of the processes. But it is difficult to see how it could be reconciled with the argument that the development of farming in the west Mediterranean was entirely the result of indigenous processes, or with the adoption by local populations of a farming economy without a significant proportion of incomers at that time. In terms of the general picture proposed here, that would have resulted in a later neolithic situation around 4000 bc where populations in south-east, eastern and central Europe would have spoken a number of Indo-European languages (albeit with local complications), and with populations in the west Mediterranean and Atlantic Europe speaking non-Indo-European languages derived from their mesolithic forebears. By stressing the complexity of the situation I am not seeking to confuse the issue. My theory of Indo-European origins probably is in fact incompatible with the view on local neolithic origins for the west Mediterranean held by such well-informed writers as Barker and Lewthwaite,380 and it is well to admit it.

	The hypothesis that early Indo-European languages were spoken as early as the seventh millennium bc in eastern Anatolia certainly also gains considerably in plausibility in the light of recent work by the Soviet authors Gamkrelidze and Ivanov. Their study is of vastly greater scope than my own, proposing radically new linguistic theories both on the evolution of the consonants in the Indo-European languages and a revised grammatical structure. Various arguments lead them to place in eastern Anatolia the original area where a proto-Indo-European language was spoken — that is to say in precisely the same area to which very different arguments have led me: ‘the original territory of the original Indo-European homeland coincided with a region contained within eastern Anatolia, the southern Caucasus and northern Mesopotamia in the fourth-fifth millennia bce’.381 It should be noted that the date which they propose is earlier than most scholars would suggest, although later than my own. Their arguments are primarily linguistic, depending among others on various Semitic loan-words which are shared by many Indo-European languages and which can be used to support some geographical proximity at an early stage. It is therefore encouraging that archaeological arguments, which are quite independent of their linguistic ones, have led me to very much the same conclusion.

	It should be noted at once, however, that their solution differs fundamentally from mine in one very major respect. For while they too see the Hittite language evolving locally, and the location of Greek in Greece as a result of westward movement from Anatolia, they make the other Indo-European languages of Europe reach their destination by a complex series of migrations which lead them first (by a route extending far to the east) to that area north of the Black Sea where so many earlier writers have set their origins:382 ‘The region north of the Black Sea region and the Volga steppes may be considered the basic common (although secondary) homeland for the “Ancient European” languages.’ This position runs, of course, against all the archaeological counter-arguments set out earlier, and cannot be accepted here. But the great encouragement which I draw from their work is that the linguistic situation is evidently of sufficient fluidity to allow such eminent authorities to propose a nuclear area in eastern Anatolia, at a much earlier date than has been conventionally accepted. Their work has certainly been well received by some western scholars.383

	At the same time, they have been criticized quite severely by the Soviet scholar, I. Diakonov,384 on very much the same grounds (among other more technical and linguistic ones) which I would myself choose:

	Essential questions should be asked: who migrated? Why? How many of them were there? Was it actually a migration of people, or rather the transfer of a language from one population to another? These are difficult questions, but they should at least be asked when we try to solve such a complicated historical problem as that of the spreading of the Indo-European languages all over Eurasia.

	What Diakonov is here advocating is precisely the central thrust of this book: that it is necessary to take a processual approach which can give some meaning in human terms (and in archaeological terms) to the realities underlying such linguistic changes. All of this emboldens me to feel that the language-farming thesis advanced here remains a distinctly tenable one, at least for Europe.

	There can be no doubt, however, that the work by these Soviet scholars represents a significant re-opening of the Indo-European question from a linguistic standpoint.385 That I think is very necessary if further progress is to be made.

	As far as the Indo-Iranian languages are concerned, along with Tocharian, the situation is certainly more complicated, and there can be no doubt that the development of a nomad pastoral economy was a significant factor, at least for central Asia. As we have seen that economic adaptation seems to have been evolved at the western end of the Russian steppe lands, and to have spread eastwards. Such a view is quite different from the traditional Childe–Gimbutas thesis. Whether the first Indo-European languages spoken in the northern Indian sub-continent came there as a result of a wave of advance farming spread, as early as the sixth millennium bc, seems at present very uncertain. It would seem that the later spread of a nomad pastoralist economy in the third millennium bc, and later, of a more highly-ranked social organization based upon horse riding must also be part of the picture, but it is perfectly possible that the languages used in the Indus Valley civilization as early as 3000 bc were already Indo-European.

	It is also interesting to note how a similar language-farming explanation is certainly valid for much more recent times. In north America the first European immigrants brought with them very much the same farming economy, based upon cereal crops, sheep and cattle, which originated in the Near East some ten millennia earlier. Again there was a wave of advance, from east to west, although naturally a whole series of local factors made the detailed local histories very different. Closely similar observations can be made for Australia, New Zealand and much of South America. In each case the Indo-European languages in question became dominant through the working of demographic processes associated with the spread of the new farming pattern.

	Of course in these lands there were other differences such as technology, and the incoming immigrants did have a highly ranked society, so that the factor of élite dominance is also a very important one. It would be completely misleading to equate the position in prehistoric Europe with the European expansion of imperial and colonialist times. Nor am I seeking to argue some mystical association between wheat and barley and the Indo-European languages. Wheat and barley came to be just as firmly associated with the Semitic languages in Mesopotamia and the Levant. My point is simply that language spread often is indeed associated with intelligible social, demographic and economic processes which the archaeologist can well aspire to study and understand: that is the nub. The finer details of the solution proposed remain to be investigated and may well be modified through further work. It is this central principle which is the more important.

	If the central arguments set out in previous chapters be accepted, whatever the view taken over various details which no doubt remain uncertain, the consequences for our understanding of the early development of the areas and languages concerned are profound; for this is not simply an intriguing philological question of interest to specialist prehistorians, it also impinges upon all those areas of study where the early histories of peoples and of nations are considered to be of significance.

	We are faced, then, with a vastly greater time depth, where the Indo-European antecedents of the modern European world are to be traced back six or seven thousand years, all of it on European soil. My theory does indeed argue for ultimately Anatolian origins, and it is indeed to these common origins that the shared linguistic unity of the Indo-European languages is largely to be ascribed; but they are remote origins, these common elements of linguistic parentage. Many of the other points of similarity are not so much due to that common source, but to a shared ‘life history’ as it were. The path of development from early farming to metal-using through to iron age society has in several ways been a similar one in different parts of Europe. This I think is in large measure due to shared environmental conditions, and to shared experiences over millennia of history: there is nothing particularly ‘Indo-European’ about most of it.

	It is an important feature, almost a paradoxical feature in some ways, that this long consideration of the origins of the Indo-European languages should serve in some senses to de-emphasize the significance of our shared Indo-European heritage. This heritage is indeed there in the common linguistic structures and elements of vocabulary which are shared by the Indo-European languages of today and by their ancestors, right back to that original and hypothetical group of proto-Indo-European dialects some eight or nine thousand years ago. However it should be observed at once that if an early Indo-European language came to be spoken in many of the lands now under consideration as early as the initial development of a farming economy, and if that was the decisive process leading to our shared Indo-European heritage, then that community or communality was culturally rather simple, although no doubt linguistically very rich. We are talking here of simple peasant farmers, with a restricted range of domestic plants and animals and a limited range of crafts. These may generally have included weaving and pottery-making and other farming skills, but theirs were egalitarian societies. To call them ‘tribal’, at any rate at the outset, might be to overstate the case, since different communities were probably not strongly linked by social ties in the early days. On the contrary, they can probably be more satisfactorily described as ‘segmentary societies’, laying stress on the almost autonomous nature of individual village or neighbourhood communities. Naturally there were links and marriage exchanges between these, but in the early days at least it may be wrong to think of much larger regional associations such as one might term ‘tribes’.

	It is implicit in this view that more sophisticated social organization, with the development of ranked society and eventually of ‘chiefdoms’, only emerged later in some areas. The hierarchical tendencies which we discern in many of the areas in question in early historical times — the warlike chiefs, the warrior aristocracy — cannot possibly have been part of that original, shared Indo-European heritage which we can associate with those first farmers and with their egalitarian societies. This would seem an inescapable consequence of the view advanced here. But it is in some ways a revolutionary one, for a whole discipline of scholarship has emerged in recent decades which concerns itself with early Indo-European society and which has reached diametrically opposite conclusions. Its weakness, as I see it, is that it has rarely considered the fundamental historical question as to what the concrete historical reality was behind the supposed communal features of the Indo-Europeans.

	Three issues now remain that we should look at: language origins, language dispersals, and the relationship between archaeology and linguistic studies. It is possible here only to touch upon these in summing up, but I should like to do so in order to indicate areas where more work needs to be done.





Archaeology and Language Origins


	The problem of the origins of language is as old as scholarship itself, and our own more specific problem of linguistic diversity is of course inseparable from it. Unfortunately the physical, that is to say anatomical, aspects of language production give us little clear-cut information. It is arguable that all the known hominids from the time of Australopithecus, some three million years ago, have been endowed with sufficient in the way of vocal chords to make the production of some form of spoken language, in the human sense, a possibility:386 the question is, rather, a neurophysiological one.

	The problem of language today is thus seen less as involving simple physical questions than as raising more crucial issues of symboling ability.387 It is argued that language is not only a means of communication, but a device which allows the handling by the individual of symbolic concepts and as such it is indispensable to structured thought. If this viewpoint be followed, it is at least arguable that the development of the relevant abilities of reasoning, of conceptualizing, should be reflected in human behaviour patterns. It is of course possible to study these through the material remains. Such is the perspective now widely accepted. Quite naturally it places much emphasis upon the symbolic aspects of material culture, and not least upon such early depictions as are seen in upper palaeolithic cave art; both the paintings and the small portable objects.388

	Many contemporary writers would be inclined to equate the development of language-as-we-know-it with the emergence of fully modern man in the physical sense, that is to say of Homo sapiens sapiens some 40,000 years ago. The equation here is based on the current view that the emergence of the physical characteristics of Homo sapiens sapiens was approximately contemporary with the development of the whole new range of behaviours which we see in the upper palaeolithic period. In western Europe it has generally been held that Homo sapiens sapiens in the physical sense can be equated with the material culture of the Aurignacian (Perigordian I) phase, and further east with the Gravettian. The earlier and less varied Mousterian material culture can be equated with modern man’s predecessor in Europe and elsewhere: Neanderthal man, Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. One very interesting aspect of current research is the investigation of the validity of this correlation, which in some respects has been called into question. Moreover there is now growing evidence for the very much earlier emergence in southern Africa, perhaps as far back as 90,000 years ago, of anatomically modern humans, accompanied by some change in their behaviour patterns as reflected in the tool industries. These behaviour patterns are to be contrasted with those of earlier hominids, which have recently been reassessed and judged by some to have been much simpler than had earlier been thought.

	Such questions are being intensively researched at present, and to draw any firm conclusion would be premature, but it certainly now looks very possible that the development of human language as a powerful vehicle for symbolic and conceptual ability is to be associated with the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens. On that view, earlier hominids would have had very restricted linguistic abilities indeed.

	Such conclusions would have immediate implications for historical linguistics. For they would set a rather well defined time frame within which the subject could operate. We could expect a process of differentiation of different ‘languages’, in the modern sense, to be underway from around 40,000 years ago in all areas with a human population.

	There is no doubt that the historical reconstruction of the global dispersal of Homo sapiens sapiens can be undertaken by archaeological means. Indeed the task is very much simpler if the physical anthropology (i.e. the physical form, including the skeletal remains) may be equated with the well-defined material culture of the upper palaeolithic. Whether fully modern man emerged first in Africa, and dispersed from there around 40,000 years ago is still a matter for debate, but it is a debate which further research will resolve. Already, I think, we can assume that this is the time frame within which historical linguistics may operate.

	A logical distinction must of course be drawn between the problem of the origins of human linguistic ability in a general sense, and that of the origins of individual languages or linguistic groups in all their rich diversity, but at the same time the two are inseparably linked. It is generally agreed that humans today carry with them at birth an innate linguistic ability which ensures that, during their early development, they come to speak at least one language, normally the language spoken around them in their early years. The precise form of specific words used to designate individual concepts is in most cases arbitrary. Given therefore a tendency of linguistic drift, in which the forms of the language between groups not in direct contact gradually diverge, the emergence of linguistic diversity would seem inevitable. We must therefore expect that linguistic diversity would have emerged almost as early as the full development of human speech ability.

	The question then arises as to how far back in time we may be able to trace the different language groupings in the modern world which we have been discussing. Rather than seeking the origins of the Indo-European language group in the demographic processes associated with the development of farming around 8000 bc, should we instead set them very much earlier and link them rather with the spread of Homo sapiens sapiens? Certainly this is a position which has been adopted by some archaeologists in the past, and it cannot be rejected immediately on a priori grounds.

	Such a view would, of course, run counter to the conclusions which have been drawn from the procedures of glottochronology. In Chapter 5 it was concluded that while lexicostatistics can be of real value in offering some quantitative measure of similarities and differences between languages, or at least between language vocabularies, the assumptions about constant rates of change which underlie glottochronology seem very doubtful. So I felt able to argue that to situate the time of differentiation between some of the early Indo-European dialects as much as 10,000 years ago, instead of 5,000 years ago, need not run counter to lexicostatistical considerations, but it may be that to place these events as far back as 40,000 years ago would create difficulties.389

	On the other hand we might not be obliged to go as far back as this. The separation between the major language groups of the world might well date from that early time, while the differentiation within them could have taken place much later, during the course of the upper palaeolithic period and of course in more recent times as well. At the moment these are relatively new ideas, within the context of recent developments in palaeolithic studies (although, as we have seen, some of them have been anticipated by earlier writers). At the moment it may be sufficient to be aware of a whole, vast field of research centred upon a coherent time frame within which it may be possible one day to fit the entire picture of language differentiation on a global level. Such a project, as we have stressed, would address the underlying social, economic and demographic processes at work, and in doing so might be able to bring the available archaeological evidence to bear in concrete fashion.





Archaeology and Language Dispersals: in particular the Polynesian and Bantu Languages


	The problem of the Indo-European languages, and the solution to it which is offered here, offers so many analogies to one or perhaps two comparable problems which present themselves elsewhere on the globe, that a brief discussion may be worthwhile. In the Polynesian case the outline solution generally accepted seems so well grounded that the comparison is likely to be more useful to Indo-European than to Polynesian studies. In the Bantu case, however, the whole issue remains controversial, and the juxtaposition of the Indo-European and Bantu questions may be mutually informative.





Polynesian


	The community among the Polynesian languages has been recognized since the time of Captain Cook. Indeed the similarity in relationships between even the least similar of them may be compared with those operating within one of the Indo-European sub-groups (such as the Romance languages): they are all much closer to each other than is, for instance, Hindi in relation to Greek. The Polynesian languages indeed form part of a much larger classificatory grouping, that of the Austronesian languages, of which there are about eight hundred, spoken in Indonesia, the Philippines, Micronesia, Polynesia and beyond.390 On the other hand the languages of Australia, of much of New Guinea and of much of the Solomon Islands are unrelated to the Austronesian languages. These relationships are summarized in the family tree, Fig. 11.2.





		 			 FIG. 11.1 Map of the Pacific showing the major Austronesian linguistic divisions (after Jennings).





	Although the languages of Polynesia form a rather minor branch of the larger Austronesian family, their island distribution in the central and eastern Pacific makes study particularly informative. In particular, the progress of Pacific archaeology has now managed to establish the initial date of colonization of most of these islands.391 The material culture and the economy of these initial settlers can be investigated. In most cases it is clear that the initial population of the island in question formed the ancestors of the modern inhabitants, and the historical reconstruction now looks increasingly uncontroversial — which is not to say that it has been without controversy in the past.

	It is now clear that the first settlers in western Polynesia arrived in Tonga about 1300 bc. The associated material assemblage is known as the Lapita culture, which is seen further west earlier, for instance in Fiji. The whole of western Polynesia was colonized by the beginning of the modern era (i.e. before ad 1), and the island economy was that of horticulturalists, who used some at least of the crops already available in the islands of south-east Asia by 3000 bc (including cultivated taro, yams, breadfruit and coconut), as well as pigs and dogs. The material culture included pottery and stone tools and (of crucial importance for the dispersal itself) outrigger canoes with sails.





		 			 FIG. 11.2 Family tree diagram for the Fijian and Polynesian languages (after Bellwood).





	The early settlement of eastern Polynesia was initiated between ad 300 and 700 in the Marquesas Islands, Tahiti, Hawaii and Easter Island. New Zealand was reached by ad 1100.

	This was a process of initial colonization, in areas previously without human population. In this respect it certainly differed markedly from the demographic processes at work in Europe at the time of the development there of early farming. But at the same time we should recognize that this process was indeed also one where the rapid diffusion of language, and the differentiation into a number of local languages, was associated with the spread of a farming (or horticultural) economy, and thus of specific plant and animal domesticates.

	In particular it is informative to compare the process of linguistic differentiation with that which may have operated in Europe. In Polynesia, as in all such dispersals, the ‘founder effect’ is in evidence.392 There the offshoot from a donor area (if we imagine the process operating in a chain-like sequence with each link in the chain acting as a ‘donor’ for the next) is not entirely typical of that area. For naturally within any area there would be a range of variation, both culturally and linguistically. The receptor area is thus colonized by a relatively small group of individuals (the ‘founders’) whose language and material culture is not entirely typical of the area from which they come. In this way, and through natural drift and divergence with time, quite marked differences arise. These are processes perfectly familiar from the working of biological evolution in general: they are not specific to human culture alone.

	It is instructive, therefore, to compare the Polynesian case with the Indo-European, but at the same time it must be admitted that the geographical pattern of variation of the Polynesian languages conforms much more conveniently to the expectations of the dispersal model than is the case for the Indo-European languages. If the Polynesian languages are subjected to a lexicostatistical study, in general the pattern of similarities between languages follows that of the dispersal path, so that the languages which are the most similar are those which diverged most recently from a common ancestor, in a way predictable from the reconstructed path of dispersal. As we have seen, for the Indo-European languages no such absolutely clear-cut pattern emerges, whereby the assumed path and the historical sequence of dispersal might allow the prediction of lexicostatistical similarity.





		 			 FIG. 11.3 Diagram indicating the chronology of Pacific island discovery by founding populations, based on archaeological interpretations and radiocarbon dates. Tonga is believed to have been colonized from Fiji around 1200 bc (after Jennings).





	On the other hand, if one looks at the picture within a particular sub-group of the Indo-European languages, such as the Germanic languages, a more intelligible pattern of relationships of similarity does sometimes emerge. It is when the languages are much less similar to each other, no doubt because they are further removed historically, that difficulties arise, and this is to some extent true in the Austronesian case also. But the comparison is certainly informative, precisely because in Polynesia the archaeological and the linguistic evidence agree so very well.





Bantu


	The case of the Bantu languages of Africa is a very different one, for neither the linguistic nor the archaeological picture is very clear-cut as yet. What is abundantly clear, however, is that, over a vast area of central and southern Africa, languages are spoken which are classified by linguists as belonging to a single language family.393 Just as in the case of the Indo-European languages, it is widely assumed that the modern distribution is the result of a dispersal process, for which a primary area of origin should be sought, but it should be noted that, as in the Indo-European case, this assumption need not go unquestioned. Instead, Lwanga-Lunyiigo has suggested:394

	The Bantu-speaking Negroes occupied a broad swathe of territory running from the great-lakes region of Eastern Africa to the shores of the Atlantic in Zaire from very early times and that the supposed exodus from West Africa into Central, Eastern and Southern Africa did not take place.

	To the extent that he is arguing against a homeland/dispersion model, and in favour of a very much larger initial area in which a degree of linguistic unity emerged, his position may be compared with that of Trubetskoy for Indo-European studies.





		 			 FIG. 11.4 The dispersal of the Bantu languages of Africa (prepared and drawn by C. Scarre).



		 			 1 Home area of the early Bantoid languages: the locus of early ironworking in Africa.

2 The spread of iron-working to the inter-lacustrine area: the early formation of the East Bantu languages.

3 The spread of early farming and iron-working to the Congo and beyond: the West Bantu languages.

4 and 5 The further spread of iron-working and of cattle pastoralism and of the East Bantu languages.





	Once again, linguists disagree about the interpretation of the linguistic evidence pointing towards a supposed homeland, with Greenberg395 seeing the original focal area as lying close to the region with the greatest modern linguistic diversity, while Guthrie396 seeks the Urheimat in the area where the modern languages show a high proportion of words with common Bantu roots. Once again it is possible to suggest that many arguments develop in a circular path, with the archaeologists quoting the authority of the linguists for some of their assumptions, and vice versa. In the words of Vansina:397

	La prépondérance de la linguistique a conduit à des situations surprenantes: les archéologues utilisent les conclusions des linguistes pour asseoir leurs inférences sur la culture matérielle, et les linguistes partent des conclusions des archéologues pour attester l’existence de locuteurs d’une quelconque sous-famille ou rameau bantu dans un secteur géographique.

	Here too there has been a tendency to equate languages with specific aspects of material culture, in this case iron working. Sometimes the alleged warlike propensities of the Bantu are adduced in support.

	Recently however, as Oliver and then Phillipson398 have pointed out, there have been efforts to link the initial expansion of early Bantu languages from the north-western part of their present distribution with the inception there of agriculture and of the early use of domestic goats. In a subsequent phase during the early first millennium bc new cereal crops (including sorghum) came to be cultivated in the eastern part of the zone now occupied by Bantu-speaking groups, and the herding of domesticated sheep (and cattle in some cases) was developed, along with iron metallurgy.

	These arguments have not yet been fully elaborated in demographic terms, but they do have the merit (advocated in Chapter 6), that a coherent processual reason should be given for the social or demographic forces postulated as underlying language change. Here, as in the Indo-European case, the expansion of a language group is linked to the expansion of a farming economy at the expense of a hunter-gatherer population. Before the development of these more recent theories it was certainly possible to object that no coherent reason was given for the supposed migrations of these various Bantu-speaking tribes, other than a supposed warlike character and the possession of iron tools and weapons. Now that the underlying dynamic of the supposed expansion is considered, the case becomes very much more plausible.

	Of course I am not in a position to assess the merits of the archaeological evidence offered in favour of these various hypotheses, and still less the linguistic arguments, but I do feel that the discussion here of our Indo-European problems does have a certain general relevance for Bantu studies. It sets a high priority on the investigation of the demographic processes at work, and therefore on the reconstruction of the subsistence economies of the different areas under consideration. It is clear that the élite dominance model is as inappropriate to the early Bantu groups as it is to the early Indo-Europeans of the fourth millennium bc. In the Polynesian case one was faced with an instance of initial colonization, but here, when dealing with language replacement, some version of the subsistence/ demography approach should be sought. It is clear, then, that there may be some real similarities between the two problems and in particular between the approaches of linguists and archaeologists towards their solution. Scholars in each geographical area may perhaps have something to learn from the mistakes and the advances made by workers in the other.





The Relationship between Archaeology and Linguistic Studies


	The study of linguistics has undergone a revolution over the past generation, and we are all learning to think much more deeply about the extraordinary and unique linguistic facility which increasingly seems inseparable from the human ability to use symbols and concepts, and is thus in a sense the prime distinguishing mark of humankind.

	Archaeology too has had its significant advances, and the great project of prehistoric archaeology of enabling us to understand more effectively the emergence and subsequent paths of development of the human species is so well advanced that some at least of the landmarks along those paths are becoming reasonably clear.

	The underlying lesson of this book, as I have increasingly come to grasp in writing it, is that these two disciplines have not yet interacted very significantly one with another. Although my prime concern has been with a single language group, albeit a major one, the issues confronted in discussing it have been very much the same as those which have to be addressed in discussing any other language group. The Indo-European languages have an outstanding advantage, which they share with the Semitic languages, with Chinese and with perhaps one or two other groups, that through the early evolution of writing among some of their speakers, we have a considerable time depth to work with. But despite this advantage, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that there is something profoundly unsatisfactory about most, perhaps all, prevailing views of their early development.

	I have tried to show, in this specific Indo-European case, that there has hitherto been no valid methodology for matching the evidence obtained from the study of the languages themselves, that is to say from historical linguistics, with the material evidence of archaeology. This has meant that the accounts seeking to use both classes of evidence have had little or no concrete reality. In making that assertion I am certainly not claiming some primacy in this field of archaeological evidence and reasoning over linguistic inferences. On the contrary, the primary difficulty in the entire enterprise is that the archaeological evidence from an early (and non-literate) period can tell us nothing directly about the languages which were spoken. At least the archaeological remains, the material culture, can be set firmly within a chronological framework. We can tell when these things were made and buried. The discipline of historical linguistics suffers from the disadvantage that, even when it is possible with reasonable plausibility to construct an early language form from more recent evidence, there is no way of setting that firmly within a chronological framework. The claims for glottochronology as offering a firm absolute chronology can be roundly dismissed (which is not, however, to deny that lexicostatistics, and other quantitative approaches, do shed light upon linguistic relationships; but they cannot date them).

	The temptation is there, in consequence, for the historical linguist to work in some notional world following a linguistically determined time scale, and not to ask with any great force or clarity precisely what the arguments about movements, influences and environmental changes would mean in real terms, out there in the physical world of material objects, where a firm time scale in calendar years operates. It is this willingness to operate in a closed and rather cosy mythological world which I have criticized in the work of Dumézil and his followers. They operate in a golden land of proto-Indo-European society and belief which is rooted neither in time nor in space. It is rather like the Dream Time of the Australian aborigines or the Camelot of Arthurian fable: so much so, indeed, that it seems almost churlish to ask such prosaic questions as ‘when?’ or ‘where?’.

	But ‘when?’ and ‘where?’ are precisely the questions which archaeologists in their prosaic way like to ask, and are equipped to answer. The real problem is to bring these two worlds of argument, these two fields of discourse, into some sort of constructive relationship. I have tried to indicate that a methodology for doing so can be developed. The task is to be undertaken by understanding better the relationships between the processes of change: on the one hand the linguistic process, on the other hand those which leave material traces in the archaeological record. The mediating phenomena appear to be largely social and demographic. Linguistic change does not take place in a vacuum, irrespective of other features of society: that is one of the emerging lessons of socio-linguistics. And those factors in society which correlate with or promote linguistic change are at the same time influential in the material sphere and find traces in the archaeological record. This is the nexus which requires further investigation, and where I feel optimistic that progress can be made.

	The sceptic, of course, may be cautious about the feasibility of such a project. I myself am optimistic that our two disciplines are on the threshold of a significant advance. It is likely that over the next decade or two we shall come to understand very much better the details of the when and the where of the emergence of our own species, Homo sapiens sapiens. It is also likely, I think, that further research in developing fields such as semiotics will lead us to understand rather more adequately the relationships between linguistic (and conceptual) ability and other aspects of human behaviour. If this advance comes about, it may well be possible, through the analysis of human actions, as reflected in the material and artefactual remains of the palaeolithic period, to be more precise about the time when the linguistic and conceptual abilities of fully modern man made their appearance.

	When this day comes, we shall be in possession of a new time frame within which to set the whole story of the evolution and development of human linguistic diversity. At the moment it looks as if the relevant time, for most of the world at any rate, may be some 40,000 years ago. Within that time frame we would have to set not only the evolution of the Indo-European languages, but also all those relationships between that broad linguistic group and other major language groups (these are relationships which I have not discussed here, mainly because I am very unsure of the methodology which at present can serve to underlie such discussions.) It may then be possible to achieve a much more rewarding rapprochement between prehistoric archaeology and historical linguistics than has hitherto been feasible. Instead of such a rapprochement, based on a coherent methodology and open to sceptical assessment, we have hitherto been working rather naïvely, building on each other’s myths. In the Indo-European field, linguists have been willing to follow the archaeological orthodoxy of nearly a century ago, while archaeologists have taken the conclusions of the historical linguists at their face value, failing to realize that they were themselves based upon archaeological assumptions which had not been questioned, yet which were not in some cases justifiable.

	There will of course be those who question whether all of this matters in the least. Why should we care ‘What song the sirens sang’? Or as Horace Walpole once succinctly said: ‘I have no curiosity to know how awkward and clumsy men have been in the dawn of arts or in their decay.’ But many of us today take a different view. We see in large measure that our identity, or at least our sense of it, lies with our own pasts. We are what we have become. To understand this, and these processes, we need also to know, or at any rate to begin to understand, what we were and where we have come from.

	The habitual way of thinking about human groups, of assuming that it is automatically sound to distinguish them into separate ‘peoples’ is very much a legacy of the nineteenth century. In some measure it derives from the classical historians and geographers, who tended to assume that their own concepts of ethnicity or nationhood could readily be projected upon those other, sometimes remote, lands which they were describing. In the nineteenth century, and earlier, European travellers had in many ways much the same outlook about ‘out there’, the world beyond, as did the classical geographers. Beyond the civilized world were strange lands peopled by barbarian tribes, uncouth of speech, whom it was necessary to classify, to name, to divide into groups in order that they might in a certain sense be categorized and hence managed, or indeed governed.

	Now, as I have tried to show, we can attempt to rethink these issues, with less emphasis on specific ethnic groups and their supposed migrations, and rather more upon the underlying economic and social processes at work. We can ask, as I have tried to do, precisely what are the mechanisms of language change: with what social realities do they correspond, and how do we expect to find these social realities reflected in the archaeological record? Applied to the Indo-European problem, these ideas have led me to suggest that the conventional view of Indo-European origins is not a sound one. Instead we can discern one crucially important episode in the prehistory of Europe and the Near East which transformed the way of life of the populations of the time: the inception of farming. The archaeological evidence for the development of farming is sufficient for a clear outline to be given, and the dispersal of the basic crop plants, wheat and barley, from Anatolia to Greece and so through Europe as far as Britain and Ireland can now be documented. Such profound economic and demographic changes must have had significant implications for the languages spoken within the areas in question. It seems likely then that the first Indo-European languages came to Europe from Anatolia around 6000 bc, together with the first domesticated plants and animals, and that they were in fact spoken by the first farmers of Europe. That, I suggest, is the key to the solution of the Indo-European problem.

	Such a view has many consequences for the understanding of the history of the Indo-European languages: some of them have been indicated above. Others will need to be examined by historical linguists and by archaeologists, or indeed by both. For too long archaeologists and linguists have been content to take on trust each others’ view of the past. The task now is to develop the methodologies necessary to reconcile those different views; to unearth, to re-examine and then to reformulate some of the preconceptions which have made them, in the last analysis, incompatible.





