Homelands in Question


	The time has now come to question more seriously whether the various attempts hitherto undertaken to locate some original ‘homeland’ for the Proto-Indo-Europeans have had any very sound basis. I have already indicated that in my view they have not. Although there are many good ideas and many relevant comments in what has been written on this subject, I believe that no coherent and plausible theory has yet been advanced. I shall argue in this chapter that most writers have fallen into what can now be recognized as dangerous traps. They have placed too much faith in the idea of some reconstructed Proto-Indo-European vocabulary, from which some kind of word-picture of the original homeland might be put together. They have too readily assumed that a given pottery form, or an assemblage of items of material equipment, can be equated directly with a group of people and hence supposedly with a particular language or language group. And they have not adequately explained why all these languages, or the speakers of all these languages, should be wandering around Europe and western Asia so tirelessly, in a series of migrations, thus setting up the pattern of different languages which we see today. Later I shall make some suggestions which I believe overcome these particular difficulties: they will be found controversial by most authorities on the subject for the very good reason that in several respects they disagree with most existing views on it.

	First it is worth re-stating some general and important points. In the first place, as the great linguist, Max Müller, said in 1888,107 the term ‘Indo-European’ refers to language, not to people or groups of people. Of course the languages were spoken by people, but that does not justify our speaking of ‘Indo-Europeans’ or ‘Aryans’ in any other sense than of those persons who spoke the languages in question. That implies that if I am brought up speaking only one language, for example a Semitic language, and then I learn an Indo-European language, in a very real sense I have become an Indo-European. And my children, especially if this language which I have learnt becomes their first language, will be Indo-Europeans too, even if both their parents originally spoke a Semitic language and came from a different cultural background.

	In this sense, then, it is not correct to speak of an Indo-European culture. Nor, if the terms Celtic and Germanic and Italic are similarly defined in terms of language, is it correct to speak of a Celtic or a Germanic or an Italic culture. Tremendous confusion about linguistic and cultural origins has come about because language and culture have not been properly distinguished. Of course language and culture often go together. In a modern European nation-state, very often as you cross the frontier, the language changes, and sometimes so does the whole way of life, and with it the system of beliefs and religion. But this is not necessarily so. Groups of people with very different cultures can speak the same language, and, conversely, within an area where the way of life is essentially the same, different languages may be spoken.

	Above all it is a serious mistake to equate race and language. The term ‘race’ has of course been seriously abused in the past, and very often it is not clear at all exactly what it means. Of course if one asks a Chinaman, a Frenchman and a Nigerian to stand in line, they may look decidedly different from each other (even there one has to be careful over definitions: there are plenty of black Frenchmen, and there are white Nigerians). But when we consider Europe and western Asia, it is not at all clear in terms of physical anthropology that there are different races at all. Yet it is true that there can be physical features which correlate at a statistically significant level with country of origin or with descent: a higher proportion of Swedes have fair hair and blue eyes than Italians. Today blood groups can be studied as well as external physical characteristics, but the notion of ‘race’ is extremely difficult to define with precision.108

	The difficulties become overwhelming when one is dealing only with skeletal material, as is the archaeologist’s usual lot in life. There is at the moment no scientifically acceptable way of taking a set of skeletal measurements and saying that a body or a skull which shows them must be assigned to a particular ‘race’. The metric characteristics of different populations can be compared, and it may be possible to make inferences on that basis, but they will probably not be racial ones in any meaningful sense. If there were significant, recurrent patterns in the skeletal material which allowed us to distinguish between different groups of people in a meaningful and valid way, then we would have to develop a study of prehistoric races. The reason for discounting this approach is not so much that we dislike the consequences of ‘racism’, but that it does not accord with the data.

	If we agree to try to separate language, race and culture in a clear way, the starting point for a consideration of Indo-European problems must always be the study of language. Indo-European studies represent a very considerable field of scholarship, and the techniques of comparative linguistics are sophisticated and well developed. There is not much point in an archaeologist who is not properly trained in the linguistic field setting out to make new or challenging statements of a linguistic nature; but when we begin to speak about the groups of people who spoke these languages, and about the historical circumstances which brought about their distribution, then we are fairly and squarely within the field of archaeology. These are the issues which I propose to follow up here.





1 The Lure of the Protolexicon


	Much of the confusion which surrounds the question of the origins of the Indo-European languages comes from the notion that the languages themselves contain all the evidence that is necessary to permit an accurate historical reconstruction and an identification of the location of an original homeland. Early enthusiasm for the ‘comparative method’ of linguistic reconstruction (as noted in Chapter 1) led to the application of the view that when related (cognate) words were discovered in two different Indo-European languages, the original word in the proto-language notionally parental to both of them could be found. In this way, Proto-Indo-European was reconstructed, the original language (Ursprache) of the original people (Urvolk) in their homeland (Urheimat). This was the method of linguistic palaeontology, as it was grandiosely termed, and with its aid the actual vocabulary of words, the protolexicon, of the Urvolk could be established.

	There remains much of value in the comparative method, and the approach is indeed one of the most useful ways to study the relationship between the Indo-European languages, but as we shall see in the next chapter the ‘family tree’ model of language change, on which the initial ideas of linguistic palaeontology depended, is now thought to be too simple an idea. Loan-words (words borrowed from a neighbouring language) are acquired by languages and they are not always easy to recognize. Yet obviously, when several common loan-words were acquired by two languages in, say, the first century ad, they can give no insight into the vocabulary of the notional parental language spoken centuries or millennia earlier. The wave model for linguistic change leads to a different picture.

	If the languages with related words are geographically far apart, the linguistic palaeontologist can argue that borrowing from one by the other is unlikely. So he will argue that because the Irish ri, ‘king’, and the Latin rex along with the Sanskrit raja are cognate and geographically remote, then a word for ‘king’ formed part of the protolexicon.

	The basic principle of linguistic palaeontology is that if the Indo-Europeans can be shown by linguistic analysis to have had the name of a specific thing within their protolexicon, then they can be assumed to have been acquainted with the thing itself.

	Thus the best modern survey of historical linguistics, by Winfred Lehmann, can say:109

	Proceeding to the everyday life of the Indo-European community we find terms for ‘herd, cow, sheep, goat, pig, dog, horse, wolf, bear, goose, duck, bee, oak, beech, willow, grain’. The lack of specific terms for grains or vegetables indicates a heavy reliance on animals for food.

	This argument, and really very little else, has led to the notion that the Proto-Indo-Europeans were nomads. The method can even be used to make chronological inferences. To quote Lehmann again:110

	The time during which the Indo-European community flourished has been subject to less dispute. When we attempt to reconstruct words for metals, we can ascribe to the Indo-Europeans vocabulary no words even for ‘silver’ or ‘gold’, let alone ‘iron’ and scarcely even a general term for ‘metal, bronze, copper’, Latin aes ‘copper, bronze’, Old English ar ‘brass, copper’ leads to New English ore, Sanskrit ayas ‘bronze’, later ‘copper’. On the basis of such vocabulary we characterize the Indo-European community as late neolithic. Fortunately archaeological discoveries have led to the identification of this community with a culture located north of the Black Sea from the fifth millennium bc. . . .

	The method is applied to the localization of the homeland by focusing on features of the natural environment. The protolexicon contains the names of certain animals and trees. It follows from the application of the general principle that the Indo-Europeans must have been acquainted with these things. If, then, we can point to some region in Europe or Asia where it can be demonstrated that these species were living a few thousand years ago, and if that is the only area where they could all be found, then that must be the homeland, so it is argued, and the problem is solved.





		 			 FIG. 4.1 The limits of the distribution of various plant and animal species in Europe: the evidence of linguistic palaeontology for the homeland of the Indo-Europeans (after Mann and Kilian).





	Alas, matters are not so easy, and the method has many objections. In the first place, any innovation, any discovery which results in a new product, will often carry the name of that product with it. So to find a word for ‘wheel’ or ‘cart’ or ‘copper’ or ‘bronze’ in several languages does not necessarily tell us very much about the origins of those languages, although it is of interest for the words themselves. Loan-words are to be expected in such circumstances.

	Secondly, it is well known that the meanings of words change. Often an old word is retained and used with quite a different meaning when some innovation has occurred. A good example is the English ‘car’ (carriage) which a couple of centuries ago had an entirely different meaning. Or as J. Fraser pointed out nearly sixty years ago in a very well-argued paper,111 it is not necessary to assume, as some have done, that the Indo-Europeans were acquainted with an intoxicating drink because they had a word corresponding to our ‘mead’, and because Sanskrit and Greek have verbal forms from the same root with the sense of ‘to be intoxicated’. As Fraser points out, the transference of a name meaning ‘drink’ to any kind of alcoholic drink is common. The Slavonic pivo is cognate with the Latin bibere and originally meant simply a drink, but now means ‘beer’ in Slavonic languages.

	Similar problems apply to institutions. Some writers have tried to suggest that the terms for ‘father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, daughter-in-law’ indicate a common Indo-European kinship system, with a close relationship with the son’s wife but not between a man and his in-laws. But the British social anthropologist, Jack Goody, has cogently argued that such inferences are not warranted.112

	Again, some writers have taken the presence in several Indo-European languages of a cognate term for ‘king’ as an indication of the institution of kingship in the ‘homeland’. But the opposite conclusion is also advanced. To quote Lehmann again:113

	But the absence of general terms for leaders of larger social groups requires us to conclude that social organizations in the Indo-European community were restricted in size. A word for ‘ruler’, related to the Latin regere ‘guide’ is found in Latin rex, Irish ri, Sanskrit raj — but other dialects have different terms, such as Greek basileus and Old English cyning. Accordingly we may posit for the Indo-European community a well-developed family system but not higher social or political organization.

	This, however, looks like very dangerous special pleading, for there are very few words indeed which are represented by cognate forms in all Indo-European languages. As Stuart Piggott has very pertinently remarked, quoting A. B. Keith:114 ‘taking the linguistic evidence too literally, one could conclude that the original Indo-European speakers knew butter but not milk, snow and feet but not rain and hands’.

	The argument about the distribution of living species is put most vigorously, but it too has its pitfalls. Simply to draw on a map the boundary of the occurrence of the various species of trees which have cognate names in the Indo-European languages does not establish for us the boundaries of Proto-Indo-European, as some have argued.115 For the existence of cognate, or even identical words in various dialects and regions does not indicate that they all refer to the same things. It has often been pointed out that a robin in England is not the same bird at all as a robin in America. So that when we find words related to ‘birch’ and ‘beech’ in several Indo-European languages it does not follow that the common word in Proto-Indo-European from which they were descended had the same specific meaning.

	Indeed if we look at the modern boundaries for a particular species of tree on a vegetation map, it will not surprise us that the various languages within the boundary have terms designating that tree, and presumably the languages which lie entirely outside the boundary will not have a name for a tree they do not know exists. If the Proto-Indo-Europeans did indeed originate within the area, they may well have had in their protolexicon terms ancestral to the modern ones, as the linguistic palaeontologists would suggest. But if we imagine that there was an original homeland outside the boundary, and that the territories within it came to speak Indo-European languages through the processes of linguistic displacement, then they would need to develop an appropriate vocabulary after their arrival. They might well then draw upon pre-existing terms in their own vocabulary which had previously held a rather different meaning (like the immigrants to the New World with their ‘robin’). Or entirely new words might be developed and be adopted, following the wave model for language change, throughout the territory to which they were appropriate. Either way, the territory through which the term for the species in question is found will not extend far beyond the natural habitat of the species, and there may be a good deal of uniformity in the terms used within that boundary.

	These points were well stated by Fraser in his article, which it is worth quoting at length:116

	I have already pointed out that the significance attached to the fact that the Indogermans were acquainted with the horse and the cow may have been exaggerated. We do not really know the precise meaning of the Indo-Germanic words in question; we do not know whether they mean the domesticated or the wild animals; and for that reason it is difficult to see how these names can safely be used for the purpose of determining the original home of the Indogermans. The same difficulty arises in the case of other etymological data used by the Linguistic Palaeontologist. We are constantly told that the Indogermans knew the beech and the birch trees, and this has counted for a great deal in the attempts that have been made to fix their home. But strictly speaking, we do not know that they were acquainted with those trees; all we know is that their vocabulary contained two words the later form of which in the historical Indogermanic languages are, generally, the name of the beech and the birch respectively. But it must be noticed that in Greek the word cognate with the English ‘beech’ is the name of the oak; and we must assume that this is not the only case in which either word has undergone a change of meaning. And if the speakers of a language when they change their homes and move into new surroundings, give the names of things familiar in their old homes to things in the new that resemble them or take their place, it may appear that in arguing from the beech and birch to the original home of the Indogermans we are arguing in a vicious circle.

	It is the case that the words which are repeatedly used in trying to establish a homeland are rather few. The names for trees have indeed been argued with comprehensive scholarship by Paul Friedrich in his book Proto-Indo-European Trees.117 The animal species were briefly quoted above. Childe, in The Aryans, gave a considerable list, derived from the work of Otto Schrader. To avoid seeming selective, I quote below the words which Childe listed:118 he went on to give their equivalent form (where it exists) in Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Celtic, Teutonic, Lithuanian, Tocharian and Armenian.

	god, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, father’s brother, grandson or nephew, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, husband’s brother, husband’s brother’s wives, husband, woman, widow, house-father, clan, village headman, ? sib, ? tribe or clan, king, dog, ox, sheep, goat, horse, pig, steer, cow, gelding, cattle, cheese, fat, butter, grain, bread, furrow, plough, mead, copper, gold, silver, razor, awl, sling-stone, bow-string, javelin, spear, sword, axe, carpenter, chariot or wheel, axle, nave, yoke, ship, oar, house, door-frame, door, pillar, earth-walls.

	The argument most frequently put forward from this list of words is that it includes more names of animal species than of plants, and that the subsistence of the Proto-Indo-Europeans was therefore that of a pastoralist economy. But this view is, unfortunately, based upon a very simplistic view of pastoralism. It is now well-established that a pastoral economy, with emphasis upon domestic animal species, can only arise following the emergence of agriculture. The old idea that pastoralism could represent some intermediate stage between the hunting and gathering of the palaeolithic and mesolithic periods and the agriculture of the neolithic, has now been thoroughly discredited. Everywhere pastoralists are dependent upon their co-existence with farmers (see Chapter 6), and much of their diet is formed by agricultural produce. Writing of the Basseri in his Nomads of South Persia, the social anthropologist, Frederik Barth, points out.119

	The normal diet of the Basseri includes a great bulk of agricultural produce, of which some tribesmen produce at least a part themselves. Cereal crops, particularly wheat, are planted on first arrival in the summer camp areas and yield their produce before the time of departure; or locally resident villagers are paid to plant a crop before the nomads arrive, to be harvested by the latter. . . . A great number of the necessities of life are thus obtained by trade and flour is the most important foodstuff, consumed as unleavened bread with every meal; and sugar, tea, dates, and fruits and vegetables are also important. In the case of most Basseri, such products are entirely or predominantly obtained by trade. . . .

	Of course it is not to be argued that all nomad groups have a subsistence economy like that of the Basseri. Some may place more emphasis on milk products than they do, others also drink the blood of their cattle. But the underlying point remains, that all pastoral nomads are also dependent on the domesticated plants produced by agriculture.

	It thus seems entirely naïve to use the argument that because several animal species have cognate names in the Indo-European languages, animals were originally more important in the economy than plants. If the Proto-Indo-Europeans were familiar with domesticated sheep, goats or cattle, then they must certainly also have been acquainted with wheat, barley and peas and also a range of other animal species. If there are no common words today among the Indo-European languages for these species, then other explanations must be found. Once this point is accepted, the preponderance of animals amongst the cognate names must be seen as the result of essentially linguistic factors, rather than as a feature of the presence and absence of the relevant species in the natural environment of the original Urvolk. The whole argument collapses, and the myth of the pastoralist Indo-Europeans loses all substance.

	Many of the arguments bearing upon the natural environment are equally weak. Much is made of the absence of words for Mediterranean species, such as the vine and the olive, from the supposed protolexicon. But if these words were present in some protolexicon, they could scarcely be expected to have continued in use in areas where these species are no longer encountered. We know that the domesticated vine is a relatively recent species in central and northern Europe: the absence of a relevant term in the early languages of those areas need thus occasion no surprise.

	In all of these discussions, it may further be argued, there has been a tendency to forget that we are not dealing with a single time period, but over a vast time depth. To reconstruct, from the existing languages, a proto-language at a particular point in time is thus an over-ambitious task. The linguist, Ernst Pulgram, caricatured this tendency, and following Fraser, offered a splendid reductio ad absurdum:120

	If we reconstructed Latin on the evidence of the Romanic languages alone, ignoring and neglecting the existence of Greek, Keltic, Germanic and the other ancient Indo-European dialects, and if thereupon we derived from the state of the common Romanic vocabulary conclusions on the culture of the speakers of Latin (whom then we should call Latins, I suppose, and ascribe to one race or another, depending on our patriotic or political leanings), we might well arrive at the following results: Proto-Romanic regem and imperatorem show us that the Latins lived in a monarchy under kings or emperors (but what shall we make of rem publicam which could presuppose a Latin republic?); since all Romanic languages contain words cognate with French prêtre and évêque, ‘priest’ and ‘bishop’, the Latins were Christians; also words cognate with French bière, tabac, café are common Romanic, evoking a picture of Caesar’s soldiers guzzling beer and smoking cigars in sidewalk cafés; and since all Romanic languages name a certain animal cheval, caballo, cal, etc., and have words for ‘war’ like guerre, guerra, the Latins called the horse caballum and the war guerram and were no doubt warlike people with a strong cavalry.

	In reality, of course, the Roman words for ‘horse’ and ‘war’ are equus and bellum, and this marvellous piece of nonsense reconstruction brilliantly exemplifies the dangers of linguistic palaeontology.

	Now these arguments are not intended as an attack upon the comparative method, as used by competent linguists to examine the histories of particular words, and to study by this means the relationships between specific languages. I hope that I am aware of the very considerable erudition which underlies many of the linguistic arguments which are put forward. My criticism is of the simplistic use of such data to reach supposedly historical conclusions. Certainly the circumstance that the Sanskrit word for ‘chariot’, ratha, is agreed by competent linguists to be cognate with the Latin for ‘wheel’, rota, is interesting, and merits historical explanation. But that is a far cry from saying that the two cognate words tell us that some hypothetical Proto-Indo-Europeans used chariots with wheels (or indeed carts with wheels) in their original homeland.

	There may be good arguments for placing the Indo-Europeans in an original homeland in south Russia, but in my view the findings of linguistic palaeontology are not among their number. They could probably be accommodated to almost any homeland theory, just as they have already been made to fit a good many very different ones. The present distribution of the Indo-European languages has to be seen not as simply the dispersal of an Urvolk from an Urheimat, speaking an Ursprache, but rather as the end product of a whole series of processes. The methods of comparative linguistics have much to offer in the study of these processes, but the construction of a protolexicon may not be their most useful contribution.





2 The Formation of New Groupings:

Corded Ware and Bell Beakers


	If the first error of the champions of an Indo-European ‘homeland’ was to base their thinking upon the shifting sands of linguistic palaeontology, their second was archaeological. It is one which has bedevilled much of European prehistory, indeed world prehistory in general: to conclude that the emergence of a new pottery style or a new complex of finds in an area indicated the development — or even the arrival — of a new group of people. Modern archaeology is shifting completely away from that kind of ‘migrationist’ thinking. Probably the most graphic examples are offered by the interesting cases of the Corded Ware People and of the Beaker Folk. Both form an essential link in the chain of argument of those claiming a south Russian homeland and of those pressing for central or northern Europe.

	There is absolutely no disagreement about the reality and the widespread nature of the Beaker phenomenon. As we saw in Chapter 2, a Beaker is a drinking vessel, with incised decoration, falling into one of a number of characteristic forms, of which the most famous is the Bell Beaker, so-called after its shape, which the French call ‘campaniforme’. Towards the end of the late neolithic period, around 2300 bc following calibrated radiocarbon dates, burials are found in many parts of western Europe containing the skeleton of a single individual accompanied by the characteristic drinking vessel and by other items which form a recognizable ‘kit’. These do indeed often include stone arrowheads and sometimes a perforated stone object often interpreted as an archer’s wrist-guard, so that the proposal that these people were archers seems well-substantiated. Sometimes there is a copper dagger and on occasions other objects of metal, such as gold earrings. These are among the earliest finds of metal objects in the areas in question. There is, however, no convincing evidence that they rode horses, but there are at least some indications that in western Europe the first appearance of horses’ bones is associated with Bell Beakers.121 Many archaeological studies contain maps of the finds of Beaker burials: Gordon Childe’s map of 1949 is shown in Fig. 4.2.122





		 			 FIG. 4.2 The distribution of Bell Beakers in Europe (after Childe).





	There have been many theories about the origin of the Beaker assemblages. Although there is a fashion today among archaeological theorists for seeing independent origins of innovations, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that there was a connection of some kind amongst these various finds. In the 1920s, when most changes were accepted as resulting from movements of people, all these things were hailed as the work of a ‘Beaker Folk’, who, it was claimed, were racially distinct, that is to say that their skull measurements showed them to be distinctly brachycephalic (round-headed). Argument has raged ever since as to whether the origin of this ‘folk’ was in the west, in Iberia, or in the east, perhaps in Hungary or Yugoslavia, or again in the north, in Scandinavia. Indeed very elaborate theories have been produced to account for the variations in the evidence in even greater detail. The German archaeologist, Edward Sangmeister, developed a theory of a ‘Reflux’, a Rückstrom, whereby Beakers and their accompanying assemblages were developed first in Spain and moved gradually across Europe, to be followed by the Reflux which carried various central-European features back to Iberia.

	Even so harsh a critic as Professor Grahame Clark, who in 1966 published an influential paper entitled ‘The invasion hypothesis in British prehistory’, could not escape the notion of a migration to Britain from continental Europe of people bringing with them the customs of Beaker burial.123 In 1977, however, the British archaeologist, Stephen Shennan, in his doctoral dissertation entitled ‘Bell beakers and their context in central Europe: a new approach’,124 came up with a new set of ideas. He suggested that we should view the Beaker assemblages as ‘status kits’ — collections of objects possessed by individuals of rather high status in the community, which were used by those persons to assert and display that status, and hence to enhance it. The importance of material goods in the assertion and maintenance of the ranking of prominent individuals within their communities has been increasingly recognized by archaeologists over the past fifteen years. Indeed the basic idea goes back to the very earliest days of archaeology, when excavators recognized the skeletons they were uncovering as ‘chiefs’ or ‘princes’ if these were accompanied by rich gravegoods such as gold and amber objects. The gravegoods accompanying Beaker burials are never as rich and impressive as those of the succeeding early bronze age, but they do represent, in most areas where they are found, a new tendency to emphasize the individual during burial by means of accompanying gravegoods of special value.

	This approach by Shennan emphasizes an increasing tendency among archaeologists to think in social terms. In Britain the Beaker burials follow a period where there was already much ritual activity documented by the large ‘henge’ monuments of the late neolithic period. Stonehenge is the most famous of these (although the great stone circle was erected later), but there are other, larger ones, such as Avebury. I suggested in 1974 that one might think of these late neolithic societies as ‘group-oriented chiefdoms’,125 where the central power within the societies of the time was expressed in these massive communal works. These could be contrasted with the ‘individualizing chiefdoms’ of the succeeding early bronze age where rich gravegoods accompanied specially favoured individuals. Shennan suggested that the emergence of Beaker burials, with their accompanying prestige goods, could be seen as part of this process, and as part of the transformation in British society between the neolithic and the early bronze age. He also suggested that the idea of Beakers and the accompanying ‘kit’ spread rapidly through north and central Europe (and so to Britain) as local leaders copied their neighbours, vying with each other in the display of these fashionable goods:126

	We have, then, in the Bell Beaker phase, at the very beginning of the Bronze Age a highly significant pattern of contact linking virtually the whole of central and western Europe in what is essentially a time of innovation, diffusion and adoption in various spheres, including ritual and ideology, in a number of very different local situations.

	Instead of the old explanation in terms of migration and diffusion it is possible in many cases to recognize a process of what has been termed ‘peer polity interaction’, where a number of local communities, none more prominent than the next, interact together. In this way a new ‘nuclear area’, a new ‘style zone’ comes about, and new things are created and diffused. This is what seems to have happened in the case of the Bell Beakers.127 What we see emerging in north-central Europe, and soon after in Britain, is a new system. As the British archaeologist, Alasdair Whittle, writes (with particular reference to Britain):128

	1. There were important changes in environment and resource by the mid-third millennium b.c. which are likely to have affected subsequent economy, settlement and society, providing a situation in which competition for basic resources is plausible particularly in southern England.

	2. The Beaker phenomenon was not ethnic, nor was it in essence novel. Attention must be paid to its details, particularly the settlement evidence, to provide an empirical demonstration of this view but the main aim should then be to interpret the phenomenon in other ways.

	3. Here it was seen as part of wider and longer-lasting processes of social change in which communal needs for cohesion were increasingly replaced by more individual acquisition of status in response to competition for scarce resources. Many other features of the period may illustrate these processes too. In this sense the specific content of the Beaker phenomenon is of no concern, only its wider function.

	These ideas are now at the centre of a whole phase of new research in Britain, where economy, social organization and ideology are taken into account together with their interactions. Of course it soon becomes very detailed. The Swiss archaeologist, Alain Gallay,129 has given a most plausible review. The overall result of these studies is to admit the significance of the Beaker phenomenon, and to see it as a symptom of very significant changes taking place in European society at that time. These changes were, in part, related to the impact of the new technology of metallurgy, and also to developments in subsistence practice.

	All of this means that there were indeed new exchange networks being built up in Europe, and new ideas (and new kinds of competition and emulation) developing because of them. It is perfectly correct to talk of processes of diffusion, but there is no longer a unique centre of diffusion. The interactions are taking place between equals, between peer polities. The old ideas of ethnic influence are thus rejected, and there is no suggestion that there were necessarily significant movements of peoples at that time. Nor is it argued that the élite individuals which we see in the Beaker burials, often under burial mounds or barrows, were incomers. There is no need to argue any widespread occurrence of élite displacement. These were probably local élites, coming into greater prominence partly through their manipulation of the exchange networks, and adopting the paraphernalia of élite display that their neighbours were in some cases already using. In adopting them they sometimes added to them, and these ideas may have been taken up by their neighbours. There was a whole network of interactions, and no single point of innovation can be identified.130

	In these circumstances (in terms of the discussion to be developed in Chapter 6) there is no special argument here in favour of language displacement. The demographic composition in each area was largely unchanged, and in most cases the local élite had local origins. There was plenty of opportunity for the adoption of loan-words: the acquisition of new objects and new techniques offers plenty of scope for that. And the more intensive networks of communication which arose at that time would certainly make easier the spread of linguistic innovations. In these circumstances we can see that this would not have been a time when a new language, even an Indo-European language, would have been dispersed from its ‘homeland’. There was nothing particularly ‘vagabondic’ about the populations involved, and no argument for seeing the Beaker élite as footloose wanderers.

	These arguments seem to me totally destructive of the suggestion that there were Kurgan invasions at this time, or that a new Kurgan language spread throughout the regions in question. It is certainly true that the Beaker élite were sometimes buried under a mound, a barrow, which in Russian might very properly be referred to by the term ‘kurgan’. But so what? Even if this particular feature had indeed been learnt from south Russia, it scarcely carries with it linguistic implications, other than the possibility of an interesting loan-word. In fact collective burial under burial mounds had been carried out for two thousand years in the west, and the Beaker burials are not the first in these areas to employ single burial.

	Very comparable arguments can be applied to the Corded Ware culture of north Europe. Again it is not in doubt that there is a large area in which burials occur, usually single burials, under burial mounds, with the deceased accompanied by cord-decorated pottery, sometimes with a ‘battle-axe’ (i.e. perforated stone axe). In 1969 the Czech archaeologist, Evžen Neustupný, wrote an influential and persuasive article on ‘The Economy of the Corded Ware Culture’131 in which he showed that there was no good argument for the widely-held notion that these were nomad pastoralists with an economy different from that of other farming communities of neolithic Europe. And in 1981 the East German specialist, Alexander Haüsler, examined in detail the arguments for an eastern origin of the Corded Ware cultures, and argued firmly for a local origin, dealing also with the implications for the Indo-European problem.132

	The socio-ideological approach has recently been applied by the British archaeologist, Christopher Tilley, to the origin of the Corded Ware/ Battle Axe cultures of Scandinavia. There the transition is between the middle neolithic TRB (i.e. Trichterbecher = Funnel Beaker) culture and the succeeding BAC (Battle Axe/ Corded Ware) groups. As Tilley emphasizes:133

	Both the TRB and BAC appear to have been characterized by cereal-based economies, supplemented by hunting, fishing, gathering and livestock. . . . In phase IV of the TRB all aspects of ceramic design are simplified and at some stage the tombs ceased to be centres of ritual activity and the change to BAC occurred. The individual is asserted for the first time in burial practices and there is little evidence of elaborate ritual surrounding the funerary activities. A small range of grave goods accompany the dead, but no hierarchical distinctions are apparent.

	Tilley’s approach to the Corded Ware is in some ways very different from Shennan’s view of the Beakers, but they see no fundamental change in farming practice, and no incursion by incoming groups: in both cases the explanation is framed primarily in social terms.

	It should be noted that none of these studies excludes the possibility that local groups might well be biologically distinctive. The Swiss physical anthropologist, R. Menk, has indeed suggested that the Beaker-using population of Switzerland was different physically from contemporaries of other cultures. But he points out that:134

	The Corded Ware complex is biologically heterogeneous. The local groups of the core area (Central Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland) form a very homogeneous bloc. . . . This bloc shows no biological affinities to the Ukrainian Kurgan populations.

	It would in my view be wrong to place much weight upon conclusions drawn from physical anthropology until the methodology is better developed. At any time the existence of local populations who are to some extent biologically distinguishable should cause little surprise.

	The overall implications of these conclusions about the Beaker and Corded Ware cultures are considerable. We have seen how major culture complexes may emerge through the operation of local factors. Through networks of interaction they can be influential over wide areas, leading to the widespread adoption of new ideologies and new ways of expressing them. Nothing in what we have seen suggests that this was a period when language replacement was a particularly active process. These conclusions are also important for the later bronze age and iron age, when other very wide-ranging culture complexes are seen (the so-called Urnfields). They are also relevant to our understanding of the Celts and Germans (see Chapter 9).





3 The Dynamics of Population Change


	The existing homeland theories, as we have seen, make the fundamental mistake of equating the emergence of a new culture complex with the intrusion of a new linguistic group, and they rely unwisely upon the resources of linguistic palaeontology for a physical description of the homeland. Unfortunately they also suffer from a third, equally damaging deficiency: they give absolutely no clear and adequate indication as to why there should have been a spread at all.

	In the old days of Kossinna it might be possible to suggest that the innate racial superiority of the Proto-Indo-Europeans allowed them to expand their territories at a certain point in time and conquer most of Europe and northern India. That was always naïve as well as arrogant, and such ideas of racial superiority are happily less prevalent today. But even accepting that unpersuasive premise, the theories had internal inadequacies. They rarely explained why the Indo-Europeans should choose that particular moment to break out, as it were. Or to put the matter another way, they did not explain why these Indo-Europeans had hidden their light under a bushel, for so long upon the steppes of south Russia, before setting out to fulfil their fateful destiny.

	No post-war writer has adopted such arguments, and there seems no need to take them seriously today. Why then should there have been a dispersal from the supposed homeland at all?

	Two possible mechanisms for language displacement can be proposed. The first is the demographic one: that there were massive transfers of population or significant technical advances allowing a significant increase of population. That view was adopted rather unthinkingly by earlier who liked to use the metaphor of a swarm of bees: the Indo-Europeans swarmed from their northern hive. But it is not at all clear why the population density should be greater in the ‘homeland’ than in neighbouring areas. That explanation simply does not apply.

	The other main theory is élite dominance. In some cases an incoming minority can indeed take control of an existing system, and the takeover can sometimes result in language replacement. However, for a really effective takeover, there needs to be some pre-existing hierarchical structure to be taken over. And while in Britain it could be argued that the late neolithic monuments imply the existence of chiefdoms, the evidence from continental Europe does not always lead to the same conclusion. Even more essential is the existence of some hierarchical social structure within the invading group who will form the new élite. It is difficult to see the necessary conquest, and the new élite administration, being brought about by immigrant groups whose social structure is essentially egalitarian. Yet the case for an effective ranked society, for the existence of chiefdoms, amongst the ‘Kurgan’ groups in their south Russian homeland has never been effectively argued. Professor Gimbutas has given the best account,135 and she lists several village settlements within what is sometimes termed the Srednij Stog II culture, at Dereivka in the lower Dnieper region, for instance. There are also various hill-fort sites, including Mikhajlovka. She looks primarily to the Maikop tomb away to the east in the Kuban region of the north Caucasus for rich graves in the ‘homeland’. In the Balkans, where she lists several Ochre Graves as documenting the Kurgan immigrants, it is not clear that they are of particularly high status.

	Nor is it entirely clear what made the Kurgan people efficient as warriors. The appeals of older generations to the ‘warlike spirit’ of the Proto-Indo-Europeans are entirely unsubstantiated: the suggestion that they were mounted warriors does not carry conviction. There is indeed the strong likelihood that the horse was intensively exploited in the steppes of south Russia at about this time and there is some evidence that it was used for riding. The story of the use of the horse is indeed a crucial one for the steppe-lands, but there is little evidence for westward incursions by mounted warriors at this time: that case cannot really be made before the late bronze age.

	The central idea underlying much that is written is that the people of the homeland were pastoral nomads, and that this somehow gave them some adaptive advantage in their move westwards. This idea, however, quite wrongly implies that a pastoralist society is particularly suited to the economic exploitation of central and western Europe, as indeed it is for the steppe lands of eastern Europe and of central Asia. We have already seen that recent work on the Beaker and Corded Ware peoples suggests that they were as much settled farmers as their predecessors.

	Around this time, late in the European neolithic, there was a move towards a more intensive subsistence economy in many areas, involving the increasing use of milk and cheese, of animal traction for the plough, and perhaps of wool and hides. This ‘secondary products revolution’, as Andrew Sherratt136 has termed it, probably did allow the more intensive exploitation of areas that were not used before, and may well have led to more widespread grazing of livestock, perhaps in uplands which were not previously used. Transhumance, with the moving of cattle away from the village and up to summer pastures, may have developed at this time. But central and western Europe is not really suited to nomad pastoralism, with the implication that the whole community leaves its winter base during the summer months and moves over great distances. Of course the reason that Europe is not effectively used in this way is that it gets by very well, with a higher density of exploitation, with mixed farming. Nomad pastoralist economies generally operate either where farming economies are not very successful, or (more often) on the margins of such economies. The development of a greater degree of pastoralism during the later neolithic, in the regions where it did occur, may have filled an ecological niche that was not previously well used. It no doubt supplemented the existing pattern: it did not replace it.

	There is, moreover, no reason to think that any move towards the greater use of domestic animal resources was prompted from outside each individual area. The domestic animals were already available in each. Such developments as did take place may be seen as part of a locally-occurring process of intensification: they need not indicate the arrival of new groups of people. Thus while it is perfectly possible that a nomad pastoralist society did develop in the south Russian steppes at about the time suggested, this development in itself is not likely to have influenced central or western Europe very much, either directly or indirectly.

	It is interesting, also, to enquire more closely into the origins of this nomadic way of life in the steppes. How did the steppe pastoralist economy originate? As indicated earlier, nomad pastoralism is always dependent in part on the existence of agriculturists. It is clear that nomad pastoralism normally develops out of mixed farming and herding, where a pattern of transhumance can be adapted to one of true nomadism appropriate to the more difficult steppe environment. If the problem is put in these terms, it is clear that the Kurgan pastoralists must in some senses be a secondary growth following upon a primary mixed farming economy. And where were these primary mixed farmers? The most obvious candidates are those on the western fringes of the south Russia steppe lands: the Cucuteni culture of Romania and the Tripolye culture of the Ukraine.

	Ward Goodenough, of the University of Pennsylvania, has persuasively argued this case:137

	Once the steppe was conquered it inevitably became a source of out migration. Until it was conquered it was a waste, waiting for people on its periphery to evolve a technology that would allow them to begin to move in and exploit it. . . .

What I have been saying obviously leads to a conclusion that the Battle Axe or Kurgan cultures originated about 3500 bc in an area bordering on the region occupied by Cucuteni and Tripolye peoples, who themselves practised a mixed farming and herding economy.

	Goodenough rightly sees here the ‘evolutionary background of pastoral nomadism as an adaptation of an older European transhumance to the more difficult steppe environment’. This view has, of course, revolutionary consequences for the ‘homeland’ theory. For it means that the initial colonization of the western part of the steppes took place from the west. The first language of the western steppes must, on this basis, have been the language spoken by the farmers of the neighbouring lands to the west.





4 Conclusion


	Three lines of argument thus lead us to reject the notion of a south Russian homeland for the Proto-Indo-Europeans. The main reason for the failure to locate such a homeland arises, I think, first from an unwise reliance on linguistic palaeontology in a rather uncritical way. Secondly it is a migrationist view. And thirdly it springs from a tendency not to consider with sufficient care the processes at work. It is all too easy to equate a pottery style with a linguistic group and to proceed upon that rather simplistic basis.

	These critical comments do not imply that the works under review have not come up with many relevant observations, and with points which need explanation. Professor Gimbutas, for instance, and archaeologist colleagues in Romania and the Ukraine, have rightly shown that after the early Cucuteni and Tripolye cultures in those areas, there follow pottery styles which have much more in common with those of the steppes. It is possible that once the new pastoralist economy of the steppes was established, the arable/ steppe boundary may have shifted some way westward. What may have been in reality an evolution from mixed farming to pastoralism in that area could thus appear in the archaeological record as a westward movement. Nor need one doubt that several of the characteristics of steppe culture which did then develop were indeed taken up in neighbouring lands to the west. These ‘Kurgan’ influences may in some cases have involved some movement of people. In others they may simply reflect the adoption of some practices derived from the steppes by the populations on their western margins. At a detailed level there is much work to be done in following up these ideas, but from the standpoint of Europe as a whole, it is difficult to believe that there was any significant and sustained movement of population from eastern to central Europe at this time, around 3500 to 3000 bc. This is not the solution to the Indo-European problem, although it may well be relevant to it.





5.



Language and Language Change


	The study of language has developed remarkably in the past twenty years, and even the more limited field of historical linguistics, focusing upon the origins and development of languages, encompasses a vast literature. To attempt a comprehensive survey in a concise space would be difficult, and for an archaeologist to do so foolhardy, but at least I can try and indicate some of the ideas and concepts which seem particularly useful to our present theme. Things have moved a long way since the days of a century ago, when immensely erudite scholars, mostly German, were comparing the vocabulary and the grammar of all the Indo-European languages then known, with great thoroughness. We can see today that on drawing inferences they made a number of limiting assumptions, which inevitably restricted the historical conclusions to which they came. However, when one appreciates that they needed to understand each of the languages which they were comparing, one can only contemplate their achievements with considerable admiration.

	Until the more recent development of sociolinguistics, many scholars tended to have rather a monolithic view of individual languages. Languages were seen as clearly differentiated one from another, and the territories in which they were spoken possessed distinct boundaries. Languages changed in well defined ways, the sound changes following patterns so regular in their behaviour that they could be said to follow laws. Today the variations within a language at a set time are given more prominence — the spatial variations reflecting different dialects, and also the different customs of pronunciation, vocabulary and grammar which accompany social distinctions within a community.

	The phonological regularities, the changes in pronunciation which took place over time, so that related words in adjacent languages can have quite different appearances, were the first to be understood. Very early on it was realized that there were uniform phonetic correlations between certain languages, and there were regular rules which allowed the scholar to move from one to the other.138 For instance the consonant p in most Indo-European languages is paralleled in Germanic languages, including English, by f: e.g.

	Latin pes; English foot

Latin piscis; English fish

Latin pater; English father.

	Or the Germanic sound th is paralleled in most of the other related languages by t:139 e.g.

	Latin tres: English three

Latin tenuis: English thin

Latin tacere (‘to be silent’): Gothic thahan.

	The Germanic h is the equivalent of k in the related languages: e.g.

	Latin centum: English hundred

Latin caput: English head

Latin cornu: English horn.

	The patterns of phonetic difference between most of the languages which are related can today be described by a whole series of generalizations, which bring out the underlying relationships very clearly. The phenomenon of sound change is now one of the best described in the whole of linguistics, yet interestingly enough precisely why such changes should occur at all is very little understood.

	In addition to the change in the form of individual words occasioned by these transformations, there are changes in their meaning. And of course over time there are significant changes in the grammatical form of certain words, such as verbs, and in the structure of sentences. All of this is the bread and butter of linguistics and it is through the study of these things that the relationships between the various languages come to be understood. So that while we shall not seek here to assimilate the huge body of scholarship which is needed to understand these relationships, we should remember that it is detailed work of this kind which allows one to determine the affinities between languages, and which sustains all the further statements about possible historical reconstructions which one may wish to make.

	The general classification of languages is however central to our interests. In the early days it was carried out essentially on the genealogical model: in terms of family relationships. Closely similar languages, like French and Italian, were linked in groups, and the groups in turn were linked as one large language family. Resemblances between the languages were considered entirely in terms of parenthood, and this whole model of change was made explicit in the family tree (Stammbaum) model proposed by Augustus Schleicher140 in 1862 for the Indo-European languages.





		 			 FIG. 5.1 The family tree model for the Indo-European languages (after Schleicher and Lehmann).





	It was assumed that resemblances between languages arose from their common origin, and languages closely similar to each other were understood to have separated or diverged from each other only comparatively recently. In the tree as shown above, the divergence has gone only so far as to arrive at the principal language groups as they existed nearly two thousand years ago, before further divergence (in most of the groups) produced the contemporary Indo-European languages of today.

	In such models it was generally assumed that, until the moment of divergence, a language is relatively uniform throughout the area in which it was spoken. The underlying human reality was thought of in terms of the migrations of peoples. So each split or divergence came about when groups of people occupying a language territory divided, with at least one part of them going off to seek a new home. It was axiomatic to this model, as indeed it is to most others, that once languages, or rather their speakers, become separated and are no longer in contact, they drift apart linguistically.

	This whole model was, of course, profoundly influenced by the evolutionary approach of Charles Darwin, and the analogy with the formation of new species is very obvious. The tendency for languages to become less similar after they have separated may be likened to the genetic drift which increasingly separates species isolated from each other. At the time of separation, the pronunciation of words, their meaning and their form and grammatical arrangement would have been identical. As time passes, some words in one of the branches would fall into disuse, while others would no doubt be invented. The pronunciation of words would alter and grammatical convention gradually change. The precise meaning of words could gradually change also, by the process which some linguists refer to as ‘semantic drift’.

	If we follow such a model for the origins of linguistic diversity, it is possible to reconstruct earlier language forms on the basis of the evidence provided by their modern descendents, using the comparative method. This involves the use of the phonological regularities discussed earlier, by which the sound shifts in words can be understood more systematically. For instance, if we consider the words for ‘eight’ in French, Italian and Portuguese, they might not at first seem to be derived from a common source:141

	French huit; Italian otto; Portuguese oito

	But by assembling other examples it is possible to see how they might be derived from a single common source in their ancestral proto-language. If we take also:

	‘milk’: French lait; Italian latte; Spanish leche; Portuguese leite

	‘fact’: French fait; Italian fatto; Spanish hecho; Portuguese feito

	we can suggest earlier forms of these words as *okto, *lakte, *faktu, using the convention where the asterisk indicates a reconstructed form rather than one which has been observed. In this case the procedure can of course be corroborated because the relevant proto-language is in fact known to us, and we can compare these forms with the relevant forms of the Latin nouns: octo, lactem, and factum.

	By this means of linguistic palaeontology a vocabulary of reconstructed words, the ‘protolexicon’ can be built up for the proto-language in question. It depends for its reconstruction on the family tree model of linguistic change, just as the traditional palaeontologists depended on an evolutionary tree model in establishing the relationships between the various species of fossil animals and plants.

	The American linguists, Leonard Bloomfield,142 has however pointed out that:

	The comparative method assumes that each branch or language bears independent witness of the forms of the parent language, and that identities or correspondences among the related languages reveal features of the parent speech. This is the same thing as assuming, firstly that the parent community was completely uniform as to language, and secondly that this parent community split suddenly and sharply into two or more daughter communities, which lost all contact with each other.

	These assumptions do indeed work tolerably for the descendents of Latin — and it should be remembered that the derivation of the Romance languages from Latin was the prototype example when the notion of the family tree model was applied to languages, and it remains the most frequently quoted example. However, as Bloomfield concludes:143

	The earlier students of Indo-European did not realize that the family-tree diagram was merely a statement of their method: they accepted the uniform parent languages and their sudden and clear-cut splitting, as historical realities.

	Although the family tree model is a perfectly coherent one, it certainly does not adequately take into account the variety of ways in which languages change. A language may borrow a word for something from a neighbouring language. Such loan-words often describe new products. The word alcohol, for instance, was widely adopted when the process of distillation became more widely known. Like many of the words in the European languages beginning with the prefix al- it is a loan-word from the Arabic, but a word need not refer to a new commodity to spread in this way. This sort of lexical borrowing is in fact very common. The Germanic languages, for instance, have taken many words from Latin, of which the following are a few examples:144



	 Table XII – German borrowing from Latin

	 		 			 Latin

			 Old English

			 Old High

German

			 Modern

English

			 Modern

German



		 			 altare

			 altare

			 altari

			 altar

			 Altar



		 			 caseus

			 cese

			 kasi

			 cheese

			 Käse



		 			 cuppa

			 cuppe

			 chuph

			 cup

			 Kopf



		 			 milia

			 mil

			 mila

			 mile

			 Meile



		 			 moneta

			 mynet

			 muruzza

			 mint

			 Münze



		 			 palma

			 palma

			 palma

			 palm

			 Palme



		 			 planta

			 plante

			 pflanza

			 plant

			 Pflanze



		 			 prunum

			 plume

			 pflumo

			 plum

			 Pflaume



		 			 tegula

			 tigele

			 ziagal

			 tile

			 Ziegel



		 			 vinum

			 win

			 win

			 wine

			 Wein





	It should be noted that not all of these words have retained exactly the same meaning after borrowing, but the relationship is in each case clear. It is well documented that these words were all borrowed from Latin, amongst some five hundred others, during the early period of contact with Latin. This illustrates how the family tree model in its simplest form overlooks the possibility that two languages may have passed through a period of common development, usually when their speakers occupied adjacent territories. They do not need to be ‘genetically related’, i.e. descended from a common parent language, for this to be so. For instance the languages of north India, which share a common Indo-European origin, nonetheless show signs of common development with languages in that general area which have a different origin and belong to the Dravidian language family. This common development is seen in the loan words from one to another, and in the occurrence of several grammatical forms which they share.

	It was in response to this difficulty that the German linguist, Johannes Schmidt,145 in 1872 introduced his wave hypothesis. Different linguistic changes may spread, like waves, over a speech area, and each change may be carried out over part of the area which does not coincide with the part covered by an earlier change. It is necessary here to consider more precisely the areas where a particular word or word form are located. This can be done in practice by drawing lines (isoglosses) on the map to separate places which differ as to any feature of language: an isogloss will thus enclose the area where a particular linguistic form is seen. The result of successive waves will result in a network of isoglosses. The cumulative effect of such changes can be considerable. In particular, to take an extreme case, if one dialect gains a political or commercial predominance of some sort over adjacent dialects, those nearest to this central dialect may give up their own peculiarities and come in time to speak only that central dialect.

	Schmidt’s wave model can be applied to the Indo-European languages to give the over-simplified diagram seen in Fig. 5.2. Here it would be perfectly possible for all these Indo-European languages or language groups to have differentiated over the years in the same location, in the areas in which they are now found. We could imagine the entire area in which they came to be spoken occupied initially by people who spoke a single Proto-Indo-European language. Following various local divergences, the subsequent groupings could then have come about by the operation of the wave model. In this way, the patterns on the linguistic map could have built up without any movements of groups of people at all. But of course we do not have to opt wholeheartedly for the wave model in this way. We could easily prefer a combination of the two models, where there was first some splitting from an original proto-language, involving some displacement of people, followed by the addition of subsequent effects by the wave mechanism..





		 			 FIG. 5.2 Distribution of the Indo-European languages seen in terms of the wave theory (after Schmidt and Lehmann).





	One important consequence here is that a language should not be thought of as a concrete and well-defined entity. When there are many isoglosses enclosing the same area, we may regard the line which they jointly follow as constituting a language boundary. They need not follow the same line, so the change from one language to another need not be an abrupt one. And two more closely related languages may each have features in common with their own neighbours which they do not share with each other. This feature produces a slightly more complicated diagram which is based on Schmidt’s, with modifications by Schrader.146 The details of the resemblances need not worry us. The point is that the lines are in effect isoglosses, and they show relationships between the languages which are more complicated than any which could be conveyed by means of a family tree.

	If we are interested in early languages, the difference between these two models is of crucial significance. This point may be illustrated by a distinction to which historical linguists in the past have attached particular importance, between two large sub-divisions in the Indo-European languages. The basis for the distinction is a contrast between the consonant s in one group and ch or h or k in the other. This is seen, for instance, in the word for ‘ten’.147

	Sanskrit dasa, Old Iranian dasa, Armenian tasn, Old Church Slavic deseti, and Lithuanian desimt; versus Greek deka, Latin decem, Old Irish deich, and Gothic taihun.

	This is generally termed the satem–centum subdivision, after the word for ‘hundred’. The eastern languages are labelled satem after the Old Iranian form, and the western languages centum after the Latin for a hundred. When this classification was first proposed, scholars assumed that the speakers of Proto-Indo-European had divided into two groups, and that in the eastern group a sound change took place which differentiated the eastern from the western dialects.

	Until the early years of this century, the distinction could be set out as follows:148



	 Table XIII – The satem/centum subdivision



			 Western Group

(centum)

			 Eastern Group

(satem)





			 Germanic

			 Baltic





			 Venetic

			 Slavic





			 Illyrian

			 Albanian





			 Celtic

			 Thracian





			 Italic

			 Phrygian





			 Greek

			 Armenian





			 Iranian





			 Indian





	This pleasant geographical consistency was first disrupted by the study of the Hittite language of early Anatolia, which was made possible in 1915 by the decipherment of the inscribed clay tablets found at the Hittite capital of Boghazköy (see Chapter 3). Hittite is a centum language, and thus disrupts the convenient distinction between east and west. The distinction received a much more serious setback with the discovery at the beginning of this century in Chinese Turkestan, of Buddhist writings from the sixth to eighth centuries ad, which are clearly Indo-European. The language was given the name Tocharian, and it too is a centum language. The notion of a neat, east/west split, which would have been nicely explained on the family tree model, becomes much less plausible in the light of these discoveries, and the centum/ satem difference is not in itself accorded much significance today.

	This change can, however, be accommodated much more readily by the wave model, by thinking in terms of dialect geography. The explanation might now be that the innovation of changing some ks to sibilants, as in the word for ‘a hundred’, spread through the central area, bringing about the sibilant satem form in Indo-Iranian, Armenian and Albanian and, imperfectly, in Slavic and Baltic. On this model the original, earlier centum form remains untouched in the periphery (Tocharian, Germanic, Celtic) outside the ripples of the wave, with the innovation localized in the middle. The historical reconstruction is thus entirely different from that on the family tree model. Nothing could more clearly illustrate that different reconstructions arise very readily from differences in methodology.

	This example also illustrated another important point: that the chronology must also be taken into account wherever possible. Hittite, one of the earliest Indo-European languages recorded, is a centum language, yet it is more ‘centrally’ placed than are the Indo-Iranian languages to the east. The change from centum to satem, if it took place in this way, must have done so later.

	Even on the wave model it is usual to assume a common ancestral origin for the languages within a language group. It would logically be possible to carry further the underlying notion that similarities between languages can develop through time, by a process of convergence (through contact). This indeed was the interesting position adopted by the Russian linguist, N. S. Trubetskoy, in 1939. He argued that the presence of the same word in a number of languages need not suggest that these languages descended from a common parent:149

	There is, then, no powerful ground for the assumption of a unitary Indogerman protolanguage, from which the individual Indogerman language groups would derive. It is just as plausible that the ancestors of the Indogerman language groups were originally quite dissimilar, and that through continuing contact, mutual influence and word borrowing became significantly closer to each other, without however going so far as to become identical.

	Trubetskoy criticized severely the dangerous assumptions which led to the construction of a supposed Proto-Indo-European language:150

	The homeland, the race and the culture of a supposed Proto-Indo-European population has been discussed, a population which may possibly never have existed.

	Instead he set out to define a number of linguistic criteria by which an Indo-European language might be recognized. If a language was found to fulfil these six criteria it was to be seen as Indo-European; if it didn’t, it wasn’t. He imagined an earlier time when no language would have done so, and he suggested that progressive contact and influence between neighbouring languages had produced changes in many of them which did in fact fulfil the necessary criteria, so that in this way they became Indo-European in terms of the definition.

	This is a beautifully logical position, and it is illuminating to set it against the family tree model, from which it differs completely. Few linguists would go so far today; and most point to basic structural resemblances between languages which would be much more difficult to transmit or evolve through contact than would mere loan-words. I have already mentioned the principle that adjacent and genetically unrelated languages can influence each other in their grammatical structure as well as in their vocabulary. Trubetskoy’s model reminds us that language evolution is a much more complicated process than the early historical linguists imagined. However it is not necessary to go as far as Trubetskoy to see how damaging the idea of convergence, which his theory shares with the wave model, is for the comparative method, and for the construction of a protolexicon.

	Loan-words and linguistic innovation must be the enemies of linguistic palaeontology. For when we find the same word, or cognate words, in a number of languages, we cannot assume — even if we accept that those languages did derive from a common ancestor — that the term in question was already present in that proto-language. It might as easily be the product of innovation. Thus, while some of the terms in Latin in Table XII may themselves have been borrowed from elsewhere, others must be regarded as innovations in Latin which were then borrowed by the Germanic languages. We are thus emphatically not justified in suggesting a reconstructed Proto-Indo-European form for each.

	It must be admitted, however, that the considerable antiquity of some words, whether or not loan-words, can be correctly judged when they or their derivatives are found in nearby languages, and when they can be shown to have been transformed by regular sound changes. Thus the Germanic ‘Karl’ (presumably from Charlemagne) gives the Proto-Slavonic *‘Karl’ and this in turn the Russian ‘Korólj’ and the Polish ‘Král’. The existence in Polish and Russian of these related forms, derivative in a regular way from a Proto-Slavonic prototype, is a good indication that these are not recent loan-words but that the common prototype did indeed exist in Proto-Slavonic.

	Even if we should find the same word for something in all Indo-European languages, this would not guarantee it a place in the protolexicon. This is particularly so if it might itself represent a technical innovation, like a previously unknown metal (e.g. tin, or platinum) or a new product, like the wheel or the stirrup. To give a modern example it is totally unsurprising if a new substance, like penicillin, or a new development, like a helicopter, should carry with it the word by which it becomes known in nearly all languages. Sometimes the word will be borrowed directly, or sometimes paraphrased into the language in what is termed a ‘calque’ (e.g. the German Fernsprecher (far-speaker) in place of ‘telephone’, which is of course itself a synthetic word coined in recent times from ancient Greek components). Thus we can see how the development of linguistics as a discipline has made what once seemed a reliable procedure, the comparative method, something much less secure.

	One of the more recent developments in linguistics has been the development of a concept of the linguistic area, and the detailed study of the distribution of linguistic forms in space. Linguistic area refers here not to the distribution in space of a single language, but of related features in a larger group of languages.151 It implies an approach to classification which is more concerned with spatial variation at a given time than with the historical relationships which may underlie that variation.

	In a sense the family tree model and the wave model both reflect different approaches to classification. If we are interested in reaching towards Proto-Indo-European, then spatial factors do have to be taken carefully into account. As Bloomfield remarks:152

	If Germanic and Balto-Slavic, for instance, have passed through a period of common development, then any agreement between them guarantees nothing about Primitive-Indo-European, but if they have not passed through a period of common development, then such an agreement, on the family-tree principle, is practically certain evidence for a trait of Primitive Indo-European.

	This is an important observation, for it does indeed carry with it significant spatial implications. It is, in fact, the resemblances between languages most distant from each other spatially which can least easily arise from the wave-like diffusion of an innovation, and are thus most likely to be the result, rather, of a relationship explicable in family tree terms. Even so, as noted earlier, this will not safeguard us against an almost universal loan-word accompanying some new technical innovation which has spread through the area by some diffusion process. Nor will it prevent our taking as Proto-Indo-European a form which has diffused throughout the entire region under consideration as a result of a wave-spread. Such occurrences are, however, likely to be rare, since, as we shall see, there are intervening areas in Western Asia where non-Indo-European languages are spoken.

	Recently linguistic classification has taken a number of new directions. In one of these, languages are classified in terms of characteristics of their syntax. Much attention is now given to word order, which correlates with other significant features. Verb–object (VO) languages (where the verb precedes the object in the order of words) and object–verb (OV) languages may be contrasted informatively. These are seen to be features which can change with time as a language develops. The classification is therefore a synchronic one — it is concerned with present features of the language and does not directly concern itself with earlier forms. Yet the approach can be applied usefully in the historical field. The American linguist, Winfred Lehmann,153 pointed out that Latin and Old English contain many OV constructions. He suggests that Proto-Indo-European was OV, since this is what we see for the oldest Indo-European texts in Hittite, Vedic Sanskrit and Greek. Today, however, while the Asiatic branches are OV in structure (Indo-Aryan and Armenian), the southern European languages are consistently VO (Albanian, Greek and Romance, as well as Celtic), while the northern Indo-European languages are inconsistently VO (Persian, Slavic, Baltic, Germanic). These observations suggest new fields of inquiry which may lead to a better understanding of language change, but they do not suggest any obvious conclusions at present.154

	A further trend in recent years has been the development of sociolinguistics155 — the study of the relationship between language variation and social difference. This is of crucial relevance for the understanding of language change in general — since new words do not at first spread uniformly through the population, but are adopted by specific social groups and spread from them to others. It is particularly relevant when two languages are spoken in the same area. This generally occurs as a result of the displacement of a number of people and, in the process, some of these people, or more likely their children become bilingual. The distinction is often made by linguists between the upper or dominant language, spoken by a conquering or otherwise more privileged group, and the lower language spoken by the subject people, or by immigrants of low status. Bloomfield makes the important generalization that:156

	In all cases, it is the lower language which borrows predominantly from the upper.

Accordingly, if the upper language survives, it remains as it was except for a few cultural loans, such as it might take from any neighbour. The Romance languages contain only a few cultural loan-words from the languages that were spoken in their territory before the Roman conquest; English has only a few cultural loan-words from the Celtic languages of Britain. . . . In the case of conquest, the cultural loans which remain in the surviving upper language are chiefly place names. . . .

On the other hand, if the lower language survives, it bears the marks of the struggle in the shape of copious borrowings. English, with its loan-words from Norman-French and its enormous layer of semi-learned (Latin-French) vocabulary is the classical instance of this.

	It is sometimes the case, however, that a (lower) language which does not survive does have influences both in vocabulary and in pronunciation upon the surviving (upper) language. In such cases the extinct (lower) language is referred to as a substratum, which leaves some traces upon the surviving speech.

	It has been emphasized, also, that language is not used only to communicate, but sometimes to exclude. Language is an important component of ethnicity,157 of group awareness. Linguistic boundaries may be deliberately maintained, and be determined by the territorial boundaries of a particular society. The nature of the social organization can thus play a major role in determining the spatial behaviour of the language.

	These generalizations are of considerable interest, and the relationship of linguistic factors with social ones is of real relevance to the archaeologist. For we have no direct evidence whatever (from the time in question) about the language that was spoken in prehistoric times but we do have evidence of the social organization of past societies.





		 			 FIG. 5.3 The use of lexicostatistical data to infer history of linguistic descent: a high percentage of cognate words implies closeness of family relationship (after Clark).





	One other recent development in the field of historical linguistics is of great potential relevance to the historical understanding of particular languages and language groups. This is the approach known as glottochronology.158 The basic idea is a very simple one. It begins with the general observation that the greater the time-depth which separates the members of a language family from the point of separation from their common ancestor, the greater the degree of differentiation between them. In practice they differ, so far as the vocabulary is concerned, because some words drop out of use and are replaced by new words. So two languages which were identical in their vocabulary at the time of separation or splitting become increasingly different as time goes on, through word loss, and through innovation. The exponents of glottochronology, notably Morris Swadesh, claimed that, for the core of essential words in a language, this process took place at a constant rate.

	Swadesh set out a basic core vocabulary of two hundred words, later using only a hundred words (see below).159



	 Table XIV – Basic core vocabulary

	 		 			 1.

			 I

			 26.

			 root

			 51.

			 breasts

			 76.

			 rain



		 			 2.

			 you

			 27.

			 bark

			 52.

			 heart

			 77.

			 stone



		 			 3.

			 we

			 28.

			 skin

			 53.

			 liver

			 78.

			 sand



		 			 4.

			 this

			 29.

			 flesh

			 54.

			 drink

			 79.

			 earth



		 			 5.

			 that

			 30.

			 blood

			 55.

			 eat

			 80.

			 cloud



		 			 6.

			 who

			 31.

			 bone

			 56.

			 bite

			 81.

			 smoke



		 			 7.

			 what

			 32.

			 grease

			 57.

			 see

			 82.

			 fire



		 			 8.

			 not

			 33.

			 egg

			 58.

			 hear

			 83.

			 ash



		 			 9.

			 all

			 34.

			 horn

			 59.

			 know

			 84.

			 burn



		 			 10.

			 many

			 35.

			 tail

			 60.

			 sleep

			 85.

			 path



		 			 11.

			 one

			 36.

			 feather

			 61.

			 die

			 86.

			 mountain



		 			 12.

			 two

			 37.

			 hair

			 62.

			 kill

			 87.

			 red



		 			 13.

			 big

			 38.

			 head

			 63.

			 swim

			 88.

			 green



		 			 14.

			 long

			 39.

			 ear

			 64.

			 fly

			 89.

			 yellow



		 			 15.

			 small

			 40.

			 eye

			 65.

			 walk

			 90.

			 white



		 			 16.

			 woman

			 41.

			 nose

			 66.

			 come

			 91.

			 black



		 			 17.

			 man

			 42.

			 mouth

			 67.

			 lie

			 92.

			 night



		 			 18.

			 person

			 43.

			 tooth

			 68.

			 sit

			 93.

			 hot



		 			 19.

			 fish

			 44.

			 tongue

			 69.

			 stand

			 94.

			 cold



		 			 20.

			 bird

			 45.

			 claw

			 70.

			 give

			 95.

			 full



		 			 21.

			 dog

			 46.

			 foot

			 71.

			 say

			 96.

			 new



		 			 22.

			 louse

			 47.

			 knee

			 72.

			 sun

			 97.

			 good



		 			 23.

			 tree

			 48.

			 hand

			 73.

			 moon

			 98.

			 round



		 			 24.

			 seed

			 49.

			 belly

			 74.

			 star

			 99.

			 dry



		 			 25.

			 leaf

			 50.

			 neck

			 75.

			 water

			 100.

			 name





	The procedure followed by the glottochronologists, when the time of splitting of two related languages is to be determined, is to list the equivalent words from the languages under consideration, and note the pairs which, on the grounds of their similarity (taking into account the known laws of sound shift) appear to be or are known to be cognates. These are then assumed to be retained from the common ancestor language, while the words which have different forms in the two languages under consideration are assumed to differ because the original word has been lost in one or other (or indeed in both) of the languages. The number of word-pairs which are cognate, out of the original list of a hundred, is thus a measure of the closeness (of the retention of the basic core vocabulary) of the two languages. Conversely the number of pairs that are now different are an indication of the extent to which words have been lost, and hence a measure of the time since the two languages originally separated.

	In the original study,160 various pairs of languages were compared, such as Old English and Middle English, the Latin of Plautus and early modern French, ancient Chinese and modern Mandarin and so on. It was concluded that the average retention rate was 81 per cent per millennium. When the original word list was shortened to the hundred words listed above, the rate was adjusted to 86 per cent per millennium.

	Following these arguments, and using this standard retention rate as a guide, the date of splitting of any two related languages could be calculated using the assumption that over a period of a thousand years, each of the languages would have retained 86 per cent of the basic vocabulary of the common protolanguage.161 It was claimed that these regularities remained valid until the level of merely chance similarity is reached, which is set at about 8 per cent. This would correspond, on the method outlined, to a time depth of 11.7 thousand years.

	Various computations have been undertaken on this basis,162 offering as conclusions that Spanish and Portuguese split at about ad 1586, Italian and French at the same date, Romanian and Italian in 1130 etc. English and Dutch would have split in ad 860 and English and German in 590 and so on.

	Some linguists have criticized these calculations on the grounds that they do not always give precisely the right answers. It is known, for instance, that the Germanic languages became separated at rather earlier dates than those proposed. But to my mind the astonishing thing is that the answers from such calculations are in some cases so close to a date of differentiation which can be established on independent grounds.





		 			 FIG. 5.4 Relationships between different Indo-European languages based on glottochronological correlations. The numbers indicate the notional time in centuries prior to the 13th century bc when divergence between the pairs of languages took place (based on Escalante and Swadesh).





	There are three principal reasons for criticism here, as I see it.

	In the first place, the whole enterprise is predicated upon an absolute family tree model for change. The difference between languages is determined by the date of splitting, and nothing else.

	Secondly, and this is a related criticism, the presence of loan-words, which have been adopted by both languages since the period of splitting, is bound to increase the number of apparent cognates, and thus lead to underestimation of the time since splitting. But even if one had some reliable means of spotting all the loan-words — which one does not — the first objection would still be relevant.

	The third and main reason for criticism, however, is that there is not the faintest plausible a priori reason for assuming that languages suffer word loss at a constant rate.163 Quite the contrary, the lessons of sociolinguistics teach us that social factors — which differ between times and places — are highly relevant to linguistic change. Such factors as population density, and the extent of interaction commonly occurring between individuals and communities, are bound to be of relevance. The rate of language change among mobile groups might be very different from the rate amongst a sedentary population. Some social groups deliberately use language differences to emphasize their own identity. The extent to which the society uses written records, and written texts within its educational system, will also have a crucial bearing upon the rate of vocabulary change. Even setting these factors aside, a language existing in isolation — for instance on a remote island — is likely to be more conservative, one would think, than one with numerous neighbours.

	A further objection to the glottochronology approach can be made in relation to the notion of a ‘basic vocabulary’, which remains constant from language to language. However, the meanings of the words in the two languages may not be precisely equivalent. If, for instance, in translating a term from the basic vocabulary into the language being compared, one finds there is a choice of two near-synonyms and that one of these is cognate to the term in the original and the other not, which of the alternatives should one choose? If several such choices arose, this could make a considerable difference to the score. The validity of the method is so far undermined by these difficulties as to be seriously in doubt.

	However, Swadesh and his colleagues at least offered a generalization which is open to testing, and if necessary rejection. Their proposal is an interesting one because it actually offers a direct and simple procedure for carrying out an analysis, which can be compared with written records of earlier stages in the language development. This implies literacy, and the presence of literacy in a society may itself be a source of conservatism. In short, glottochronology in its simple assumptions is just too good to be true.

	Despite this, the method represents in one sense a substantial breakthrough in historical linguistics. It needs only slight modification to be a highly valuable research tool, for it is in fact a pioneering investigation in the much broader field of lexicostatistics; the statistical study of vocabulary.

	Many scholars understandably find it difficult to accept a precise and constant rate for word loss from all languages. A high percentage of surviving cognate words in the basic vocabularies of two languages is an indicator of what one might term linguistic proximity, while a low number is an indicator of linguistic distance. The modern discipline of numerical taxonomy is very familiar with concepts such as these. We can use the number of surviving cognate word pairs as a measure of similarity, and proceed to classify the various languages (for we need not restrict ourselves to two at a time) in terms of what the taxonomists call ‘taxonomic distance’.164 That is simply an exercise based on the number of cognate pairs. In itself it assumes nothing about the nature of language change, or the presence or absence of loan-words. In fact, as I have suggested, we should expect geographically adjacent languages to display less taxonomic distance than geographically remote ones which had split off at the same time. And this approach in itself assumes nothing about splitting: it could be applied as readily following Trubetskoy’s model for change, although the interpretive conclusions there would of course be different ones. It is worth noting that the languages in the sub-families and sub-groups of a larger family like Indo-European will normally be classed close together in any lexicostatistical approach since they are in general very similar to each other. The circumstance that the languages of the Romance group scored much more recent dates of separation than did those of the Germanic group, when the techniques of glottochronology were applied, may not tell us much about actual dates of splitting. However, it does show, objectively, on the basis of the vocabularies, that the Romance group is a more tightly knit one than the Germanic. We should note the further overwhelming limitation of this approach to the study and comparison of languages: that so far it is restricted to the comparison of individual words, and has no regard whatever to grammatical structure.

	I have been able to touch only on a few aspects of the modern discipline of historical linguistics here, and no doubt I have overlooked much of the important work which is now going on. Recent developments in structural linguistics will also have their implications for historical reconstruction, although these have not yet been fully worked out. But at least we can begin to see how far modern linguistics differs from the simple family tree approach of a century ago. Any study of the archaeology of language has to bear this in mind.





6.



Language, Population and Social Organization: A Processual Approach


	How does a specific language come to be spoken in a particular area? That is the underlying question which we have to ask, if we seek to understand the distribution of languages in the different countries of Europe and beyond. In general, archaeologists have rushed forward to equate this particular language with that specific pottery group, and to draw up a whole complicated scenario of movements and prehistoric migrations to account for the distribution seen today, or in documented historical times. The more basic question, as to how the languages spoken in a particular area change, has not been asked. I believe that it is possible to make some valid general statements, which lead the way to a more coherent use of the archaeological record, and so allow us to form some idea about the prehistory of language.

	To make general statements of such a kind in the form of explicit models does have a certain usefulness if it focuses our attention on the underlying historical processes which are at the root of change. They involve the lives of real people whose life experiences together shape the history and development of the language. This is not just a question of the movement of people, whether in groups over long distance (i.e. migrations), or piecemeal and over shorter distances (which may amount to what has traditionally been referred to as the ‘diffusion’ of population). Different social groups or classes have their own varieties of language, each of which may change independently of the others. Moreover the spatial varieties within a language area, and the dialects within it, serve to complicate the picture, as already indicated.

	In the light of these factors, any models which we may set up are likely to be over simplified, but I believe the effort is worthwhile.165 For it then allows us, when considering any specific case of change, to refer it back to the general models which we have, and to see if they are of help in explaining what has been observed. In many cases I believe that they are. This undertaking of attempting some sort of explanation through generalization is what is termed in contemporary archaeology the processual approach. It has the merit of making our explanations explicit, which is a very effective way of bringing their weaknesses to light, and hence also of investigating their strengths.





Three Processes of Linguistic Change within a Given Area


	It is useful first to distinguish three very basic, primary processes by which languages come to be spoken in a particular region. I shall call these processes: initial colonization, replacement and continuous development. The reasoning here may be rather obvious, but it does lead on to some important conclusions.





1 Initial colonization


	This is the process where human beings enter a previously uninhabited region, bringing with them their own speech, so that the language is introduced to the area. That must have been the process which operated when the first humans reached northern Europe after the retreat of the glacial ice cover. For instance, we can be sure that Scandinavia was colonized in this way by the first mesolithic (hunter-gatherer) communities around 8000 bc. Or, to take another example, the whole land mass of the Americas seems to have been uninhabited by humans until the first hunters crossed the land bridge at the Bering Strait, perhaps earlier than 10000 bc. The most recent instance of large-scale human colonization is in Polynesia, where from c. 1300 bc, small groups of humans reached each of the islands in turn. Archaeological research has established that Hawaii was not populated until about ad 500, and New Zealand not until c. ad 1000.





2 Replacement


	This is the process whereby the language spoken in a particular region is displaced by another, brought in by people from a different, possibly adjacent, region where it is in use. This is the mechanism of language change with which we are most familiar today, because it has operated so effectively in recent centuries. Over the past five hundred years the languages of Europe have spread over two of the five continents (Australia and the Americas) and much of two others (Africa and south Asia), by a simple process of direct replacement. This is the model which most archaeologists have used in considering the distribution of early languages.





3 Continuous development


	Within any linguistic area there are conflicting tendencies at work. In the first place, education processes within societies lead towards the effective replication of customs, techniques and speech from one generation to the next, and departures from the accepted norm are viewed with disfavour. Special social mechanisms reinforce this sort of stability; and religion is often the most prominent of these. Religious texts, whether written, like the Bible or some of the early Sanskrit writings, or oral, like the Homeric epics in early Greece or the Vedic hymns in India, were often transmitted unaltered over very long time periods.

	The opposing tendency is innovation — whether by borrowing from neighbours, or through the invention of new words and the development of new turns of phrase and ultimately new grammatical forms.

	Alongside the opposing tendencies towards stability or innovation, we can contrast divergence and convergence. The former, arising most readily in isolation, is often considered a random process, analogous to the genetic drift of the biologists. It is certainly the case that when groups of people speaking the same language separate and are no longer in contact, marked differences in vocabulary and in forms of expression gradually emerge. A good example is Polynesia, where, since the islands are very remote from each other, and interactions are few, the consequences of divergence are particularly plain (see Chapter 11).

	Convergence comes about through interaction, so that the languages of neighbouring areas increasingly have more in common. There is one further factor often at work, however, which we have not yet discussed: the remarkable human ability to speak two (or more) languages. It is when individuals speak another language as well as their own native one that convergence occurs most rapidly. Sometimes it can go so far that two languages can effectively amalgamate to form a new hybrid. This arises most frequently when parents speak different languages. In some cases the children adopt a pidgin language which becomes their own primary language. Such a hybrid language is then termed a ‘creole’.166



	When we are trying to understand the historical background to a distribution of languages, as seen for instance in the Indo-European group, these three processes may all be relevant. The first is beautifully easy to study archaeologically, because the archaeology of initial colonization is nearly always clear enough, once the region in question has been well surveyed. The third is the most difficult, since there is nothing outwardly (or archaeologically) very remarkable about the continuous development of a language within an area. In many cases where we have a continuity of occupation indicated archaeologically, such a situation might well be inferred, but the rate of development would be very hard to assess. Of course the glottochronologists like to claim that the process of word loss, which is one element of language drift and hence of divergence, proceeds at a constant rate. I am reluctant to believe so implausible a claim. When we are assessing convergence, it may be that traded goods and other indications of contact in the material culture may help to document interaction; but that is as far as we can go. It is, on the other hand, possible to generalize about language replacement, and to consider much more carefully and in general terms the circumstances in which one language may come to supersede another in a particular area. That is what the archaeologists have hitherto notably failed to do.





Models for Linguistic Replacement


	Archaeologists often speak as if it is a very natural thing for the language spoken in one area to be replaced by another. Sometimes, when reading the earlier literature, you would think that every time the style of pottery in use in a village changed, the transition must have been accompanied by a total change of population, and with it of language. But populations do not change so easily; nor do languages. Indeed one of the most striking shifts in archaeological thought in the past few years has been the realization that there have been far fewer wholesale migrations of people than had once been thought. Professor Grahame Clark, in his paper167 ‘The invasion hypothesis in British prehistory’, published in 1966, suggested that following the spread of farming to Britain there had perhaps been no more than one significant invasion of Britain before the Roman conquest, and even the single exception which he cited, associated with the appearance of Beaker pottery in Britain, would today be discounted by most scholars.168

	However, the discussion should not be a matter simply of asserting whether or not one believes that this or that change of pottery or of other aspects of the material culture represents a change of population. We need some principles to guide us. I think there are in fact only two or three major ways in which language displacement is likely to occur. These can be investigated archaeologically, although the method is undoubtedly more difficult than the old procedure of just recognizing the appearance of a different kind of pottery or other artefacts and hailing this as the arrival of the Beaker Folk, or some other supposed immigrant group.





Model I: Demography/Subsistence


	The first model assumes that the new language comes about as the result of the movement into the territory of large numbers of people who speak the new language. They do not have to conquer the existing inhabitants by force of arms. Quite the contrary, for on this model it is not necessary to assume that the newcomers had any highly-structured social organization which would enable them to bring about a military conquest. We certainly have no need to assume that they were inherently ‘warlike’, for there is no reason to imagine that the speakers of one language were militarily more able than those of another. Of course one group may prevail over another on the basis of a different technology: that is a much more relevant question.

	People have to have a reason for moving, and often they go somewhere where the resources they need are more easily available than at home. When we are talking of agricultural populations, that generally means land and, other things being equal, people move from an area of higher population density to one of lower. But other things are not always equal, and the movement is sometimes from an area of low prosperity to one of high prosperity, with the immigrants generally taking a relatively low place on the social scale in relation to the existing population.

	In general, if the newcomers are either to displace the existing population, or to outnumber them, they can only do so on the basis of a new exploitative technology. Unless they bring with them some special techniques or skills, in fact generally some new mode of subsistence, there is no reason why they should fare better than the existing population. That population will usually already have reached a population density which is to some extent limited by the available resources. So the newcomers must either use different resources, or utilize the existing ones in a new way, if they are to have much impact.

	By far the most obvious instance of this process is the introduction of farming into an area previously inhabited only by hunter-gatherers. In Europe it has been calculated that the density of population during the period of hunter-gatherings169 might usually have been no more than about one person for every 10 square kilometres on average. The subsistence techniques of early farming can support, in Europe and western Asia, a population of about five persons per square kilometre170 without great difficulty, and without advanced farming techniques. That represents a fiftyfold increase — an increase of 5000 per cent!

	This, I would argue, is a powerful factor which outweighs almost all others when we are discussing the large-scale dispersion of a new population. Of course it should at once be stressed that the spread of a new technology certainly need not imply the spread of a new population: the diffusion of an innovation is a familiar process, and the existing population is generally perfectly capable of taking up new techniques and applying them. In such a case the language in the territory in question may acquire a few loan-words, but it will not undergo a complete replacement. In general I suggest that replacement of language will usually only take place, in the absence of highly centralized political organization, when the introduced technology itself allows a far higher density of population to exist than formerly. This has been one general feature of the colonization process of the world in recent centuries, although in fact generally accompanied by force of arms applied through a centralized organization. It is likely to have been the case for the dispersal of the Bantu languages in Africa by what seems to have been a process of replacement171 (see Chapter 11).



	The wave of advance model – It is useful here to consider which specific form of the Demography/ Subsistence model is appropriate. Our thinking about the way a new technique, which is associated with population increase, can spread geographically has been greatly clarified by an important piece of work by the Italian geneticist, Luigi Cavalli-Sforza, working in collaboration with the American archaeologist, Albert Ammerman.172 They first contrasted the two usual alternatives offered for the spread of farming. On the one hand, there is the model of diffusion, where the existing, rather sparse population of hunter-gatherers comes into contact with communities in neighbouring territories which already practise farming. From these they acquire the necessary domesticated plants, and the livestock, as well as a knowledge of farming practices, and so they come to take up farming. On the other hand there is the deliberate colonization model where a well-defined group of people deliberately set off for a distant land, to set up a new community.

	The wave of advance model differs significantly from both these. Movements of people are involved but only over very short distances. It notes that a marked increase in population follows the adoption of farming in a new territory. The authors argue that in a particular area the increase follows what is termed the logistic growth pattern, which starts off very rapidly (in fact exponentially), but then slows down as the maximum population density, the saturation point for that particular area with this kind of farming, is reached. See Fig. 6.1.





		 			 FIG. 6.1 Population growth curves. Under logistic growth, a population starting at a density of 0.1 inhabitants per sq. km. multiplies at an initial rate of about 3–9% per year which determines a doubling in about 18 years. The growth rate slows down continuously until it reaches zero when saturation occurs at 5 inhabitants per sq. km. If growth rate were to continue indefinitely at the initial rate the dotted curve of exponential growth would result (after Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza).





		 			 FIG. 6.2 The wave of advance model. (a) Distribution of migration distances assuming that migration is random in direction, in two dimensions x and y. An individual starts his migration at the origin (x=o, y=o) and after following an irregular path arrives at point p at a given time. (b) The distribution surface on the left hand has been transformed into a distribution curve in one dimension (after Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza).





	They assume in addition that the local farmers will sometimes shift the position of their farms by a few kilometres, perhaps as the soil in their fields becomes temporarily exhausted. Or it may be that in each new generation, some of the offspring stay on the parental farm, while others move off a few kilometres to seek convenient land elsewhere. However there is no suggestion that this move systematically takes place in a given direction: in that respect it is a random movement. As Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza put it:173

	It has been shown mathematically that if such a phenomenon of increase in population numbers coincides with a model of local migratory activity, random in direction, a wave of population expansion will set in and progress at a constant radial rate. This mode of demic diffusion may be distinguished from ‘colonization’, which in its conventional meaning is the intentional settlement by a coherent group of people, usually in a distant land. A familiar example of colonization is that which is recorded in classical Greek history. By contrast, the wave of advance model would be one involving slow, continuous expansion with movements usually being over short distances.

	The wave of advance, of which they speak, would be a wave of population increase, generally spreading out radially, from any areas where the new technology (in this case farming) has already become well established. The progress of such a wave of advance is seen in Fig. 6.3. There it is assumed that the population density of farmers goes up to an average of five persons per square kilometre, and that the population grows in the early stages of occupation of an area at such a rate that it doubles every eighteen years. The distance of the local migratory activity — that is the distance of the movement of settlement, which is random in direction — is taken to be eighteen kilometres for each generation of twenty-five years. Under these conditions, the rate of movement of the wave of advance turns out to be one kilometre per year.





		 			 FIG. 6.3 Computer simulation of the wave of advance. The curves give population densities at various times from the beginning and distances from the origin of the simulated spread of early farming in Europe.





	It is not necessary to spell out in detail the mathematics on which this model is based. It is sufficient to say that it is an explicit mathematical model, drawn from the statistics of genetics. Given the underlying assumptions, the conclusions follow with mathematical rigour. That does not mean to say that the model has to be right: but if it isn’t, there has to be something wrong with the assumptions.

	Obviously people do not behave like mathematical automata and any specific region in question will not display the sort of uniform environment which, for simplicity, the model assumes. Nor is it reasonable to assume that the position of the farming settlement of a family will move precisely eighteen kilometres every generation. But we are talking here about average behaviours — some people will move further, some not so far.

	There is no suggestion here that people have to be motivated by some burning desire to explore distant lands. The average distance moved per generation is a rather modest one. And there is no suggestion that people have to be moving always in the same direction. The remarkable feature of the model is that they can move randomly with respect to direction, that is to say in whatever direction they choose, and yet the overall outcome will still be the spread of farming outwards from the area already under cultivation, at a relatively steady rate.

	This, I believe, has the very greatest potential relevance for our discussion of early language spread: for here is a process which results in an increase of population on an absolutely revolutionary scale, spreading across the lands in question, yet without any suggestion of advance planning, and without any individuals having to move very far. Indeed if the average displacement, of individuals, is random in direction and only about eighteen kilometres, it is hardly appropriate to speak here of a migration at all.

	Of course it should be clearly realized that the model itself does not tell us whether this spread results in language displacement or not. It is up to us to determine from the evidence whether the techniques of farming really did spread by this process, rather than by the adoption of farming techniques by the pre-existing local population of hunter-gatherers. That would have different overall effects. Yet in some cases, as we shall see, there is evidence that at the time of the arrival of the first farmers in an area, the hunter-gatherers already there often kept to their own traditional areas, which were not necessarily those which the farmers chose to exploit. It does not follow then that the two groups were competing for the same resources, although this must sometimes have been the case. But we certainly may make the suggestion that when the new farming population outnumbered the hunter-gatherers by fifty to one, and when the two groups spoke different languages, it would generally be the language of the farmers which would prevail.

	It should be noted too that it is not an inherent feature of the model that it is restricted to farming. It can apply to any group of people carrying with them a technique of exploitation which results in a very substantial increase in population density. For this reason it applies very appropriately to the spread of cereal farming (with livestock) in North America with the arrival of the Europeans, even though farming based on maize and other local crops was already long known in some regions there, but the European-style farming certainly did permit a substantial increase in population in many areas. The North American example did also, initially, involve colonization of the traditional kind, with the first settlers travelling from their homelands. These were not just a simple peasant population with a new subsistence technique, intermingling peaceably with the original inhabitants; it was of course more complicated than that, with the close-knit social organization of the settlers and their military technology (metal weapons, firearms, horses) playing a significant role not envisaged in the wave of advance model itself.

	Although the initial colonization of the New World by Europeans was clearly a case of long distance migration, the subsequent pattern of expansion was very different. A number of studies have shown how the ‘frontier’174 between the European economy and life-style and that of the indigenous population gradually moved to the west. Although there are complicating factors in this case, it is perfectly appropriate to analyse that moving frontier in terms of the wave of advance model.

	This model is eminently visible archaeologically. It is a relatively straightforward matter to determine, by excavation, whether a community enjoyed a farming economy or was based on hunting and gathering. The material equipment of the first farmers of a region is generally quite distinctive. Often they used pottery, whereas hunter-gatherers, with a few exceptions (such as those of the Jomon culture of Japan), rarely did.

	It is sometimes less easy to decide whether the first farming settlements in an area were occupied by people who were already resident there and who adopted techniques of farming from their neighbours, or whether the first farmers were newcomers. But sometimes the settlement pattern of the hunter-gatherers and of the farmers differs markedly. Moreover, in some cases we see aspects of the material culture of the hunter-gatherers continuing in use alongside the new farming economy. That may be an indication that the original population has survived and has taken up farming. On the other hand, when the tool kits and the artefacts of the two groups are entirely different, that suggests that the farming population may have been immigrants, and that the process can quite properly be described (in some cases) by the wave of advance model.

	In Chapter 7 I shall use this model to suggest a possible mechanism for the spread of an early Indo-European language, or languages, throughout Europe.





Model II: Élite Dominance


	The wave of advance model, as we have outlined it, is a special case of our first model of language replacement, based on demography and subsistence. It implies the introduction of a new subsistence technology which allows for a significant increase in population density. The second model for language replacement is quite different, depending on none of these things.

	It assumes instead the arrival from outside the territory of a relatively small group of highly-organized people, speaking a different language, who because of their military effectiveness are able to dominate the existing population, and bring it into effective subjection. The two languages will then exist side-by-side for some time, with many of the population, probably both the indigenous and the immigrant, becoming bilingual. In some circumstances the territory will continue to speak its original language, and the newcomers will be assimilated and their foreign language forgotten. In others it is the language of the newcomers which prevails, while that of the original population, although they were the more numerous, dies out. That is a case of language replacement.

	This model lays stress upon the social organization of the immigrant group. They may not be large in number, but in order to bring the pre-existing population into subjection effectively, they must already display, I would argue, what the anthropologist terms ‘ranking’: they must already have a ranked or a stratified social organization.175 Sometimes they will be the agents of a state society — that is to say of a society which displays many of the features which we associate with urban civilization. Such societies have a head or central agency of state, generally supported by an army, based upon the capital city. There is a hierarchy of settlement, with a system of local governors for the subsidiary towns. There are craft specialists as well as priests and warriors, and often the bureaucratic control is administered with the use of writing. Such societies are ‘stratified’ because they comprise different social classes or strata. The Roman conquest of Europe, for example, was undertaken by a society of that kind. Unlike Model I, it did not necessarily bring about any notable population increase.

	In other instances the incoming élite will not be organized on quite so complex a level. They may, rather, show the features of what anthropologists sometimes term a ‘chiefdom’ society.176 Here there is still some measure of centralized organization, but there is not the administrative bureaucracy often associated with the state. The society is not now divided into a series of separate social classes, but is organized rather by a system of ranking, based on kinship, where those most closely related to the chief occupy the positions of highest status. From the economic standpoint craft specialisation is a feature of such societies, and there may be other part-time specialists such as priests and warriors.

	I would argue that it is only when a small incoming group is organized in such a way that it can expect to dominate a much larger resident population. Of course it helps if the incomers also have some advantage in military technology. For instance, if the incomers know the techniques of horse riding and the locals do not, the former are at a tremendous advantage. That was part of the secret of the success of the Spanish conquistadores in the New World. But organization is more important than military technology alone. Social organization is often visible archaeologically, and there are various indicators by which ranked societies may be recognized on the basis of the finds. The settlement pattern is an important one, since it usually includes centres of power and there is often evidence for persons of high status, whose dwellings are prominent in size and quality of construction.

	Above all it must be remembered that a migration is a hazardous business. It has little chance of success unless those moving into a territory can either occupy a new ecological niche, as in the case of Model I, or compete very effectively with the existing population for their own basic resources. It is my argument that most cases of language displacement fall within the scope of this model or the preceding one.





Model III: System Collapse


	A third model of change is system collapse.177 Many early state societies were not very stable organizations; it seems that often they grew rapidly, and in a way which sometimes led to overspecialization. In some cases the population density grew large, and the organization rather top-heavy, so that it could not effectively withstand the sort of adversity which arises when bad weather results in a series of bad harvests, or when the fertility of the land is steadily declining. Instead of diversifying their activities, some early state societies seem instead to have intensified them to the point where the system could no longer stand the strain. The central authority lost control, despite all the prestige its ritual and religion could command. In such circumstances, chaos very frequently set in. The craft specialists were no longer supported by the central administration and had to look elsewhere for their food. Moreover those farmers who had previously produced specialist products for exchange within the redistributive system — the early equivalent of cash-cropping — found that their food supply would be much better assured if they simply produced what they wanted for themselves, rather than specializing in just a few commodities for sale or exchange (such as wine, or olive oil). In these circumstances, while the farmers might be better off by switching to subsistence farming, the overall efficiency of the system, which is often at its highest when geared to specialist production, would decline. That simply exacerbated the crisis.





		 			 FIG. 6.4 System collapse: (a) the system under pressure. The centralized system has extended its territorial boundaries into the peripheral zone. The central authority is perpetually under pressure from smaller local groups beyond the frontier.





		 			 FIG. 6.5 System collapse: (b) after an internal crisis, the central power retreats from the peripheral zone, and the small groups beyond the frontier profit, seizing the opportunity to advance and occupy the peripheral zone.





	Such a pattern of events can now be discerned in the case of a number of early civilizations and states, where previously it was often assumed that their demise must have been the consequence of invasion from outside, and of conquest. What I am describing is the phenomenon of the ‘Dark Age’, such as beset Mycenaean Greece after 1110 bc or the Lowland Maya civilization after ad 890. In these and many other cases it now seems that the organizational system of society simply collapsed. Certainly those archaeologists who have assumed in each case that the Dark Age was brought on by the invasion of a destroying army have found it very difficult to find any trace whatever of these supposed destroyers.

	The phenomenon of system collapse can nonetheless result in group movements, some of them with definite consequences for the languages spoken in the area, for when a state society collapses, its systems of boundary maintenance also collapse. The frontiers are no longer patrolled, and there is no longer a standing army to defend the cities or the palaces. There is bound to be a good deal of lawlessness, and armed groups will soon emerge within the territory to exploit the situation. If, on the edge of the territory, there are already well-organized groups, held at bay during the rule of law by the military power of the state, they are bound to take advantage of the new disorder.178 We can predict, then, that they will tend to move from the periphery into the heart of the state’s territory: some of them may be so successful that they will themselves manage to subject the existing population by a process very much like the élite dominance described in Model II.

	We can predict, then, when a state system collapses, that the collapse will be followed by local movements of groups from the periphery towards the centre. Some of these may ultimately establish their own organization and language upon the territory as a whole, so that a degree of language replacement will be seen.

	In many cases there are few linguistic consequences of note following a system collapse. In the Maya Lowlands, for instance, there does not seem to have been any language shift, but the dominance of the Aztecs in Mexico, and of their language Nahuatl, seems to have followed the collapse of the previous state organization in roughly this way. In Mycenaean Greece, while the Greek language itself was not displaced, there may well have been local movements of groups which resulted in the adoption of Greek dialects in certain areas different from those which preceded them. And the collapse of the Roman empire certainly had a number of striking consequences. Amongst the most significant was the rise to dominance in Britain of groups apparently organized at chiefdom level, who had made their way across the English Channel. There is plenty of evidence of boundary maintenance in the previous (i.e. fourth) century, when the Romans maintained the whole elaborate defensive system which we know as ‘the forts of the Saxon shore’. When these could no longer be garrisoned, the sort of local displacements described above occurred: small, tightly organized groups of people moved in from the Low Countries. This was linguistically significant, since the language spoken in the outcome was Anglo-Saxon. It may be that there were already quite a few people in England before the collapse who spoke a Germanic language. The earlier language, which the Romans in part displaced on their arrival four centuries before the collapse, is generally agreed among scholars to have been a Celtic language, and it is not clear to what extent it was superseded by Latin, throughout the population, during the period of Roman rule. There were Saxon mercenaries already present in England before the power of Rome finally ended, so the subsequent dominance of the Anglo-Saxon language may have been due in part to them, as well as to the small invading groups who profited by the ensuing chaos.

	The usefulness of this model is that it serves to explain a number of those cases of language replacement which at first sight do not fall within the scope either of the Wave of Advance model or of the Élite Dominance model, although in a sense they are in fact subsumed within the latter.





The Mobility Factor and Nomad Pastoralism


	When we are considering the movement of numbers of people, under the headings of any of these three models, the method by which they moved is a crucial factor.

	The technology of seafaring has, of course, been essential for many of the really long-distance colonisations. The European colonization of much of the globe in the fifteenth to nineteenth centuries was naturally due to developments in shipbuilding and in navigation, as well as in the social organization of the parent states. And the Norse colonization of Britain and Ireland, to take another example, was closely related to the development of the famous Viking long-ship as a seafaring vessel.

	On land, the horse was at some periods a crucial resource, but one about which there has been much confusion. It is essential to distinguish between the use of the horse as an animal for traction and as a pack animal, on the one hand; and as an animal for riding on the other. There are indications that the horse may first have been domesticated in what is now western Russia around 3000 bc, but there is no definite evidence that it was ridden as early as this: the first entirely clear evidence which we have of horse riding comes from depictions of horse and rider in the early second millennium, and from finds of horse bits and horse harness from the first millennium bc, although decorated bone ‘cheek-pieces’ from Slovakia and Hungary may indicate horse riding there before 2000 bc. There are indications of horse-drawn chariots in the Near East and in Greece from around 1600 bc, and traces of carts drawn by horses or oxen more than a millennium earlier.

	One very important consequence of the domestication of the horse as a pack animal was the opportunity which it opened for the development of a much more mobile, nomad pastoral economy. Such an economy is based largely on the management of livestock (sheep, goats and/or cattle). It is necessary to take the herds long distances between the summer and winter pasturing grounds — distances so great that the entire community moves with the herd. This is an altogether different pattern of subsistence from transhumance, where the distance between summer and winter pasture is much less (generally a matter of differing altitude in a fairly mountainous environment), so that the main community can live in the same village all the year round. Such very long distance movements, where the community takes with it all its worldly goods, require pack animals, and this must have been one of the main early uses of the horse.

	It should be stressed, however, that the nomad pastoral economy always requires the co-existence of agriculture:179 the pastoral nomads may not cultivate plants themselves (although in practice they quite often do) but they certainly need bread and other plant products, which they exchange for their own animal produce. In the early days of archaeology it used to be thought that the pastoral nomad existence was in some way intermediate in time between that of the hunter-gatherer and the settled farmer. That notion is no longer accepted: pastoral nomadism was only able to emerge as a secondary development following the successful development of agriculture. The economy of the nomad pastoralist is generally one of symbiosis with agricultural communities.

	As the Soviet scholar Igor Diakonov180 has recently written:

	Nomadism supposes riding with cattle: either horse-riding or camel-riding. Chariots are not suitable for tending cattle: they are no good on broken terrain and require very specialized service. The Near East did not know true nomadism until the last centuries of the second millennium bc. . . . Nomadism did not exist in Central Asia and the steppe zone of the European part of the USSR until the second millennium bc either.

	The development of the technology of horse riding was significant in different ways. It was obviously a development of great potential military significance which conferred a considerable advantage upon any coherently organized group which could ride. This brings us back to the Élite Dominance model, and we can imagine that in iron age Europe, when some groups had the techniques of horse riding (and the horses) and others did not, the strategies of dominance may have altered significantly.

	In the first millennium ad the development of the stirrup, which made fighting on horseback very much easier and more secure, is often said to have had a similar impact. The historian of technology, Lynn White,181 has argued that it was the stirrup which allowed the military action of heavy cavalry, and he goes so far as to claim that it was precisely this which made possible the rise of the feudal class of the European Middle Ages.

	Much the same is true of the kingdoms of West Africa at a rather later period. As the British social anthropologist, Jack Goody,182 has written:

	The horse was the noble animal in every sense, and one reserved for the nobility and its hangers on. It was reserved for the nobility, not because of special sumptuary laws, but because of the large investment in the means of destruction that horses entailed. Chivalry, the horse culture, had a politico-military base. . . .

In West Africa, as in medieval Europe and most other parts of the globe, horses were the possessions of a politically dominant estate that was usually of immigrant origin and had established its domination over a land of peasant farmers.

	The wheeled vehicle, the cart, plays an important part in mobility. For, while nomad pastoralists have developed a life-style whereby their baggage can be pared down to what may be transported by pack animals, in practice it is difficult for entire groups of farmers to travel very far without wheeled transport. Timothy Champion has stressed the significance of this factor, alongside that of social organization, in his consideration of mass migration in later prehistoric Europe, and has concluded that.183

	. . . it is highly unlikely that the population of prehistoric Europe had grown to such an extent, or the agricultural depredation of man progressed so far, that migration should have been the preferred solution to crisis at any time before the first millennium.

	These, then, are some of the underlying factors which must have determined the extent to which language displacement would have taken place in prehistoric times. The essential point to reiterate is that modern archaeology no longer regards the displacement of large groups of people as an everyday event. Migrations took place, but they did so only in circumstances which made them necessary, and under conditions which today we can hope to understand. It is these conditions which modern archaeology can set out to investigate: they are often so well-defined that they should certainly leave indications in the archaeological record. These findings will not, however, be so simple and straightforward as specific pottery types, once claimed as the ‘visiting card’ of individual ethnic groups, but rather take the form of evidence for the social organization of the communities involved, and for their technology and mode of subsistence. Gordon Childe once wrote of the prehistoric archaeology of his day that:184

	It aimed at distilling from archaeological remains a preliterate substitute for the conventional politico-military history, with cultures instead of statesmen as actors, and migrations in place of battles.

	The discipline of history itself has moved on since that time, with greater attention being paid to the underlying technology of societies and to basic features of their organization. Modern history is no longer concerned exclusively with the deeds and thoughts of great men. Indeed Childe, writing those words in 1957, did himself an injustice. For while his book The Aryans, published in 1926, did indeed conform to that view of prehistoric archaeology, Childe was himself a pioneer in the study of the impact of technological change on early societies.185 He was one of the leading figures in the development of economic prehistory, which, along with social archaeology, offers a more promising approach to the questions we have been discussing, and in particular to this difficult issue of language displacement.





Other Processual Models for Language Change


	When we are considering the processes by which changes and displacements in language are effected, it is not difficult to think of other relevant models. These are perhaps less germane to the case in point, since they are not proposed here in relation to the Indo-European problem. However, since this chapter is also intended to serve as a more general introduction towards a processual approach to the problems of language change, it is appropriate at least to mention them.





Constrained Population Displacement


	This is the refugee phenomenon, where a substantial body of people moves out of one territory and into another, not directly through the effects of the Demography/ Subsistence model, but because constrained to do so by the incursion of a hostile population into their original territory. In certain circumstances the refugees may become the dominant population linguistically in their new territory, and their language survive there.

	This was, of course, the model adopted by many scholars in the early days of Indo-European studies, when the initial reason for the supposed westward incursion of Indo-European tribes was sometimes seen as the arrival of other, hostile tribes from the east. This is, however, a model to be viewed with caution, although it may well have operated in some cases. Examples could certainly be claimed, for instance, in the so-called ‘migration period’ which followed the collapse of the western Roman empire.

	However, this is, in a sense, a rather secondary model. For the initial movement, which uprooted the unfortunate refugees in the first place, must itself have been a displacement of people, and it in turn has to be explained in terms of one of the models for language displacement which we have already set out. (In the case of the migration period, the collapse of the Roman Empire was a major causal factor.) The second weakness of the model is that refugees rarely form a dominant group in the territory where they finally settle, and it must be unusual therefore, for the language of refugees to become the dominant language in any society.





Sedentary/Mobile Boundary Shift


	It should be noted that, even when the two contrasting (and sometimes symbiotic) economies of mixed agriculture and of nomad pastoralism are well established side-by-side, in a stable relationship, the location of the boundary between the two may change with time. In reality it is not, of course, easy to draw a boundary line, because the areas exploited by the two economies interpenetrate. The nomad may well pass many fields under agriculture on his way from one pasture to another.

	However, assuming that one can find some way of defining with a fair approximation the location of the boundary, there is no doubt that it will shift from time to time through the operation of local climatic, economic and social conditions. When it does there may well be a resulting language change in the land lying between the old and the new boundaries.

	This point is worth making explicit here, because we shall see that towards the end of the neolithic period in eastern Europe, there are indeed indications that the material culture which is associated further east with a nomadic economy can be found in the area. This has sometimes been taken as the evidence for a widespread migration of nomads into central and western Europe. It could, of course, constitute evidence tending to support such an event, but a good deal of further data would be needed from areas further west before one could feel that a good case had been made out. The other obvious interpretation of the material in eastern Europe would be in terms of the models defined here.

	The location of such a mobile/ sedentary interface has often been a factor of crucial relevance in the history of China, for example.186 The Great Wall itself was built with this intention and in general the boundary did not penetrate very far into imperial China itself. On occasions, of course, the interface moved so far east that the result was one of élite domination: the outcomes were the Yuan dynasty of the Mongols, and later the Manchu dynasty.





Donor/Recipient Population Systems


	Another interesting model is of relevance to one particular kind of élite displacement. In his influential article on the origins of agriculture, entitled ‘Post-Pleistocene adaptations’, Lewis Binford187 discussed the position when there are ‘two or more different kinds of socio-cultural systems which occupy adjacent environmental zones’. Here, however, we are not thinking of changes which cause a displacement in the boundary between the two: that might in some cases lead to the Sedentary/ Mobile Boundary Shift just discussed. Instead it is worth considering the circumstances if the more rapidly growing group and its economy cannot move into neighbouring territory. In such a situation, as Binford shows, the more rapidly growing group becomes, often over a long period, the donor group in terms of population, and the other the recipient. The result is the steady intrusion of an immigrant population into the less dynamic zone.

	Whether or not this process lies at the source of the origins of agriculture in the Near East, as Binford at that time suggested, there is a case for seeing the development of the Semitic languages188 in the Near East, over a long period of time, as the result of such a process. The donor zone in this case would be, speaking approximately, the Arabian peninsula, and the recipient one, Mesopotamia. It can certainly be argued that from the third millennium bc onwards, there were frequent and sometimes steady influxes of Semitic-speaking groups into Mesopotamia, who settled there and ultimately came to outnumber the Sumerian-speaking population. In such circumstances, the language of the majority may well become dominant during a period of instability, as indeed occurred with the emergence to power of Sargon of Agade.

	It is not my argument here that this is what happened in Europe. On the contrary, there is no evidence that such processes occurred there during the periods in question. As far as the steppe lands of western Russia are concerned, the former model of Sedentary/ Mobile Boundary Shift is quite sufficient to explain the limited archaeological evidence which is relevant. But it is pertinent to note that such a model is possible, and that it may have a bearing on the rise to dominance of the Semitic languages. In this way there should be no suggestion that a special case is being argued for either problem.



	Now we have examined some of the processual mechanisms underlying language change we can turn to a specific case, the Indo-European problem. In doing so I will try to follow the principles outlined in this chapter, which apply with equal force anywhere in the world when we are considering the archaeology of language.





7.



