Early Language Dispersals in Europe


	In the previous chapters a position was taken which is critical, directly or by implication, of nearly every attempt so far to solve the Indo-European problem. Does this mean that the problem is incapable of solution? I think not. I believe it is possible to offer a plausible explanation for the existence of related languages across almost the whole of Europe which does not make the erroneous assumptions criticised earlier. Quite how we can proceed to test this explanation is a more difficult question.





1 Language and Farming


	If we look at the distribution of the Indo-European languages of Europe when we first see them in the centuries shortly before or after the beginning of the Christian era (or, in the case of Greece, a thousand years earlier), virtually the whole of Europe seems to have been Indo-European-speaking. The only clear exceptions are the Etruscan language of central Italy, and presumably the ancestor of the Basque language of northern Spain, with Iberian at the east of the peninsula. This is a vast area for such a degree of uniformity.

	The possibility advanced by Trubetskoy has already been discussed, that this uniformity is simply the result of convergence. That is to say that languages in different areas which were not themselves necessarily related, became ‘Indo-Europeanized’ through processes of contact. The conclusion was reached instead that, as most scholars have argued, some common origin for the languages must be accepted. This means that the family tree model has to apply, at least in part, to explain some of the observed uniformity. That does not exclude the operation of the wave model, and indeed it is likely that the present pattern is a veritable palimpsest of ancestral influences overlain by loan-words and by subsequently adopted common grammatical forms over succeeding millennia.

	What historical reality lies behind the common ancestral origin of all these languages? We have rejected the ‘Kurgan’ theory of a dispersal around 3500–3000 bc, and with it those for Corded Ware and for Beakers (c. 2900 to 2000 bc). The same arguments apply for the later unities, the culture complexes which one may recognize, such as the Urnfields of the late bronze age. Even if each of these culture complexes was recognized as implying linguistic uniformity, none of them is large enough to apply to the whole of Europe. The Urnfields could not possibly do, for they could not explain the arrival of people speaking an Indo-European language in Greece before 1500 bc. The Beaker complex is likewise not relevant to south-east Europe: there are no Beakers there. There is, indeed, precious little Corded Ware in Greece, and none in Italy. So only a rather embracing theory where Kurgan cultures, Corded Ware and Beakers are all brought into play, as in the wider ramifications of Professor Gimbutas’s Kurgan hypothesis, would do.

	The alternative, then, is to go earlier. In doing so, we do indeed come upon one major process which undoubtedly radically affected the whole of Europe. This was the adoption of farming.





		 			 FIG. 7.1 (a) Emmer wheat, (b) einkorn and (c) six-row barley: the basic ingredients of the neolithic revolution in Europe and the Near East (after J. M. Renfrew).





	It is widely accepted today that most of the major plant domesticates and probably some of the animals also, which formed the basis for the early farming cultures of Europe, were ultimately imports into the area.

	In her book Palaeoethnobotany, Dr Jane Renfrew189 has reviewed the evidence for the plants, and although there remains the possibility that wild prototypes for some of the cereal plants were available in parts of south-east Europe, the overall conclusion is that the economy of agriculture was in the main an imported one. There are just a few intriguing indications of cereal grains from much earlier levels in the Franchthi Cave in Greece.190 But at present it seems safe to say that the first farmers of Europe were settled in Greece (and Crete) before 6000 bc. They had a mixed economy based upon the cultivation of emmer wheat and einkorn wheat along with pulse crops such as peas and vetch. Their livestock were mainly sheep and goats; cattle and pigs were also known, though perhaps not domesticated at the outset. This is well-documented from research at such thoroughly investigated sites as Nea Nikomedeia in Macedonia, Argissa Maghoula in Thessaly, Knossos in Crete and the Franchthi Cave in south Greece.191





		 			 FIG. 7.2 Modern distribution in the Near East of the wild prototype Triticum boeoticum for domesticated einkorn (after Zohary and J. M. Renfrew).





		 			 FIG. 7.3 Modern distribution in the Near East of the wild prototype, Hordeum spontaneum, for domesticated barley (after Zohary and J. M. Renfrew).





	It is possible to trace the spread of farming throughout much of Europe back to its Greek origins. That does not mean that there was any dispersal of people. It is quite conceivable that the existing, rather sparse, hunter-gatherer population of Europe acquired the necessary plant and animal species from their neighbours to the south-east and took up farming gradually themselves. That would represent a process of what the anthropologist terms ‘acculturation’. Instead I suggest that the spread of farming in Europe took place by a process much like the wave of advance described in Chapter 6. This implies that the bulk of the population in each new area which comes to practise a farming economy is not of local ancestry. In the main this is not an indigenous, acculturated population, but one where the children, in most cases, were born perhaps twenty or thirty miles away from the birthplaces of their parents. There is absolutely no need to suggest any organized migrations: no individual on this model needs to have moved more than forty to sixty kilometres in his or her entire life.192 Yet gradually, because of the great increase in population which the development of farming allows in an area, the result would have been to fill Europe not only with a new, farming economy, but to a large extent with a new population.

	The process of bringing a farming economy to Europe began somewhere shortly before 6000 bc in Crete and Greece. To be more accurate we should probably try to use a calibrated radiocarbon chronology. If we do so, we should say that farming reached Greece sometime before 6500 bc. It had reached the Orkney Islands, at the northern tip of Scotland, and the rest of Europe also by about 3500 bc.193





		 			 FIG. 7.4 Radiocarbon dates for the spread of farming economy to Europe. The map indicates the earliest sites of farming settlements, as determined by radiocarbon analysis for results published up to 1965. Dates are in uncalibrated radiocarbon years (after J. G. D. Clark).





	It is perfectly reasonable to view the coming of farming to Europe as a single process, albeit one with many phases, with pauses and sudden advances. For if we were to take the wheat sown in Orkney in the neolithic around 3000 bc, and ask where each year’s seed corn had itself been reaped, we would trace a line across the map of Europe that would inevitably lead us back to the Greek early neolithic, and from there back across to western Anatolia. This is a crucial point. It is by no means so certain that the same would be true of the ancestry of human beings; although that is broadly what I am in fact arguing here. However, for the wheat and some of the other plant species (and probably the ancestry of the sheep and goats also) that is the position.

	My argument, following the wave of advance model, is that the new economy of farming allowed the population in each area to rise, over just a few centuries from perhaps 0.1 persons per square kilometre to something like 5 or 10 per square kilometre. As the model predicts,194 with only small, local movements of twenty or thirty kilometres, this would gradually result in the peopling of the whole of Europe by a farming population, the descendents of the first European farmers.

	If that was the case, we would expect that the language of those first farmers in Greece around 6500 bc would be carried across the whole of Europe. Of course it would change in the process. In areas close to Greece, the language of the first farmers would be rather similar to that of their farming ancestors. But with the passing of the years, if the two regions were now isolated, divergences would emerge and dialects would form. Over a period of millennia, these would separate into distinct although cognate languages. This is very much the process which, as we have seen, happened to Latin at the end of the Roman Empire, where a number of the different provinces diverged linguistically with the formation of their own Romance languages.195 Further to the north-west, and many centuries later, the language of the first farmers as they arrived might already be rather different from their ancestors in Greece, and even more so from their distant cousins in Greece at the same point in time. There is no difficulty, then, in imagining the development of a whole series of different languages, and ultimately of language families in the different parts of Europe.

	So far, however, we have completely ignored the pre-existing, hunter-gatherer, the ‘mesolithic’ population. On one view we might disregard them, suggesting that they exploited a rather different ecological niche from that used by the first farmers, as Ruth Tringham196 has indeed argued. If they kept themselves to themselves, so to speak, they would soon come to represent a small linguistic minority representing perhaps no more than 1 per cent of the population in most areas. Gradually they might have been linguistically assimilated, although contributing words and perhaps grammatical features to the language of each area.

	In cases where the mesolithic population was much denser — perhaps in Brittany or on the shores of Portugal,197 where the shell middens suggest a fairly flourishing mesolithic community, their contribution might have been larger, and where the local mesolithic population actually took up farming itself, it too would undergo much the same increase in population density. In such a case its language would have a greater probability of surviving. On this model, that could be the explanation for the occasional pockets of non-Indo-European languages which survived into historic times, such as Etruscan or Basque, and no doubt many others which survived for a while but are now extinct.





		 			 FIG. 7.5 The impact of farming on the existing mesolithic communities of north-west Europe along the ‘Atlantic façade’ (after Kinnes).





	That then is the model in outline. It predicts that if we see a very wide uniformity in language, we should seek a demographic and economic explanation. The Indo-European languages of Europe would thus be traceable back to the first farmers of Greece who would themselves have spoken an early form of Indo-European.

	It should be noted that this correlation between European mixed farming and the Indo-European languages applies equally to very large areas of the globe. Precisely the same process took place in Australia, when the first European settlers, with their domesticated plants and animals, spread rapidly across a sub-continent until then occupied exclusively by hunter-gatherers. In the rest of the world (and indeed in Australia too) the model is mixed with the other major process outlined in Chapter 6: élite dominance. In the Americas and in New Zealand, where there were already native farming economies, the new European arable farming system, with its domesticated animals, was propagated by force of arms. However many of the features of the original model still apply. The wave of advance can be traced as the American frontier, and it crossed what is now the United States in just a few centuries. The result has certainly been a vast increase in population density. Much the same is true for some of the countries of South America, although naturally in lands such as Peru, which already had a highly developed economy and social organization, the picture is more complicated, as it is in Central America. The equation between mixed cereal and livestock farming and the Indo-European languages is a striking one, although not of course universal: many Semitic speakers are mixed farmers too, and the correlation is a product of the processes which I have described.





2 The Spread of Farming in Europe


	To say that the first farmers of Europe spoke an early Indo-European language or languages is sheer hypothesis. The alternative, that the linguistic unity might extend yet further into the past, we will examine in Chapter 11. Following this first hypothesis, let us explore in more detail the process by which Europe came to adopt farming. The progress of archaeology in recent decades allows a very detailed picture to be built up.

	In the first place, we should realize that although the origins were shared, there was nothing stereotyped about the process. In some areas there were already settled communities before the advent of farming, sometimes with a well-established village life. The site of the Lepenski Vir198 on the Danube, above the Iron Gate, in what is now Yugoslavia, is one of these. There was a village of at least forty houses, and the art of the time, around 5000 bc, had a coherent style of its own. This was a community based mainly upon the fish resources of the Danube and one which operated therefore upon what we should regard as a ‘mesolithic’ subsistence base.

	The late Eric Higgs looked at farming adaptations in an original way, and he was among the first to point out that Europe made many contributions of its own to its farming economy.199 Thus cattle, and pigs, may have been separately domesticated in Europe. It has also been argued that there may have been a separate centre in southern France for domestication of sheep.200

	Thus while the first immigrant farmers of Greece may have brought with them the plants and animals which made farming there possible, they worked out their own adaptations to their special circumstances. Robert Rodden, the excavator of the early farming village of Nea Nikomedeia has shown how the houses there were built with a timber frame, and the walls were then completed by plastering with mud in a manner not unlike the wattle and daub method in medieval Britain.201 This differs from the use of plain mud brick that was used in some farming communities further east, such as Çatal Hüyük in Anatolia. In Europe, as he points out, farming villages were on an open plan, with separate free-standing houses. Often in the Near East, the settlement was ‘agglomerate’, with inter-linking rooms and houses.

	John Nandris, of the University of London, has written about the First Temperate Neolithic,202 stressing that the early farming settlements of temperate Europe, in Yugoslavia and neighbouring lands, were different in many ways from those of Greece. Andrew Sherratt has recently made this point in relation to the Hungarian Plain,203 and both have stressed that groundwater and flooding are relevant factors in those areas, which they rarely are in Greece. So there was nothing routine about the adoption of farming techniques in each area. In a way the occupants of each new piece of territory had to rediscover for themselves the nature of farming, and what was appropriate to that area. They generally had available to them the plants and animals which their fathers had used, and many of the relevant skills, but they had to work out adaptations for themselves. They experimented with new techniques, and with different plant and animal species. They hunted the wild fauna of the area, and ultimately transformed their farming practices, so that the neolithic of northern Europe was very different from that of Greece. But the culture and the farming economy of each territory was recognizably a transformation of the parent economy of its neighbour. Rather than seeing the wave of advance as a mechanical, indeed passive, process we should view it as a whole series of transformations in which the farming populations actively participated. This may have implications for their languages too, but it does not alter the circumstance that each economy was a transformation of its predecessor in a long series traceable back to early Greece.

	The archaeologist is concerned not only with the economy but with the material culture of the communities with which he is dealing, and where possible with their social structure and ideology also. In Greece the early farmers had stone tools — chipped stone blades and polished stone carpentry tools and axes. After a brief period without pottery they invented or acquired the techniques of pottery making. They were probably already weaving, and, of course, they were building houses. Small baked clay figures or ‘figurines’ in early neolithic Greece, which are found also in the first temperate neolithic of the Balkans, have been taken as indications of cult practice. I share this view, although other interpretations are possible. There are occasional finds of bits of copper from very early farming times, although the use of copper to make artefacts has not yet been documented from the Greek early neolithic, as it has in that of Anatolia. The use of boats is certainly implied by the importation of obsidian, a volcanic glass useful for making chipped stone tools, from the island of Melos, even before the farming economy began. If we examine the protolexicon, as set out by Gordon Childe (see Chapter 4, section 1) we can document or predict nearly all the components except the words relating to the wheel and the chariot, which were certainly not yet known. Although there are no grounds for speaking of a ranked society at this time, it is perfectly possible that the village could have had a head man who might fit the role of the simple predecessor of the rex or raja. Of course the Greek environment lacks many of the trees and some of the animals which are seen in the Indo-European language of more northerly lands, so that the absence of words for these species in the Indo-European languages of southern Europe is to be predicted.

	It is possible, with the aid of radiocarbon dating, to trace the spread of the farming economy through Europe. From Greece in 6500 bc the same type of farming economy was well established in Yugoslavia by around 5000 bc. Stuart Piggott has given a simplified map204 of this process.





		 			 FIG. 7.6 The early spread of farming in Europe, 1. Starčevo and allied; 2. Linear pottery; 3. Impressed pottery (after Piggott).





	The cultures of the first temperate neolithic take different names: Starčevo in Yugoslavia, Körös in Hungary, Criș in Romania and Karanovo in Bulgaria. They have much in common. It was from the Körös culture that a transformation took place, producing a new adaptation which is seen from Hungary and Czechoslovakia right up the Danube to Germany and north to the Low Countries. This is termed the Linear Pottery culture, which we have already met in the writings of Kossinna. The house form here was a very different one. These were long, timber-frame houses, much more suited to the winters of central and northern Europe than were the mud houses of Greece. By 4000 bc we find this culture almost on the shores of the English Channel. By 3000 bc a new transformation has produced the first neolithic of Scandinavia, the Funnel Beaker Culture (TRB), mentioned in the last chapter, and seen first in Denmark and then in Sweden. Meanwhile the spread of the Linear Pottery culture to the east has resulted in a new transformation across to the east of the Carpathian Mountains, where the early phases of the Cucuteni and Tripolye cultures emerge.

	In the Mediterranean an analogous process was at work.205 The farming economy of western Greece reached Italy by sea, and soon Sardinia and Corsica, southern France and the Mediterranean coasts of Iberia. In each of these areas there is pottery decorated with impressions which has given its name to the Impressed Ware cultures. Farming was soon practised throughout much of Iberia, and in central and northern France. From there, and perhaps also from the Low Countries, the first farmers reached Britain and Ireland. This is of course an absurdly compressed account, which covers in a few pages what many volumes and many university courses treat in much greater detail, over many chapters and many lectures.

	It should be noted at this point that the view that the techniques of farming spread from south-east Europe to north and west, carried by the expansive movement of a farming population, as argued by the wave of advance model, has not gone unchallenged. It was one of the great merits of the approach of the late E. S. Higgs to questions of prehistoric economy that he was very willing to question earlier assumptions. One of these was the view that the origins of farming reflected a sudden revolution. Instead he argued for a long symbiosis between humans and animals which resulted in the development of domesticates, and which took place over a very wide area. A number of his former students206 have argued not only that farming practices were adopted in the main by local hunter-gatherer populations who acquired those domesticates that were not locally available through trade and exchange, but also that most of the domesticates were in fact locally available. This case, however plausible it may be for cattle and pigs and for some of the pulse and other crops, does not work very well for precisely those species which were the first staples of the farmers of southern Europe: wheat and barley, and sheep and goats.

	Both Robin Dennell and Graeme Barker have sought to argue that barley and einkorn wheat might be native to Europe, and hence locally domesticated there, while conceding that this can hardly be so for bread wheat and emmer. Although indications of wild barley have indeed been found from upper palaeolithic levels of the Franchthi Cave in Greece, there is no evidence that it underwent domestication there, and most palaeobotanists accept that the domestic cereals of Greece were indeed imported. No evidence has yet been put forward in a systematic way to argue that cereals were independently domesticated in other parts of Europe. The essential basis of European agriculture — cereals — was an imported one.

	The most important stock animals in early Mediterranean Europe were sheep and goats. It is indeed the case that wild ovicaprids are known from some parts of the area already from the mesolithic and earlier periods. Much has been made of the evidence for this from early sites such as Châteauneuf-les-Martigues in southern France. But it is far from clear that these were the prototypes and ancestors for the domestic animals which were used there in neolithic times. As Geddes207 has written:

	On the basis of cytogenetic and palaeontological evidence, it now appears improbable that the late Mesolithic sheep of southern France were domesticated in situ, or were themselves wild. These domestic sheep, whose ancestry must be traced ultimately to south-western Asia. . . .

	To insist that the main plants and animals were imported to Europe is not, however, the same as to demonstrate that the early farmers were themselves immigrants. It is perfectly possible to argue that exchange systems between the local, mesolithic population and their farming neighbours could have provided the former both with the necessary domesticates and with the stimulus to use them.

	However the critics of the wave of advance model often seem not to have understood it too well. Barker goes so far as to argue:208

	There is remarkably little hard evidence for any colonization movement. In particular, not a shred of evidence has ever been produced (or apparently thought necessary) to demonstrate the existence anywhere in Europe or in the putative homelands outside Europe of the kind of seething population sump predicted by the model in order to provide ever more land-hungry colonists for service at the expanding agricultural frontier.

	To speak in these terms is to misunderstand the model at a rather basic level. Dennell209 has quite rightly pointed out that the population density of the first farmers, once their settlements were well established, was not particularly high — but it does not need to be for entirely virgin land nearby to seem attractive. He has also stressed that the early farming cultures of Europe were regionally distinctive. That point is noted above, where it is argued that we may speak in terms of a number of transformations of the early farming package. These transformations were there viewed as adaptations to the new environments gradually brought about by the first farmers as they moved into them and developed their own farming systems. Interestingly Dennell himself speaks of the Linear Pottery people as colonists, and it is difficult to see why the same perspective is not applicable in south-east Europe and in west Mediterranean Europe also. Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza further adduce in support of their wave of advance maps210 for the distribution of various blood groups in Europe, suggesting genetic affinities which they feel are best explained by their model. I think experience has shown that genetic arguments in relation to language and culture quite readily lend themselves to misleading interpretations. So that although the blood group data could indeed be used to reinforce the case presented here, I feel it would be wiser to await further assessment of the arguments relating to these data, which have not yet been thoroughly reviewed.

	The case for the arrival of a farming economy in several areas of Europe has, however, been well made, and I do not yet find the alternative assertions very persuasive.211 This does not mean that the wave of advance model has to be applied in an inflexible or mechanical way. Of course there were local variations, and changes of pace, with quite long periods of stability in order for a farming population to become established and grow in numbers within a given area, before some individuals thought it preferable to seek farming land a little further afield. There was, then, nothing uniform about this process. In some cases, as with the Linear Pottery culture, farming seems to have spread rapidly. In others, as with the first neolithic of Scandinavia, it took rather a long time to get going. The archaeological record is becoming clearer all the time.





3 The Ancestral Languages of Europe


	If the spread of farming was indeed responsible for the initial dispersal of the Indo-European languages in Europe, we should be able to make certain inferences about the relationships between the early languages in each area. Of course these will have been affected by many processes and circumstances before resulting in the modern languages of Europe, but there may be predictions which we can make which might be used to test the validity of the proposed explanation.

	It does not, of course, follow that the first farming population of Greece all spoke the same dialect or even the same language. Be that as it may, we can list the transformations schematically as follows:



	1 Anatolia to Greece (Thessaly and West Macedonia)

	2 North Greece to First Temperate (Starčevo/ Körös/ Karanovo)

	3 First Temperate (Körös) to Linear Pottery

	4 Linear Pottery to Proto-Cucuteni and Proto-Tripolye

	5 Linear Pottery to Scandinavia (TRB), and westwards into North France

	6 West Greece to Impressed Wares (Mediterranean Coasts)

	7 Impressed Wares to Iberian Neolithic

	8 Impressed Wares to Central and North France

	9 North France and Low Countries (Linear Pottery) to Britain and Ireland.

	These relationships are set out in Fig. 7.7.





		 			 FIG. 7.7 Hypothetical sequence of cultural and linguistic transformations during the early spread of farming in Europe. The initial transformation (1) is from the early neolithic of Anatolia to that of central Greece where the language was ancestral to the Greek language. Transformation (10) indicates the change from East European settled farming to the first pastoral-nomad economy of the steppe lands.





	For the purposes of analysis, it may be interesting to see what linguistic patterns would emerge if we made the probably unwarranted assumption, that the languages of Europe as we know them from around the beginning of the Christian era derived from those of the first farmers in each of the regions under consideration. The experiment at least has the merit of maximal simplicity.



	Transformation 1 would lead ultimately to the Proto-Greek language.

	Transformation 2 would lead to Proto-Illyrian, and perhaps Proto-Thracian and Proto-Dacian in the east.

	Transformation 3 would lead to a language of Central Europe relevant perhaps to Proto-Celtic and Proto-Germanic.

	Transformation 4 would lead to languages in those lands where the Slav languages are now spoken.

	Transformation 5 would lead to the early, presumably Proto- Germanic, languages of Scandinavia.

	Transformation 6 would lead to the Proto-Italic languages (but not non-Indo-European Etruscan).

	Transformation 7 would lead to the early languages of Spain and Portugal (but not non-Indo-European Basque and Iberian).

	Transformation 8 would lead to the early Proto-Celtic (or pre-Celtic) languages of France (to which Transformation 5 would contribute).

	Transformation 9 would lead to the early languages of Britain and Ireland, including Proto-Celtic (or pre-Celtic) and perhaps Pictish, if this is an Indo-European language.212

	Transformation 10 would lead to the first Proto-Indo-European languages of the steppe lands.



	There is in fact no reason to suppose that so simple a picture could be valid; for there are no doubt many cases of language replacement which we ought to be considering, as well as other more complex linguistic processes. In the first place they take no account whatever of the pre-existing languages of the hunter-gatherer populations of those areas. We are aware today only of Basque, Iberian and Etruscan as the long-standing non-Indo-European languages of Europe, but there may well have been many more.213 Although they have not survived as living languages, nor been recorded in inscriptions, they may well have had their influence upon the Indo-European languages which survived.

	Secondly, it is not clear from this model to what extent the language of the first farmers of Greece was modified during the wave of advance phase. On the one hand one might imagine that there was little change initially, so that a somewhat similar Proto-Indo-European language might have been spoken from Greece right through to Scandinavia with only dialectal variations at the outset. The differentiation into the various Indo-European branches would then have been a subsequent process. On the other hand, linguistic change might have been quite fast during the dispersal phase, so that the language of the very first Scandinavian farmers, or even of the first Linear Pottery farmers, might already have been very different at the outset from the early farmers of Greece.

	An intermediate position between these two extremes is suggested by the work of the German linguist Hans Krahe.214 He pointed out in 1957 that the river names of central Europe preserved many similarities which might indicate the presence in the area of an early stage of development of the Indo-European languages which he termed ‘Old European’. For instance rivers named Alba appear in Spain, France, Switzerland and Germany; and rivers named Ara are found in Germany, Holland, England, Scotland and Spain. On the model proposed here it would be easy to see in these names a survival of the early group of dialects or languages existing across central and northern Europe before the process of differentiation had resulted in the different Indo-European branches, few of which retained such word forms.

	On this model also we would expect various new words to arise along the way, so to speak, so that the innovations would be seen in languages diverging from the line of development from early Greece after a given point but not prior to that point. This would tie in with Krahe’s observation that the European words for ‘sea’, ‘forest’, ‘oak’, ‘apple’, etc., are found in the languages of central and northern Europe — in general north of the Alps — but not further south. In the same way, a number of the other special words for species occurring in temperate and northern lands, but not in the south, would be expected to develop. Some might borrow pre-existing words in the language and give them a more specialist meaning. Others would be entirely new words. In this way, for instance, many of the Proto-Indo-European names for trees may have come about. Krahe concludes his 1957 article with a view which would harmonize with the model proposed here:215

	Finally, as a further reward we should observe that the recognition of ‘Old European’ — at least for the west Indogermanic languages — has made evident a prehistoric intermediate stage in the development. On the one hand this lies chronologically long after the period of a still relatively unitary general Indogermanic root language. On the other hand it lies far before the earliest emergence of the separated individual languages.

	A further limitation implicit in this simplistic presentation of the basic model is the lack of consideration of possible language replacements occurring between the pattern thus established around 4000 bc and the beginning of the present era. As we know that since that time the spread of the Latin language was responsible for the subsequent pattern of the Romance languages, is it reasonable to suppose that similar developments were not taking place earlier? In the same way, it is well established that the Hungarian language was introduced into central Europe around the ninth century ad — so why not similar events earlier? However the model is perfectly open to elaboration of that kind. The process outlined here might well have been succeeded by other processes which would have the effect of complicating the linguistic picture. That would not in itself invalidate the wave of advance approach.

	Moreover, it does not follow that simply because the Romans and the Magyars effected successful language replacements other such replacements must necessarily have happened in earlier times. It should be noted that the historically attested language replacements in Europe do not fall within the Demographic/ Subsistence category discussed in Chapter 6. That is relevant only to substantial changes in population density brought about by changes in subsistence practices, and we have very little evidence for such demographic changes after the initial spread of farming. To be sure, there were continual processes of intensification, including the ‘secondary products revolution’ with its greater emphasis on livestock, but there is no reason to think that they were generally associated with substantial movements of people. On the contrary, the language replacements to which we can point fall within the Élite Dominance model. Such a model is entirely appropriate to the practice of military power by an empire like that of the Romans. It is appropriate also to a chiefdom society, such as the Magyars, when this is supported by a new military technology — in this case the technology of mounted warfare aided by the use of the stirrup. The first of these circumstances is simply not applicable in Europe before the time of the Romans. The second — chiefdom society coupled with developments in military technology — may have been. It is possible that the use of the horse in the first millennium bc by mounted warriors (although without the full possibilities of a heavy cavalry made possible by the stirrup) may have been significant in this way. In this case the impact of the Scythians and the Cimmerians may have been influential in eastern Europe, and this may have an important bearing upon our understanding of the Slav languages, and perhaps upon other aspects of the language pattern of east-central Europe.

	Apart from these events, however, it is at present difficult to see indications of major episodes of élite dominance by outside groups in the prehistory of Europe such as might have resulted in significant language displacements. Some are, it is true, historically attested on a more limited scale. The origin of the kingdom of Dalriada in western Scotland, which is quite plausibly credited with the introduction from Ireland of the Gaelic language to its territory, and ultimately to Scotland as a whole, was probably one of these. A similar case can be made for the early origins of the Breton language from south-west England — although both these cases should be critically examined. But before the development of ‘chiefly’ tribal societies of heroic mould in the European iron age, such episodes are less likely. It is possible, therefore, that the language pattern of Europe was a fairly stable one between 4500 and 1000 bc. The Celts are discussed further in Chapter 9.

	To say this does not in any way question the likelihood of border adjustments — of shifts over time in the position of linguistic boundaries. We must expect also the usual processes of linguistic evolution over time — convergences between some neighbouring languages, ultimately perhaps resulting in assimilation, and in other cases divergences resulting in the separation of distinct dialects and even languages. These would be no doubt determined in part by the extent of interaction between neighbouring areas, so that natural barriers such as mountains, and sometimes seas, would be expected to emerge also as linguistic boundaries. Thus it is likely that Iberia will have had a fairly stable linguistic history — although interactions across the Straits of Gibraltar may have played a significant role. Italy may also have been a stable area (although probably prone to regional variants), and we have some evidence that Greece was too. The case of eastern Europe may, however, be very different, and a more complex linguistic history is to be predicted there.

	The advantage of this hypothesis is that it allows us to see the development of the European languages in time depth. We have already seen how it harmonizes with the hydronomy (river name) approach of Krahe. The Bulgarian scholar, Vladimir Georgiev, has also stressed the importance of place names216 in revealing an earlier stage of linguistic development, and it may be that some of those which are often classed as ‘Pre-Indo-European’ by some scholars may instead represent an intermediate stage, as Krahe suggested, before the differentiation of the different language branches.





4 The Question of Time Depth


	There is no doubt that the date proposed here for the dispersal of farmers speaking an early Indo-European language is very much earlier than most scholars have suggested, with the exception of Herbert Kühn and Pedro Bosch-Gimpera. (Kühn’s ideas are discussed in Chapter 11). What is proposed here does in fact have much in common with Bosch-Gimpera’s theory,217 except that modern research shows very clearly that farming spread to the rest of Europe from Greece, and to Greece from Anatolia. These suggestions have more in common with the ideas of Bosch-Gimpera than with those of Kossinna or Childe — but Childe’s emphasis on the importance of chariotry and horsemanship are again particularly apt for later episodes of élite dominance.

	On the other hand it is difficult to see how most linguists have felt able to suggest that the Indo-European dispersal took place as recently as the third millennium bc or a little later (although their chronology has been set a few centuries earlier in the light of the calibration of radiocarbon dates). It is easier to see how the enthusiasts for glottochronology arrived at a relatively late date following these assumptions, but these have been widely criticized by many linguists.

	My analysis of the literature suggests that the date of c. 2500 bc often cited for the ‘dispersal’ is based upon a circularity of reasoning. Archaeologists often quote it as being based upon linguistic evidence, and can indeed refer to linguists who give this impression. The linguistic argument seems to be a two-fold one. In the first place the absence of common words for ‘iron’ and ‘bronze’ among most Indo-European languages is taken as an indication that these were not part of the protolexicon and were thus not known in the homeland. And they point to the Latin aes, the Germanic aiz and the Sanskrit ayas, etc. meaning variously ‘copper’, or ‘bronze’ or ‘ore’ or ‘metal’, as an indicator that metallurgy of some kind was already underway in the homeland before the dispersal. Hence, they conclude, the dispersal took place towards the end of the neolithic period or early in the copper age. This ignores the circumstance that even the neolithic population of Europe must have been familiar, in many areas, with native copper, and in many others with copper and other metallic ores, which often have either a brightly-coloured or metallic appearance. The existence of a word for ‘ore’ or for ‘copper’ is no proof of copper metallurgy. In any case we are now very familiar with indications of very simple copper metallurgy in quite early neolithic contexts, in Greece and in the Near East218 (Çatal Hüyük, Çayönü, Ali Kosh, etc.). This argument, then, in no way militates against an early neolithic, or indeed earlier, date.

	The circularity is yet more apparent in the second argument. Basically this takes the supposed finding of linguistic palaeontology leading to a homeland in south Russia or in central Europe, and accepts the conclusions either of the Kossinna school or of the early Childe and of Gimbutas in favour of a late neolithic dispersal. The dispersal is thus set around 2500 bc. This date is not based on any clear linguistic argument; it is not really a linguistic argument at all. It is a conclusion based upon consensus. Yet it is taken by archaeologists as linguistic evidence, and is used by them to support that very consensus. There is therefore a complete circularity. And in this case it would appear that the consensus may be in error.

	Another, linguistically much more interesting, argument relates to the speed with which languages change and diverge. It will no doubt be argued that six thousand years is too long a time for the process of divergence resulting in the modern languages of Europe, and that the notion of a very early form, in Greece, eight and a half thousand years ago is unreasonable. However this view may not sufficiently take into account the implications of the decipherment of the Linear B tablets with its revelation of Mycenaean Greek; for Mycenaean Greek can be understood in many cases as if it were classical Greek. There are a few phrases where the resemblance is close, so that the transliterations of those parts of the tablets begin to make some sort of sense even in modern Greek. Admittedly there are many other cases where the Mycenaean Greek cannot be understood at all, even with the aid of Classical Greek. But there are some phrases, now 3,300 years old, which may still be recognized as Greek (although of course the decipherment itself has not gone unquestioned). I think it can be reasonably asserted that Mycenaean Greek stands closer to Modern Greek than it does to Latin. Mycenaean Greek and Latin must have come a long way, through many processes of divergence, since the first notional ‘dispersal’. So that from that perspective the time depth suggested here is not implausible.

	Of course this is precisely the area where the procedures of glottochronology should be most relevant. Its original exponent, Morris Swadesh, following calculations by Roberto Escalente, produced a table,219 on which Fig. 5.4 is based, suggesting that Greek and Latin became separate branches some twenty centuries before the thirteenth century bc, i.e. c. 3300 bc, and that Hittite separated from Greek c. 4500 bc. These tables do not in general produce a pattern entirely consistent with the branching family tree model upon which they are based. The main point to be made is that there is no good ground for thinking that the rate of word loss in one language need be the same as in another. If we were to alter Swadesh’s rate of loss by a factor of about two we might obtain results more consistent with the datings which have been reliably established by radiocarbon for the spread of farming in Europe.

	Glottochronology, with its rather dubious claims for chronological precision, should be treated with caution, but the closely allied approach of lexicostatistics is based on far less narrow assumptions. If we are content simply to use the tables offered as a measure in some sense of the closeness or similarity between pairs of languages, as measured from their vocabularies, we may obtain a more useful picture — unfortunately it is not a consistent one. The reason for this may be simply that many of the branches have diverged so far from each other that the numerical score of similarities between them is not many times more than the 8 per cent which Swadesh predicted would arise by chance alone, between entirely unrelated languages. With the very early divergences which am proposing, going back some eight thousand years, we are beginning to approach the notional limit of 11.7 thousand years. Swadesh suggested that when two languages diverged from a common parent language as long ago as that, the word losses from them would have been cumulatively so great that the remaining 8 per cent of similarities which his method would predict would in fact be no more than the figure to be expected from chance similarities. So there are, in Swadesh’s own view, serious difficulties in using this method for early periods.

	I believe, in short, that the methods of lexicostatistics can usefully summarize what vocabulary can tell us about similarities between languages. They cannot be used mechanically to reconstruct a supposed historical picture.

	It does not appear, therefore, that the claims of glottochronology are sufficiently firm to rule out the pattern of events proposed here. On the contrary, these events might usefully be used in a re-examination of some of the principles upon which glottochronology itself rests. The stability seen in some languages, notably Greek, does suggest that in many cases the pace of language change may be no faster than is proposed here. In general, I feel lexico-statistics is more likely to be helpful in illuminating the general relationships between languages than in establishing a precise chronology for language change.





5 Before Greece, Anatolia


	There can be little doubt that the principal plant domesticates, and some of the animals too, came to Greece from Anatolia. It is likely that they were brought by immigrant farmers travelling in small boats across the Aegean sea. We need not think of this as an organized ‘migration’. There is plenty of evidence that already in pre-farming times the early inhabitants of southern Greece were travelling by sea. This is documented for us by the finds of obsidian, shown by analysis to have come from the island of Melos,220 which is found in early Greek sites, and particularly in mesolithic and even in late upper palaeolithic levels of the Franchthi Cave in the Peloponnese. It must be assumed that the early inhabitants of the Aegean coasts of Anatolia were travelling in the same way, although this is not yet clearly documented.

	In the case of Crete we can be sure that the techniques of farming were indeed introduced by new settlers, since there are at present very few indications there of an earlier, hunter-gatherer population. Precisely where these small groups of immigrants came from is not yet known, but one presumes it was from early farming settlements yet to be discovered, on the southern coasts of Aegean Anatolia. We certainly have a clear indication of the way of life which they brought with them revealed in the lowest levels at the site of Knossos in Crete.





		 			 FIG. 7.8 Stamp seals (‘pintaderas’) from Anatolia and Europe: (a) (b) and (c) from Çatal Hüyük, Anatolia (d) from Maliq, Albania (e) from Tečić, Yugoslavia (after Mellaart and Makkay).





	Most workers agree that the first farming practices of mainland Greece were also introduced by small groups of immigrants. The process need have been no more than a marine version of the wave of advance model. We can imagine people who were already used to travelling by boat, and who may in previous years already have crossed the Aegean on short visits, deciding to make a permanent move to exploit the rich potential of the farmlands of Thessaly, Central Greece and the Peloponnese. So far there are almost no indications of early farming settlements along the north Aegean coast, in what is now East Macedonia and Thrace. So all the evidence does support a sea-crossing, rather than a wave of advance movement along the northern coastlands.

	We do not have much idea of the language of neolithic Crete, since its bronze age successor, as documented by the Minoan Linear A tablets, remains undeciphered. But if the earliest farmers of mainland Greece spoke an early form of Indo-European, so did their parents in the early farming settlements of Aegean Anatolia. None of these has yet been investigated, but in view of the very early farming sites further east, there is no doubt that they must have existed.

	It is likely that the first farmers of west Anatolia did not develop farming there, on the spot, from wild prototype species, and we should imagine the wave of advance beginning rather further to the east, perhaps in the Konya Plain, where the site of Çatal Hüyük221 is located, or further east still. The question is one of determining where there was a substantial hunter-gatherer population that either adopted farming through contact with farmers in neighbouring territories or actually formed part of the primary nuclear zone where early farming developed.





		 			 FIG. 7.9 The original area of the Anatolian early farming culture (shaded), and the cultural similarities between the early Greek farming site of Nea Nikomedeia and other early sites. Specific similarities are indicated by numbers (see key). Karanovo is typical of early farming sites in Bulgaria, Soufli Magoula of many early farming sites in Thessaly in central Greece (after Rodden and Mellaart).





	 Comparisons with Nea Nikomedeia



			 Architecture

			 Adornment





			 1 Square house plan

			 6 Studs and nails





			 2 Wood frame and mud

			 7 Clay stamps (‘pintaderas’)





			 3 Open settlement plan

			 8 Belt-fastener





			 Subsistence

			 Pottery Decoration





			 4 Cattle?

			 9 White-painted and finger impressed





			 5 Pigs?

			 10 Red-on-cream painting





			 11 Modelled face





	On the model presented here, it is altogether unsurprising that Hittite should be an Indo-European language. Like its contemporary to the west, Mycenaean Greek, it would represent the successor within its own region of its very early Indo-European predecessor some five thousand years earlier. The other Anatolic languages, notably Luwian and Palaic, would likewise be descended from the same Anatolian neolithic predecessors, along with other languages now extinct. But the presence of other, non-Indo-European languages in the area at the time of the Hittites, mainly the Hattic language, indicates perhaps that not all the early farmers in the nuclear zone of domestication spoke an early Indo-European language.

	It would of course be possible to see these non-Indo-European language-speakers as intrusive in some way, the product of some language displacement. They could have come from north of the Caucasus, or from the areas east of Anatolia. But there seems to be no way of telling which was ‘earlier’ — Hittite or Hattic. It is often assumed that Hattic was earlier in Anatolia, but that is simply the consequence of assuming that the Hittites were themselves an intrusive population. In reality, no good evidence has ever been advanced to document the notion that the Hittites were intrusive to Anatolia. It is true that the archaeological record is not very complete yet in Anatolia, and any number of surprises may emerge. I am not personally convinced by the arguments advanced by James Mellaart, one of the leading authorities on prehistoric Anatolia, for widespread destructions associated with movements of people and languages, during the early bronze age.222 Again it is difficult to see why people would move in large numbers at that time from south-east Europe, the region that is now Turkish Thrace, into Anatolia. I would prefer to see Hittite as a language indigenous to Anatolia, growing from an early Indo-European base there.

	How far east do we hope to trace this westward-moving wave of advance? The answer to that question must come from our knowledge of the origins of farming itself. At present it is widely agreed that the ‘nuclear zone’ may be approached by a study of the distribution of the prototype plant species. In the absence of good distribution maps for the early prehistoric period, modern maps for the relevant species223 give the best indication.

	The nuclear zone, on the ‘hilly flanks of the fertile crescent’, to use the terminology of Robert Braidwood, may be subdivided into three lobes.224 The first, in the Levant, is represented by such early sites as Jericho and Tell Ramad. Its hunter-gatherer predecessor was the Natufian culture of Palestine. The second lobe, represented by such early farming sites as Jarmo and Ali Kosh, was preceded by the hunter-gatherer groups which are today named after the cave of Karim Shahir in the north Zagros. The third lobe is in south-east Anatolia, with such sites as Cayönü and Çatal Hüyük. The hunter-gatherer groups in this region, which are of special interest to us, are less well known. It should be noted, moreover, that Soviet archaeologists might claim a fourth lobe for this nuclear zone lying east of the last, and extending into Turkmenia,225 with sites such as Djeitun and Togolok Tepe.

	There were of course other centres of early farming, other nuclear zones, for instance in China. Our concern here is primarily with the range of plant and animal species which accompanied the specific wave of advance under review, and which formed the basis for the mixed farming economy of Europe and western Asia. Whether or not the development of early farming in India and Pakistan represents an entirely independent farming origin, like that of China, we will consider next (see Chapter 8). The alternative hypothesis could be advanced that the relevant areas formed part of a further lobe of the nuclear farming zone of western Asia.

	The logic of the argument thus leads us to conclude that the first farmers in the east Anatolian part of the nuclear farming zone were probably speaking an early form of Indo-European.226 We shall see that the same might conceivably be argued for some of the early farmers of the Zagros area. But in the southern part of the Zagros we are close to the two areas, Sumer and Elam, where in very early historic times, not long after 3000 bc, we have clear written evidence for the existence of two non-Indo-European languages, Sumerian and Elamite. In the Levant, the earliest known inscriptions certainly give us no indications of Indo-European languages: it is not clear whether early Semitic languages may have been spoken in the area so early as this. The language of Ebla in north Syria in the third millennium bc is related to the Semitic languages. Displacements by later Semitic languages, such as Arabic, indicate that these originated further south, in Arabia, and a case can be made for a Semitic ‘homeland’ in that area. It seems difficult, therefore, to hazard a guess about the language of the Natufians of Palestine.

	All these are hazardous postulates, about a time so early that we cannot possibly have direct linguistic evidence for it. However the logic of the model identifies east Anatolia as part, although not necessarily all, of the early ‘homeland’ of people speaking a very early form of Indo-European, around 7000 bc.





6 Implications


	The implications of this model are of course highly significant, both for our understanding of the Indo-European languages, and for the prehistory of Europe and much of Asia. For Europe the picture which results is one of much greater time depth, much greater stability, than has hitherto been widely recognized. (The implications of this for north Europe, and specifically for the Celts, are looked at in Chapter 9.) In general, what we begin to see is that the prehistory of the different regions of Europe shows, with some significant exceptions, considerable continuity, from the time of the first farmers onwards. It is already widely accepted that the old idea of immigrant megalith builders, for instance, can be unhesitatingly discarded, in favour of local origins. Similarly the origins of copper metallurgy may now be seen independently in at least one area of Europe (i.e. the Balkans), and there is no reason to think in terms of any large-scale movement of people in association with the spread of metallurgical practices.

	We have argued that the Beaker complex came about as a result of a network of interactions and exchanges rather than through any population movements or élite displacements, and similarly for the Corded Ware/ Battle Axe complex. In Chapter 9 a similar case will be made for the Urnfield complex and for the iron age La Tène culture.

	This point of view does not imply any exaggerated claims for the isolation of Europe, nor any extreme arguments in favour of ‘independent invention’. It can harmonize quite happily with theories of what used to be called ‘diffusion’ — the gradual spread of new ideas and techniques. Those scholars who like to think in terms of ‘world systems’ may see Europe as simply the periphery to the Near Eastern core of a larger world system. None of that would contradict the continuities which are here proposed, nor the linguistic stability for which I am arguing.

	What they imply, however, is that we should look in each area for its own roots — unless we have clear reason to do otherwise. There need be no prior assumption that things must have changed a good deal with the ‘coming’ of the Indo-Europeans. As an example of this new freedom to ‘think local’, it is worth turning again to the old problem of ‘The Coming of the Greeks’.





7 Who were the Greeks?


	As we have seen, until the Linear B tablets were shown to be written in an early form of Greek, it was often thought that the Greeks entered Greece during the dark ages at the end of the Mycenaean civilization. The writings of early historians such as Thucydides could be interpreted as suggesting, (although they did not actually say so), a Dorian invasion from right outside Greece, one among successive ‘waves’ of invaders, later to be responsible for the various dialects of classical times.

	Already before the decipherment, there were many who recognized the elements of continuity from Mycenaean to classical times and earlier indications of entry were therefore sought. One of the favourites was placed at the beginning of the middle bronze age, when the wheel-made gray Minyan ware made its appearance. Childe was among the first to comment upon its possible significance227 — now the significance of a single pottery type is widely discounted. Instead some scholars look to an earlier phase during the later part of the early bronze age, around 2200 bc, when an assemblage of pottery is found on a number of maritime Greek sites which does indeed resemble pottery from north-west Anatolia. This would be a possible candidate for replacement by élite dominance. While such pottery is found in some areas, it is not seen in other parts of Greece, and it is possible to exaggerate its importance.

	Other than that, it is difficult to find any major assemblage of finds from prehistoric Greece which shows an outside origin, such as would indicate a displacement of people. The one significant exception occurs in east Macedonia, where at sites like the one which Marija Gimbutas and I excavated at Sitagroi, pottery and other finds closely resembling those from sites in Bulgaria to the north, twice occur. The first time is during the copper age, around 4500 bc, and the second is during the early bronze age, two thousand years later. This area, although firmly now part of Greece, has sometimes been a marginal one, and may at times have owed allegiance in different directions through a process of boundary displacement. It was indeed occupied in early classical times by Thracian tribes, barbarians who did not speak the Greek language. No doubt they did indeed speak a Thracian language akin to that in what is now Bulgaria, whose origins were suggested earlier.

	The story in Greece, although there are several gaps in our present understanding, seems to be one of substantial continuity, with some occasional displacements. The economic decline at the end of the neolithic period, and the system collapse at the end of the late bronze (Mycenaean) period may both have produced some boundary displacements in border areas, but there is no need to suggest anything more radical.

	These archaeological observations harmonize quite well with recent thinking by historical linguists. One of the most notable, John Chadwick,228 the collaborator with Michael Ventris in the decipherment of Linear B, has written:

	My own opinion, advanced with due caution but firmly held, is that the question ‘Where did the Greeks come from?’ is meaningless. We can only begin to speak of Greeks after the formation of the Greek language as a recognizably distinct branch of Indo-European . . . the study of place-names and loan-words is rather more complicated than (many) have thought; and the certain facts are few. The only certain historical conclusions to be drawn for Greece from linguistic evidence of this type are these: at least one language was spoken there before Greek; Greek is the product of the engrafting of an Indo-European idiom on non-Greek stock; Greek was already spoken in Greece in the Mycenaean age; and finally, the distribution of the Greek dialects within Greece was radically changed by the events which followed the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization.

	Now it is true that in the passage quoted, Chadwick suggested that the process of formation of the Greek language took place ‘during the first half of the second millennium bc’, so that the arrival of Indo-European-speaking peoples in Greece would presumably be set by him somewhere around or a little before 2000 bc. But it is not clear to what extent Chadwick is influenced by the widely-held assumptions which we have already discussed about the ‘coming of the Indo-Europeans’. Any independent arguments about date would presumably have to be based on general notions about the rate of which languages change. I have already given reasons for thinking that Mycenaean Greek probably differed at least as much from its Indo-European neighbours of the time as it does from modern Greek.

	Apart from this debateable, although very important, point about dating, the linguistic views of Chadwick harmonize perfectly with the archaeological arguments put forward here. In the words of Sir John Myres:229 ‘the Greeks were ever in process of becoming’. The same may be said of several of the other languages of Europe.





8.



The Early Indo-Iranian Languages and their Origins


	The model for early Indo-European origins set out in the last chapter outlined a basic process which could be used to explain the fundamental underlying relationships between the major Indo-European languages of Europe and of Anatolia. But so far, nothing has been said about their relationship to the Indo-European languages of India, nor to the whole group of Iranian languages. There remains also the problem of the so-called Tocharian languages of Chinese Turkestan, and of various other more limited indications like the several Indo-European words recognized both in the Hurrian language and in the names of the rulers of their land of Mitanni where it was spoken. Let us start with India.





1 The Aryas


	The Hymns of the Rigveda, which preserve the oldest form of Indian language which has come down to us, Vedic Sanskrit, were not written down until very much later. The earliest actual inscriptions from India come from the time of the great ruler Ashoka, dating from the third century bc. They are classified generally as ‘Middle Indo-Aryan’. Early Sanskrit literature, although much of it was set down after that date, was written in accordance with the Sanskrit language of the fifth century bc, as codified by the celebrated grammarian Panini, who lived in north-western India about that time. As the linguist M. B. Emeneau230 puts it:

	Classical Sanskrit is a literary language written according to the book — that is, Panini’s grammar, and following it more or less correctly. We find in it no dialects, no chronological development, except loss and at times invasion from the vernaculars of the users, and no geographical divergences. Vedic Sanskrit, however, is different. It is anything but a unified language, a language of one dialect only the Rigvedic dialect then is not the direct ancestor of classical Sanskrit. There must have been several related dialects in the period of the Rigveda composition, one of which is the basic dialect of this text, another of which is basically the ancestor of the classical language of some centuries later.

	Opinions differ about the difference in date between classical Sanskrit and the Vedic Sanskrit of the Rigveda. Emeneau quotes a difference of between one and five hundred years and suggests a date of about 1200–1000 bc for the composition of the hymns, but the estimation of the rate of linguistic change from internal evidence alone is very hazardous, and an earlier date is perfectly possible.

	The Hymns of the Rigveda form an extraordinary body of literature. In general they are dedicated to specific deities, among whom the following occur very frequently:

	Indra, God of the Blue Sky, the Thunderer,

Agni, the God of Fire and Light,

Varuna, Chief of the Lords of Natural and Moral Order,

Mitra, a Light God,

Surya, the Sun God,

the Asvins, the two horsemen, twin heralds of Dawn,

and the Maruts, who are storm gods.

	The rituals described or alluded to again and again include the drinking of Soma, the deified juice of a plant of the same name which, strangely, later scholars have not identified precisely.

	It is worth quoting one of these hymns taken from the great corpus of more than one thousand which form the ten books of the Rigveda. I have chosen one dedicated to Indra, which mentions in verse 8 the Aryas, the people who speak the Vedic language. As so often, the god is shown in warlike mood, destroying the strongholds of the enemies of the Aryas. (Puru and Divodasa/Atithigva are princes favoured by Indra; Sambora is a demon of air, and Ahi of drought.)

	Book 1, Hymn cxxx231 Indra

	1 COME to us, Indra, from afar, conducting

us even as a lord of heroes to the

gatherings, home, like a King, his heroes’

lord.

We come with gifts of pleasant good, with

juice poured forth, invoking thee,

As sons invite a sire, that thou mayst get

thee strength, thee, most bounteous, to get

thee strength.

	2 O Indra, drink the Soma juice pressed

out with stones, poured from the reservoir,

as an ox drinks the spring, a very

thirsty bull the spring.

For the sweet draught that gladdens thee,

for mightiest freshening of thy strength.

Let thy Bay Horses bring thee hither as

the Sun, as every day they bring the

Sun.

	3 He found the treasure brought from heaven

that lay concealed, close-hidden, like the

nestling of a bird, in rock, enclosed in

never-ending rock.

Best Angiras, bolt-armed, he strove to win,

as ’twere, the stall of kine;

So Indra hath disclosed the food concealed,

disclosed the doors, the food that

lay concealed.

	4 Grasping his thunderbolt with both hands,

Indra made its edge most keen, for

hurling, like a carving-knife for Ahi’s

slaughter made it keen.

Endued with majesty and strength, O

Indra, and with lordly might,

Thou crashest down the trees, as when a

craftsman fells, crashest them down as

with an axe.

	5 Thou, Indra, without effort hast let loose

the foods to run their free course down,

like chariots to the sea, like chariots

showing forth their strength.

They, reaching hence away, have joined

their strength for one eternal end,

Even as the cows who poured forth every

thing for man, yea, poured forth all

things for mankind.

	6 Eager for riches, men have formed for thee

this song, as a skilful craftsman

fashioneth a car, so they have wrought

thee to their bliss;

Adorning thee, O Singer, like a generous

steed for deeds of might,

Yea, like a steed to show his strength and

win the prize, that he may bear each

prize away.

	7 For Puru thou hast shattered, Indra!

ninety forts, for Divodasa thy boon

servant with thy bolt, O Dancer, for

thy worshipper.

For Atithigva he, the Strong, brought

Sambara from the mountain down,

Distributing the mighty treasures with his

strength, parting all treasures with his

strength.

	8 Indra in battles help his Aryan worshipper,

he who hath hundred helps at hand in

every fray, in frays that win the light of

heaven.

Plaguing the lawless he gave up to Manu’s

seed the dusky skin;

Blazing, ’twere, he bums each covetous

man away, he burns, the tyrannous

away.

	9 Waxed strong in might at dawn he tore

the Sun’s wheel off. Bright red, he

steals away their speech, the Lord of

Power, their speech he steals away from

them.

As thou with eager speed, O Sage, hast

come from far away to help,

As winning for thine own all happiness of

men, winning all happiness each day.

	10 Lauded with our new hymns, O vigorous

in deed, save us with strengthening

help, thou Shatterer of the Forts!

Thou, Indra, praised by Divodasa’s clansmen,

as heaven grows great with days,

shalt wax in glory.

	This hymn is typical in its reference to Soma juice, and in its association of horses and chariots with the heroic practice of war.

	Even a superficial reading of the Vedic hymns gives a clear, if no doubt a partial impression of the world of the Aryas. (It should be noted that the people are the Aryas, and ‘Aryan’ is the adjective derived from their name).

	Many scholars have pointed out that an enemy quite frequently smitten in these hymns is the Dasyu. The Dasyus have been thought by some commentators to represent the original, non-Vedic-speaking population of the area, expelled by the incursion of the warlike Aryas in their war-chariots. As far as I can see there is nothing in the Hymns of the Rigveda which demonstrates that the Vedic-speaking population were intrusive to the area:232 this comes rather from a historical assumption about the ‘coming’ of the Indo-Europeans. It is certainly true that the gods invoked do aid the Aryas by over-throwing forts, but this does not in itself establish that the Aryas had no forts themselves. Nor does the fleetness in battle, provided by horses (who were clearly used primarily for pulling chariots), in itself suggest that the writers of these hymns were nomads. Indeed the chariot is not a vehicle especially associated with nomads. This was clearly a heroic society, glorifying in battle. Some of these hymns, though repetitive, are very beautiful pieces of poetry, and they are not by any means all warlike.

	Archaeology gives very little help in broadening the context for these hymns, since there is no clear archaeological link — the hymns themselves are not dateable other than on general linguistic grounds, perhaps to around 1000 bc, perhaps rather earlier. Their importance should not to be underestimated. They stand at the head of the whole body of Indian literature, and at the very sources of the Hindu religion; that is not to say that we can see the Hindu religion in them with any degree of clarity. The principal deities of Hinduism are the Lords Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. Brahma and Vishnu do appear in the Vedic texts, but not Shiva. On the other hand, many of the principal divine figures of the Rigveda continue to play a role in the Hindu religion, albeit a more minor one. Amongst these are Surya (the sun god), Indra and Mithra.





2 The Indus Valley Civilization and its Aftermath


	When Sir William Jones first spoke of the early literature of India he had absolutely no idea of the antiquity of Indian civilization. For many years, the material record did not go back much before the time of King Ashoka in the third century bc, and the brief accounts of north India left by the commentators upon Alexander the Great’s travels and conquests in the previous century. It was not till the year 1921 that Sir John Marshall233 (with R. D. Banerji) made his great discovery of the Indus Valley civilization, with the investigation of two of its great cities at Mohenjodaro and Harappa. He found huge, brick-built cities in the fertile flood plains of the river, with well-planned street layout and many of the features of urban life with which scholars were already familiar from the discoveries in Mesopotamia. Amongst these were a well-developed craft specialization — for instance in pottery and bronze — and no doubt a highly structured social organization, reflected in the citadel at each site, with its large public buildings. The civilization was already flourishing shortly after 3000 bc, but had gone into irreversible and rather rapid decline by 1800 bc.





		 			 FIG. 8.1 The Indus script on copper tablets from Mohenjodaro (after Marshall).





	This was a literate civilization. Most of the inscriptions are preserved upon seal-stones, generally with only a few characters each. This has allowed very thorough studies of the script, in which some four hundred signs were found, fifty-three of them used commonly. This suggests that it must be a mixed hieroglyphic and syllabic script rather than a pure syllabic script like Minoan Linear B. There are of course too many signs for an alphabet, yet not enough for a true pictographic script like that of the Egyptian hieroglyphs or the Chinese script. Various efforts have been made to decipher this script, and the Finnish scholar A. Parpola234 has produced an impressively lucid analysis. At present, many specialists favour an interpretation using the assumption that the language of the seal-stones is related to the Dravidian languages. These are the languages of modern central and southern India, constituting a different language group from the Indo-European. But this again rather follows the assumption that the Indo-European languages are intrusive into the north of the Indian sub-continent, and that the Dravidian languages were already there when they came. Other attempts at decipherment have been made on the alternative assumption that the script is related to proto-Elamite, the language of the inscriptions of south-east Iran at the time the Sumerian civilization was flourishing in southern Mesopotamia. This again is perfectly plausible, especially since proto-Elamite tablets have been found at the important site of Tepe Yahya on the south Iranian plateau. Still other efforts to decipher the inscriptions have been made, assuming instead that the language of the Indus Valley seal-stones is in fact an early form of Indo-European. In my view, it is difficult to feel that any of these decipherments has yet been particularly successful, not even that of Parpola or the Russian scholars235 who have claimed the inscriptions as early Dravidian. The difficulty is that in each case, for a successful decipherment, one needs to start with something that is known. So far, unfortunately, there are no bilingual inscriptions involving the Indus script, nor can any proper names yet be recognized in it. So the present decipherments consist in assuming a solution, and then trying to show that the results are plausible. This can lead to positive results, but again it can easily be an exercise in self-deception, and it is not clear that convincing progress has been made of the interpretation. This is not, however, to belittle the very important work which scholars have conducted in preparing a computer-based corpus of inscriptions, and an analysis of the occurrences and co-occurrences of the individual signs.

	The great question for us is, of course, are the Indus Valley seal-stone inscriptions in an early form of Indo-European?236 In a sense this would not be surprising, since the earliest written records from the area which can now be interpreted are the Hymns of the Rigveda. But the weight of scholarly opinion has in the past been against such an interpretation. It is important to analyse why.





		 			 FIG. 8.2 Map of India indicating sites of the Indus Valley civilization (shaded) (after J. G. D. Clark).





	In the first place, it has generally been assumed that the speakers of Indo-European were immigrants to India. This led to the further assumption by many scholars that the Indus Valley civilization was pre-Indo-European and perhaps Dravidian in its speech. Given that the Indus Valley civilization came to a rather sudden end, which extinguished urbanism in India for a millennium, it is not surprising in the migrationist climate of the earlier part of this century that scholars should have thought in terms of ‘destroyers’. And who more natural than the warlike, battle-axe-using Indo-Europeans, already familiar from European prehistory, who could of course be linked with the warlike, chariot-riding Indo-Aryans of the Rigveda? This was the view advanced, for instance, by Sir Mortimer Wheeler, who assumed that various groups of skeletons found during the excavations at Mohenjodaro were the remains of those who had been killed in the cataclysm which befell the city:237

	The Aryan invasion of the Land of the Seven Rivers, the Punjab and its environs, constantly assumes the form of an onslaught upon the walled cities of the aborigines. For these cities the term used in the Rigveda is pur, meaning a ‘rampart’, ‘fort’ or ‘stronghold’. One is called ‘broad’ and ‘wide’. Sometimes strongholds are referred to metaphorically as ‘of metal’. Autumnal forts are also named: this may refer to the forts in that season being occupied against Aryan attack or against inundations caused by overflowing rivers. Forts ‘with a hundred walls’ are mentioned. The citadel may be made of stone; alternatively, the use of mud-bricks is perhaps alluded to by the epithet ama (‘raw’, ‘unbaked’). Indra, the Aryan war-god is puramdara, ‘fort-destroyer’. He shatters ‘ninety forts’ for his Aryan protégé, Divodasa. The same forts are doubtless referred to where in other hymns he demolishes variously ninety-nine and a hundred ‘ancient castles’ of the aboriginal leader Sambara. In brief he ‘rends forts as age consumes a garment’. Where are — or were — these Citadels? It has in the past been supposed that they were mythical, or were ‘merely places of refuge against attack, ramparts of hardened earth with palisades and a ditch’. The recent excavations of Harappa may be thought to have changed the picture. Here we have a highly evolved civilization of essentially non-Aryan type, now known to have employed massive fortifications and known also to have dominated the river-system of north-western India at a time not distant from the likely period of the earlier Aryan invasions of that region. What destroyed this firmly settled civilization? Climatic, economic, political deterioration may have weakened it, but its ultimate extinction is more likely to have been completed by deliberate and large-scale destruction. It may be no mere chance that at a late period of Mohenjodaro men, women and children appear to have been massacred there. On circumstantial evidence, Indra stands accused.

	This interpretation is rooted entirely on assumptions which, as we have seen, are not necessarily valid. When Wheeler speaks of ‘the Aryan invasion of the Land of the Seven Rivers, the Punjab’, he has no warranty at all, so far as I can see. If one checks the dozen references in the Rigveda to the Seven Rivers, there is nothing in any of them that to me implies invasion: the land of the Seven Rivers is the land of the Rigveda, the scene of the action. Nothing implies that the Aryas were strangers there. Nor is it implied that the inhabitants of the walled cities (including the Dasyus) were any more aboriginal than the Aryas themselves. Most of the references, indeed, are very general ones such as the beginning of the Hymn to Indra (Hymn 102 of Book 1).238

	To thee the Mighty One I bring this mighty Hymn,

for thy desire hath been gratified by my praise

In Indra, yea in him victorious through his strength,

the Gods have joyed at feast, and when the Soma flowed.

The Seven Rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven

and sky and earth display his comely form.

The Sun and Moon in change alternate run their course,

that we, O Indra, may behold and may have faith. . . .

	The Rigveda gives no grounds for believing that the Aryas themselves lacked for forts, strongholds and citadels. Recent work on the decline of the Indus Valley civilization shows that it did not have a single, simple cause: certainly there are no grounds for blaming its demise upon invading hordes. This seems instead to have been a system collapse, and local movements of people may have followed it. Furthermore the chronology for the Aryan invaders theory is decidedly shaky. The decline of the Indus Valley civilization can now be put about 1800 bc. Yet we have seen that many scholars would set the date of composition of the Rigveda around 1000 bc. Certainly one could argue for an earlier date than this, but it is scarcely sound to do so in order that the date should come close to the end of Harappa and Mohenjodaro, and then to go on to claim that the closeness in date suggests that the one caused the other! This is what some arguments have done.

	There is at least one other good example of the production of this kind of heroic poetry after a system collapse: the poetry of Homer. But Homer was writing sufficiently soon afterwards to have some memory of the pre-collapse Mycenaean age, probably because he was setting down what by then had become a strong oral tradition in poetry. The Rigveda could well stand in the same position in relation to the Indus Valley civilization, except that, perhaps taking shape rather longer after the collapse, it does not really hark back to the golden age before it. A much closer parallel for it in this respect than the Greek epics would be the Homeric Hymns, which in some ways are quite similar to it. They too relate primarily to their own time, and little in them refers back to the civilization of the earlier literate age.





3 Hypothesis A: Neolithic Aryas?


	The time has now come to grasp the nettle. I can suggest one interesting way of relating the early languages of India and Iran to those of Europe. As we shall see, the evidence is not completely persuasive, and it is necessary to think of an alternative hypothesis, which is set out in section 4. However, both have the merit of offering some mechanism for the language displacement involved.

	The first, and in some ways the simplest answer, is to suggest that the arrival of Indo-European speakers in the Indian sub-continent was very much analogous to that in Europe. Recent archaeological work in Pakistan has given very early evidence for farming there of a kind simply not previously available. The French archaeologist, Jean-François Jarrige, has conducted an outstandingly successful excavation at the site of Mehrgarh in Baluchistan (west Pakistan),239 and there is now evidence for the cultivation of cereal crops (six row barley, einkorn, emmer and bread wheat) preceding 6000 bc.

	It is not yet altogether clear that Baluchistan lay outside the primary zone for the domestication of these and other species. It would be perfectly possible to argue for the Zagros Mountain loop of the four primary zones to extend eastward to west Pakistan. It is possible instead that some sort of wave of advance operated to south and east as well as to north and west from the primary zones in and near east Anatolia, although of course modified by the terrain. We have already seen how rapidly Europe adopted farming under the influence of this wave of advance. In this way it might be argued that, from the very earliest farming times, as represented by Mehrgarh and by other sites later, an early Indo-European language was spoken in the Indus Valley and in areas to the north and west.

	Despite Wheeler’s comments, it is difficult to see what is particularly non-Aryan about the Indus Valley civilization, which on this hypothesis would be speaking the Indo-European ancestor of Vedic Sanskrit. Certainly there are elements of continuity from the Indus civilization on to its aftermath. The main’ disruption was the ending of urban life, but as Raymond Allchin has emphasized,240 the rural life of northern India, and what is now Pakistan, carried on little changed.

	There are, in particular, some suggestions that the religion practised in the Indus Valley may have had its effect on the later Hindu religion. The ‘great bath’ at Mohenjodaro may well have had ritual purposes,241 which reminds us today of the various Hindu ceremonies of purification. Among the few major stone objects from the Indus Valley sites are shaped stones, which many observers have pointed out may hold a phallic significance,242 but they also resemble quite closely the lingam, the sacred stone dedicated to the Lord Shiva in modern Hindu practice. There are other indications, for instance the seated figure, in yoga position, seen on an Indus Valley seal-stone243 has been equated by some with representations of the Lord Shiva himself. Of course continuity of cult need not indicate continuity of language, but there is no inherent reason why the people of the Indus Valley civilization should not already have been speaking an Indo-European language, the ancestor of the Rigveda.

	Raymond and Bridget Allchin have recently considered the case for ‘pre-Vedic’ movements into the plains of India and Pakistan, pointing to distinctive fireplaces at the site of Kalibangan,244 which may be interpreted as ritual hearths:245

	Such ‘ritual hearths’ are reported from the beginning of the Harappan period itself. It has been suggested that they may have been fire altars, evidence of domestic, popular and civic fire-cults of the Indo-Iranians, which are described in detail in the later Vedic literature. It may then be an indication of culture contact between an early group of Indo-Aryans and the population of the still flourishing Indus civilization.

	The Allchins do not suggest that the Indus civilization itself should be regarded as Indo-European-speaking, simply that elements within it may already be recognized which are later characteristic of Indo-Aryan culture, as seen in the Rigveda. Their arguments in favour of Indo-Aryan features back in the Harappan period could certainly be taken in support of Hypothesis A.

	Since the development of the civilization can quite plausibly be traced right back to early roots in the finds at Mehrgarh, the origin of the neolithic there is of the greatest relevance. The difficulty, of course, is that the area in question is a long way south and east of the recognized early farming centres in the Zagros.

	This view would certainly have the merit of linking the spread of the Indo-European languages to the south-east with the same basic mechanism as in the north-west. And of course the Old Iranian language is also Indo-European. One difficulty, of real significance, is that there are said to be very few loan-words which might be identified as Indo-European in the early languages recorded in Mesopotamia. Had there been such early contact between them and these early Indo-European languages to their east, then there might have been indications already in them. The proto-Elamite tablets from the south Iranian site of Tepe Yahya are likewise a counter-argument to early Indo-European being spoken in that area, although proto-Elamite may have been a later introduction there.

	On the other hand the Soviet archaeologist, V. M. Masson,246 has suggested that the seals which he recovered from the site of Altyn-Tepe in Turkmenia, far up north near the Caspian Sea, are of proto-Indian type. Since he accepts the Russian decipherment for the Indus Valley script, which claims that the language is Dravidian, he comes to a very different conclusion from the one put forward here. But if we accept the observation that the Altyn-Tepe seals and those of the Indus are similar, and that this has linguistic implications, we could certainly take the alternative view that the accompanying language in each case was proto-Indo-European. This is not difficult to accept for the sites in Turkmenia, for there one sees a good degree of continuity back to the period of the earliest farming at Djeitun, and there are indications that these farming origins are related to those further to the west including those of our Indo-European-speaking farmers in East Anatolia. As the Soviet authors V. M. Masson and V. I. Sarianidi put it:247

	It has now been established beyond any doubt that the people who adopted the Djeitun culture maintained connections with the early agriculturalists of the Near East. . . . In the Iraqo-Iranian zone the best documented [area] is the Zagros Mountain region — Jarmo, Sarab and Tepe Guran: this offers the clearest analogies to the Djeitun culture, especially in flint implements and pottery, though there are also important differences which distinguish the two cultures.

	Hypothesis A, then, would carry the history of the Indo-European languages in north India and Iran back to the early neolithic period in those areas. The decisive process of dispersal would, as in Europe, be the demographic changes which accompanied the development of early farming. It might be possible also to link early Turkmenia with this process.

	All of this, it must be admitted, is very hypothetical indeed. A much more comprehensive view is needed of the contemporaries of early Mehrgarh, and of the early neolithic in Baluchistan generally, before the hypothesis can be further advanced. If Baluchistan itself turns out to be within the primary zone of early agriculture, as is perfectly possible, the argument may become more difficult.

	It should be noted, moreover, that the Old Iranian language as seen in the Avesta, and Vedic Sanskrit, as seen in the Rigveda, are very close: so close that they are generally considered to belong to a single, Indo-Iranian branch of the Indo-European family. Without placing too much reliance on the actual absolute figures produced by glottochronology, we may note that the lexico-statistician, Norman Bird,248 has reported a strong co-occurrence of Indic with Iranian words: 85 per cent of Iranian words from his list have Indic equivalences. At first sight this is an exceedingly high figure — although we should note that 77 per cent of Hittite words in the list have co-occurrences with Indic roots also. If Vedic Sanskrit and Old Iranian are really to be considered as very closely related, this would imply a higher degree of recent interaction than might result from the straightforward pattern of an early wave of advance spread of agriculture. Some degree of continuing contact after the spread of early farming would be necessary to produce this degree of linguistic affinity. Fortunately the various links between the cultures of the Iranian plateau in the succeeding periods are becoming increasingly clear. There are indications of settlements of the Indus Valley culture on the banks of the Amu Darya river in northern Afghanistan, and graves of bronze age Turkmenian type have been reported from near the site of Mehrgarh in Baluchistan.249 Of course these are some four thousand years more recent than the earliest farming discoveries there. But it is clear that there were continuing interactions in Afghanistan and on the Iranian Plateau, and a continuing community of Indo-European languages in that area is not improbable. It would be from this complex that, at a rather later date, the horse-riding nomads responsible for the presence of Indo-European languages in Chinese Turkestan (i.e. the Tocharian languages) would ultimately derive, and the chiefs of the Land of Mitanni in the mid-second millennium would originate, from this same complex. (In view of the reported scarcity or non-existence of Indo-European loan-words in the early languages of Mesopotamia, we must assume that until the mid-second millennium bc, these people on the east of the Zagros Mountain range kept themselves to that area). There were of course numerous trading contacts between the Iranian plateau and Mesopotamia — already in the Sumerian period there are attractive, carved, greenstone vessels in Mesopotamia, made of chlorite schist, which must have originated on the plateau — but if we are following the present hypothesis, these contacts would not have had much linguistic impact. Much more work will have to be carried out on the archaeology of Central Asia before this hypothesis can be properly investigated, but it is perfectly conceivable that by the early second millennium, the languages of the Iranian plateau and of the Indus Valley, as well as of Turkmenia, were predominantly Indo-European.

	The adoption of the horse and the techniques of chariotry may for a while have given some of these people some degree of military advantage over the populations in the Mesopotamia plains, and this may account for the various Indo-European names and words which we find from around 1500 bc onwards. Certainly, the adoption of horse riding transformed the economy of the steppe lands, and the various mounted nomad groups of the first millennium bc — the Saka and the Scythians, the Cimmerians, the Medes and the Tocharoi, all speaking Indo-European languages — developed military technology. The so-called Tocharians of Chinese Turkestan may have reached that area at this time. It is interesting, too, that although most of the military activity reported in the Rigveda was conducted from a horse-drawn chariot, as indeed was that of the Hittites and the Hurrian-speakers of Mitanni, there are passages in the Vedic hymns which strongly suggest that by the time of their composition horses were also being ridden.250 This suggests a rather later date for the Rigveda, and reminds us that at this time there were renewed possibilities for contact between all the lands bordering upon the Iranian plateau.

	Much here is hypothetical, but at least a coherent picture can be set out, which explains the observed language distributions (when they enter the light of history) in terms of readily intelligible processes of culture change. It remains to be seen whether so prolonged a separation as this implies between the western Indo-European languages of Europe and the eastern Indo-European languages of Iran and India is a feasible background for the various linguistic resemblances between them. That is a linguistic problem whose outcome will have an important bearing upon the viability of Hypothesis A. It should be remembered that with the increased intensity of interaction from the first millennium bc, when horse riding became widespread, there is the definite possibility of shared language developments of a wave-theory type extending across the steppe lands, between the Slavic languages in the west, the Anatolian languages (and Armenian) and the Iranian and Indic languages. This perspective of a very long time depth for the Indo-Iranian languages should not be lightly dismissed. Certainly the assumption that the Aryas were recent ‘immigrants’ to India, and their enemies were ‘aborigines’, has done much to distort our understanding of the archaeology of India and Pakistan.

	It may be permissible at this point to draw a very general parallel between the transition in Greece from the Mycenaean to the Classical periods on the one hand, and the passage in north India and Pakistan from the Indus Valley civilization to the Vedic period, already implied when we compared the Homeric Hymns251 of early iron age Greece with the Hymns of the Rigveda. Neither gives any clear hint of the urban civilization which flourished in the relevant area some centuries earlier and then collapsed.

	I have recently argued that, in the case of the Greek religion, we see a whole series of transformations from that of the Mycenaean late bronze age of around 1500 bc to the religion of the classical Greeks a millennium later. The Mycenaean religion and the Greek religion were very different belief systems, or at least their material manifestations were fundamentally different. But the Greek religion did not replace the Mycenaean as a result of the immigration of ‘Greeks’. That is the old view which we can now confidently dismiss: instead we see a succession of stages when new elements emerged, most but not all of them of local origin.

	If we apply the same line of reasoning to the transformation from Indus civilization to its non-urban aftermath of a millennium later, we can trace the emergence of a number of elements, few of which need to be of foreign origin. Certainly there are some outside elements — the use of the horse to pull a war chariot is one of these. Precisely the same innovation is seen in Mycenaean Greece, at about the same time, and it is now clear that this happened in Greece without a significant change in population from immigration. Some centuries after the chariot, horse riding in association with new military techniques is seen in both areas. It is not surprising that both innovations had a greater impact in India and Pakistan, where the open terrain offers more scope for the horse (and indeed for the chariot) than does the rocky and mountainous landscape of Greece. There is nothing which forces us to associate these innovations in India with a new population, or with immigrants, any more than in Greece. The adoption of new military techniques will only entail language displacement if they are associated either with significant population change or with new élite dominance.

	What we may be seeing at this time is the development of a new ideology, which finds its finest expression in the Hymns of the Rigveda, and indeed of the Avesta, and this may be reflected in the pottery of Cemetery H at Harappa,252 which has handsome decorated vessels depicting horses, and departs from the geometric tradition of the pottery decoration of the Indus Valley civilization. (Much the same can, of course, be said of the pictorial pottery of Geometric Greece, where the Homeric heroes are first represented silhouetted in black against the yellow clay.)

	We should, in other words, consider seriously the possibility that the new religious and cultural synthesis which is represented by the Rigveda was essentially a product of the soil of India and Pakistan, and that it was not imported, ready-made, on the back of the steeds of the Indo-Aryans. Of course it evolved while in contact with the developing cultures of other lands, most notably Iran, so that by a process of peer polity interaction, cultures and ideologies emerged which in many ways resembled each other. It is not necessary to suggest that one was borrowed, as it were, directly from the other.

	This hypothesis that early Indo-European languages were spoken in north India with Pakistan and on the Iranian plateau at the sixth millennium bc has the merit of harmonizing symmetrically with the theory for the origin of the Indo-European languages of Europe. It also emphasizes the continuity in the Indus valley and adjacent areas from the early neolithic through to the floruit of the Indus Valley civilization — a point which Jarrige has recently stressed. Moreover the continuity is seen to follow unbroken from that time across the Dark Age succeeding the collapse of the urban centres of the Indus Valley, so that features of that urban civilization persist, across a series of transformations, to form the basis for later Indian civilization. A number of scholars have previously developed these ideas of continuity.

	The hypothesis has, however, what may be a damaging weakness. It requires that the first farmers in the area, at sites such as Mehrgarh, should have reached there with their farming economy by the sort of wave of advance process which has been postulated for neolithic Europe. What works in Europe does not necessarily apply so well for the transmission of farming across or along the western flanks of the Iranian plateau from some nuclear farming area to the north. It remains to be seen whether the wild predecessors of the plants and animals found domesticated at Mehrgarh were already native to the area. If they were not, Hypothesis A may find some support. If they were, it is surely more likely that the process of domestication took place locally, and the theory of an Incoming wave of advance is not necessary. In these circumstances we have to look for another explanation.





4 Hypothesis B: Mounted Nomads of the Steppe


	This hypothesis outlines an alternative. Let us admit at the outset that it resembles the old and traditional view in relying on pastoral nomad invaders, but in other ways it is very different. It accepts the likelihood of local farming origins and that the arrival of the Indo-European languages is associated with the arrival of mounted warriors whose original way of life was one of nomad pastoralism; that is to say a process of élite dominance.





The Development of Central Asian Nomad Pastoralism


	In order to reach some understanding of the second and first millennia bc in this area, it is essential to look at the origins of nomad pastoralism.253 This is a difficult theme, since the archaeological traces of pastoral nomads are notoriously less substantial than those of settled farmers.

	i Development of a primarily pastoral economy. In Central Asia and the European steppes, the principal domestic animals exploited were generally sheep and goats, and horses were herded for their products (milk, meat) as well as their usefulness for traction or as beasts of burden. The essential point is that some arid steppe lands are appropriate for grazing but not for the growing of cereal crops. The pastoral economy is usually symbiotic with the agricultural one as it has been shown that a major component of the diet of these pastoralists was bread. The practice of agriculture is thus a precondition of a pastoral economy. In general a nomadic way of life may often have developed from the more limited mobility of a transhumant one.

	ii Use of equids as pack animals. There is only limited evidence for this practice of using horses, mules, donkeys and onagers prior to subsequent stages of development, but the ability to transport a certain amount of equipment by animal, including tents, is a fundamental element in most nomadic economies.

	iii The use of wheeled carts. The use of the four-wheeled cart254 is archaeologically attested both in Europe and in Asia before that of the two-wheel chariot with spoked wheels. In many cases the draught animals seem to have been equids,255 but in some areas cattle were also used. This seems to have been the case, for instance, in the Indus civilization256 (although the economy there was not of course based on pastoral nomadism). In some cases two-wheeled carts are more common, but in the earlier phases of development the wheels were solid or composite, not spoked.

	iv Development of the war chariot with two spoked wheels and drawn by horses. This is not reliably attested anywhere before about 1800/1600 bc. Such war chariots can be seen on Mycenaean257 gravestones dated from about 1600 bc, in late Hittite reliefs258 and in scenes of battles from before the Amarna period in Egypt.259 The Hurrian called Kikkuli from the Land of Mitanni wrote a treatise in the Hittite language on the training of chariot-horses for the Hittite rulers of Hattusas. And the Hymns of the Rigveda make frequent reference to war-chariots.

	v Fully mobile nomad pastoralism and the military use of mounted horsemen. Surprisingly perhaps we have little evidence that horses were ridden until long after they were used to pull chariots. The earliest representations of horse riding nearly all seem to come after about 1200 bc. That is certainly true in Greece — we have no pictures of Mycenaean horse riding260 — and it is also true of the Hittites, the reliefs showing mounted warriors all come from the time of the Late Hittite period.261 The art of the Scythians, and of Mesopotamia, where there are palace reliefs of the Assyrian kings, are the earliest representations we have of horse riding. (There are Egyptian reliefs of an earlier date which do in fact show horses being ridden,262 but these early depictions are not of mounted warriors.)

	The development of the bit seems to have been an essential innovation for riding, and chariot horses were not initially controlled in this way. Finds of bronze and iron horse-bits offer the most abundant archaeological evidence of horse riding, and they occur by 1500 bc in the Near East, earlier on the steppes, and in Europe and in China after 1000 bc.263

	Claims have been made that perforated bone objects found very much earlier in central Europe were in fact horse-bits,264 but they are not numerous, and the innovation (if such it was) did not become widespread nor is it certain that they were used in this way.





		 			 FIG. 8.3 Decorated antler cheek-pieces for horse-bits from the Carpathian basin, c. 2000–1800 bc (after Piggott).





	vi The military use of heavy cavalry, using the stirrup. Rather surprisingly, once again, the all-metal stirrup265 seems to have been a late invention made in China in the fourth century ad and first seen in Europe in the seventh century. It allowed the use of much more formidable weapons, notably the lance, since the horseman could now avoid being unseated during the heavy impact of battle. The barbarian invasions of Europe after the Dark Ages are said to have owed much of their effectiveness to this.



	This very schematic outline distinguishes between pastoralism as a new form of adaptation to the steppe lands (allowing them to be exploited for the first time), fully mobile nomad pastoralism based on horse riding, and the warlike, expansionist behaviour which we often associate in our minds with pastoral nomads. This aggressive behaviour of the mounted warrior only becomes a significant feature in the history of Europe and Asia after about 1000 bc. The suggestion that the Corded Ware/ Battle Axe people of central and northern Europe behaved in this way was based largely upon the fundamental misunderstanding of ignoring these distinctions. Likewise the Kurgan peoples of the south Russia steppes need not be regarded as formidable warriors until they were capable of fighting upon horseback. One very relevant factor here may well have been the development of suitable breeds of horse large enough to serve as chargers.266 The considerable delay between phases (ii) and (iii) on the one hand and phases (iv) and (v) on the other may be due largely to this.

	One of the main ideas constituting Hypothesis B is that, with the development of chariotry and then of military horse riding, a new possibility for élite dominance emerged. This would be the basic underlying mechanism for the process of language replacement which took place during the later second millennium bc. But precisely where did these important innovations take place? That question is not an easy one to answer, although it is clear that the development is likely to have occurred amongst people who were already using the horse intensively both as a pack animal and for traction — and this brings us back to the steppes of Eurasia.

	It would seem that the horse was not used for traction on the Iranian plateau until rather later than on the steppe lands to the north. Certainly we find cattle, not horses, yoked to the model carts found in the Indus civilization. In Turkmenia there are comparable models, but with camels267 pulling the carts, found in what is termed the Namazga IV period, dateable from about 3000 to 2600 bc. In Mesopotamia on the famous standard from Ur268 just a little later, the animal pulling the cart is sometimes considered to be an onager, and the horse may not yet have been introduced.

	Given then that the predominantly pastoral economy of the steppe lands must have developed in the first place from a mixed farming economy on the more fertile steppe margins, can we determine more precisely where this took place? This is one of the most interesting questions of Eurasian prehistory. Consideration of the map suggests that there are really only four possibilities:

	(a) the south Russian steppe margins, at the west of the great Eurasian steppes, in the Ukraine area. There the point of agricultural origin would be the neolithic cultures of eastern Europe, termed Cucuteni and Tripolye.

	(b) the lands north of the Caucasus Mountains, between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. The local farming cultures there have been studied by Soviet archaeologists, but are not yet well dated.

	(c) the farming areas of Turkmenia, along the line of the Kopet Dag, east of the Caspian Sea. The Djeitun culture represented the first farmers in that area. (Most of Central Asia was dominated during the period of the Turkmenian neolithic by what has been called the Kelteminar culture, which has a characteristic range of pottery and flint types. In many cases the settlements are located on the banks of lakes and small rivers, and it has been suggested that fishing as well as hunting were of considerable economic importance).

	(d) any other areas of early farming further east. No other such centres are in fact known at present until one reaches China and the Yangshao culture of Honan province.

	It seems likely at present that the fully mobile pastoral economy of the Eurasian steppe-land developed either in area (a) or (b). We are thus talking of the range of cultures which go under the name of yamno269 (Pit Grave) or Kurgan (burial mound) cultures. Radio-carbon dates do not yet provide unequivocal evidence to decide between them, but it is an integral part of Hypothesis B that the Eurasian steppe-lands were colonized by nomadic pastoralists from the west (i.e. from the Ukraine). This theory was put forward by Ward Goodenough in 1970 and this somewhat technical archaeological discussion opens up wide vistas.

	The development of pastoralism in the steppe lands had consequences in their own way as significant as the introduction of farming to south-east Europe. For here now was a new economic basis which could spread with its own wave of advance. The language of the first nomad-pastoralists could spread, by a process analogous to adaptive radiation, with the same dynamic demographic basis which underlay the rapid spread of farming across Europe. Just as in Europe, the language of the first farmers (of Greece) had an adaptive advantage (its farming basis) which allowed it to spread throughout the area, so on the steppe lands the language of the first effective nomad pastoralists had the opportunity to spread across the region.

	I suggest that this is precisely what it did. Sandor Bökönyi,270 in his study of the prehistory of the horse, has shown that the horse was already known and exploited (presumably for food) in the south Russian steppes at the outset of the period in question. The context there is in the early farming Tripolye and Cucuteni communities of the eastern Balkans. It was the spread, from west to east, of the yamno or Kurgan cultures of the first true steppe neolithic which gave the steppe lands of Europe and Central Asia their first cultural unity. I suggest that the language of these early steppe pastoralists, who were not yet driving chariots or perhaps riding horses, was already Indo-European. Moreover we can be more specific than that. The language must indeed have been derived from that of those Cucuteni and Tripolye peasants who, with their mixed farming economy, were at the beginning of the transition to nomad pastoralism on the steppe margins. The transformations by which this culture and its accompanying language developed from its earlier European antecedents were discussed in Chapter 7. The Slavic language group may represent the much later development within the same area of the language spoken by the descendants of those Tripolye and Cucuteni peasants.

	This solution of the problem is rather better substantiated archaeologically at the present time than is its Caucasian alternative. It is also linguistically more convenient, because the contemporary languages of the Caucasus region do not belong to the Indo-European group. The Caucasian languages are numerous and varied, and there is no reason to think of them as a recent importation to the area. They appear on the map, indeed, to form a sort of linguistic barrier between the early farmers of Anatolia and the steppe lands to the north.

	Once it is accepted that the first nomad pastoralists of the steppes were already speaking an Indo-European language, derived from south Russia and points west, the rest of the picture is clear enough. The succeeding culture of much of the steppes, which is termed the Andronovo culture, shows considerable unity over a very large area, and it persists to bronze age times. There can be no doubt that the horse was being used to pull the carts of the steppe population before this time, and maybe it did begin to have a military significance. At any rate, one may suggest that at this time the steppe nomad economy began to have an impact upon Turkmenia and the Iranian plateau. As Masson and Sarianidi write in their consideration of Turkmenia:271

	The migration of tribal groups to the south is an almost established fact. The second millennium bc was a period of great migrations and population changes, possibly as a result of the ‘population explosion’ in the Euro-Asian steppes following the adoption of nomadic stock-breeding and primitive agriculture which followed the archaic Neolithic economy. At all events, the archaeological material at our disposal leaves no doubt as to the spread of a population with Andronovo and Timber-Grave characteristics. There were two main movements of these steppe tribes into Western Central Asia. . . . This should, of course, be studied in conjunction with the problem of the diffusion of tribes of the Indo-Iranian linguistic group.

	I would myself differentiate between the initial population explosion associated with the adoption in the steppes of the nomad pastoral economy and the later movements south, which I imagine as being related more to the élite dominance model. But from this point on, Hypothesis B accords with much of the standard archaeological interpretations for the area.

	There can be no doubt that when the peoples of the steppes, then termed, amongst other things, Cimmerians, Sarmatians and Scythians, first entered the light of history about a thousand years later they spoke Indo-European languages.272 The same is true of the peoples of the Iranian plateau — the Medes and Persians, and the Saka (i.e. the Scythians once again). The Iranian languages are thus naturally to be seen as Indo-European through the dominance of the Iranian plateau by horse-using steppe-nomads from the north. How far east this unity extended is difficult to determine, but the later existence of Indo-European languages in the Turfan depression of Chinese Turkestan suggests that it may have been a long way. Of course by the time it is recorded, in the eighth century ad, Tocharian already formed an Indo-European enclave amongst nomadic pastoralists speaking Ural-Altaic languages.273

	It is clear that at some point during the first millennium bc there were very significant developments in the eastern part of the Eurasian steppe which resulted in the dominance of populations speaking Ural-Altaic languages over much of the area. Just as initially, in Europe and Central Asia at least, the economy of nomad-pastoralism was associated with Indo-European speakers, so later the nomads were predominantly non-Indo-European in speech, with the exception of just a few pockets, like the speakers of the Ossetian language.274 The underlying economic or processual reasons for these later changes are not at all clear to me: one is reluctant to blame all of this simply upon the invention of the stirrup. But that problem takes us beyond the time scale of the present inquiry — it is, of course, entirely relevant both for the later language displacements in Anatolia, which led to the adoption of Turkish and the extinction there of Indo-European speech, and for the incursion of the Finno-Ugrian languages into Hungary, and Estonia in the first millennium ad.

	Turning once again to the Indus, there is no reason to imagine that our ‘nomadic warriors’ were responsible for the demise of the Indus civilization — that was probably a case of system collapse. But these well-organized and mobile tribal groups, with a chiefdom organization, may have profited by the disorder in the Indus to achieve a measure of élite dominance, and hence to bring about an effective language displacement. Thus the early language of eastern Europe, transformed no doubt in its transition to the Eurasian steppes, and transformed again in its adoption to the Iranian plateau and to Afghanistan, would have come to the Indus.





5 The Choice of Hypotheses: A versus B


	At present it is not easy to see how one should choose between these two hypotheses. Both accept the major premise of this book that central and eastern Anatolia was the key area where an early form of Indo-European language was spoken before 6500 bc. From there the distribution of the language and its successors into Europe was associated with the spread of farming.

	Hypothesis A suggests that the zone of early farmers speaking Proto-Indo-European extended east to northern Iran and even to Turkmenia at the outset. The spread of Indo-European speech to the south, to the Iranian plateau and to north India and Pakistan, can then be seen as part of an analogous dispersal, related to the demographic changes associated with the adoption of farming.

	Hypothesis B does not take this view. It suggests instead that the crucial development for the eastern area was the development in the Eurasian steppes of nomad pastoralism, and that this took place first at the western end of the steppes. In this way, it was argued, the nomad pastoralists of the steppes spoke an Indo-European language at the outset. Their later dominance in Iran and in the Indus is then ascribed to their military effectiveness, based largely upon the use of the horse.





		 			 FIG. 8.4 Proposed alternative origins for the Indo-Aryan languages. Hypothesis A (indicated by continuous line). Spread of farming economy and early Indo-European speakers eastwards from Anatolia during the sixth millennium bc. And/or Hypothesis B (indicated by broken line). Incursion of a pastoral nomad economy, with pack-animals, carts and possibly horse riding, from the Russian steppe-lands to the Iranian plateau and to north India during the second millennium bc.





	It is of course possible to blend these two hypotheses. Even if we accept Hypothesis A, it is still likely that the first steppe nomads did indeed speak Indo-European languages, and that their adaptation to the steppes first took place in the Ukraine. If we accept Hypothesis B, it is perfectly possible that Indo-European languages were spoken in north Iran and Turkmenia from the time of the first farmers there: the first Indo-European speakers in India would be very much later.

	From the linguistic point of view, however, the two hypotheses are very different. The first implies that the Indo-European languages of Iran and India and Pakistan derive from precursors in eastern Anatolia and further east, just as the first Indo-European languages of Europe derived at the same time from precursors in central and western Anatolia. The successors of the western Anatolian languages are the Indo-European languages of Europe; the successor of the central Anatolian languages was Hittite; and the successors of the eastern Anatolian languages were thus the Indo-Iranian languages. We might expect, then, a number of resemblances between Hittite and the Indo-Iranian languages. On the other hand, the languages of eastern Europe would originally have born little affinity with the Indo-Iranian languages, although convergences could occur as a result of steppe-land influences on Iran and India at a later date. The original separation would have taken place by 6500 bc.

	On the other hand, Hypothesis B implies that the relationship between the Indo-Iranian languages and those of eastern Europe would be very much closer, with a common origin around 4000 bc. There are some indications which might support such a view, for instance the old classification of the Slavic languages within the eastern or satem group — but little emphasis is placed these days upon this simplistic distinction.

	Archaeologically speaking, a conclusion is not at present any easier. The decision which has to be made is whether or not the development of the early neolithic of the Iranian plateau, and especially of Baluchistan was initially, in large measure, the result of a ‘spread’ of farming there, on a wave of advance model, or instead primarily a local development. A further crucial question is whether or not there is really convincing evidence in the Indus for an episode of élite displacement, with the new élite coming from well to the north, outside the area, somewhere around the middle of the second millennium bc. This has often been suggested. But there are only a few finds which might indicate the arrival of an élite from the north. There are in fact some finds near Mehrgarh275 in the Indus valley which closely resemble the culture at the site of Namazga much further to the north in Turkmenia. The famous Cemetery H at Harappa, with its painted pottery, would make an interesting focus of study. Can we regard it as a late development of the Indus civilization, a transformation from it, in a society which was becoming or had become non-urban? Or do we have to see it as the result of an immigrant group, bringing with it a whole new range of material equipment by which its source can unequivocally be identified? One cannot be sure, but present evidence might suggest the former.

	As a tentative conclusion, however, I feel that it is useful in considering the Indo-Iranian languages, to see their distribution as the result of the working out of at least three cultural and economic processes. The first would indeed be the colonization, by early peasant farmers, of tracts of potential farmland in Iran, perhaps as far south as Pakistan (including Mehrgarh) on a variant of the wave of advance model adapted for the environment of the terrains in question. This draws heavily upon the arguments considered for Hypothesis A. The area of origin would be eastern Anatolia, and those areas to the east which one can regard as participating within the original ‘nuclear zone’ for the initial domestication of plants and animals. At present, however, it seems that the area to the west of the Zagros mountains, including Mesopotamia and most of the Levant, had an early farming population which was not Indo-European speaking.

	The second process of importance is the development of nomad pastoralism in the steppe lands of Russia, and the wider spread of such nomad pastoralism. The evidence at the moment seems to show that the domestication of the horse took place at the western extremity of the Russian steppes, and that the spread of the nomad pastoral economy took place from west to east. Naturally one should consider whether comparable processes leading to nomad pastoralism were independently under way in other areas. At present it is possible to consider a nomad pastoralist presence in central Asia from the third millennium bc as a result of this second process.

	The third process is that of élite dominance, where well organized communities of mounted nomad pastoralists, with a ranked social organization, achieved dominance in certain areas by force of arms. We are talking here of events in the first millennium bc, and perhaps back into the second millennium bc, but not earlier, for we have no evidence for mounted warriors at an earlier time.

	The situation in each area was no doubt the product of these and other processes. In central Asia, the second process is likely to have been the most important, at least initially, and in this context the later work of Henning on Tocharian origins is highly significant. He argues for an equation between the Proto-Tocharians and the Guti, who are documented in Babylonia at the end of the third millennium bc. He observes that276 ‘if we regard the Guti as “Proto-Tocharians” their nearest relatives among the Indo-Europeans would be the Hittite nations of Asia Minor’, although my arguments would lead to a closer relationship with the early nomad pastoralists of the European steppe lands. There may be other problems, at a detailed level, with some of Henning’s proposals, but as he says,277 ‘This is the heart of the theory that I wish to propound. Possibly the archaeologists may welcome a theory that involves considerable movement of people from Persia to the limits of China as early as the close of the third millennium bc.’ That is indeed welcome, as an observation formulated on linguistic grounds, so long as it can be tied up with the processual realities which we are endeavouring to establish.

	In the case of India and Pakistan the present dilemma remains the decision as to how much emphasis to place on the first of these processes, the farming wave of advance, and how much on the succeeding two. It is at least useful to stress that the situation may not be adequately explained by laying weight upon a single one of these processes. The balance of the evidence, as recently usefully reviewed by Shaffer,278 is in favour of the presence of an Indo-European speaking population during the Harappan civilization, and not exclusively later. At the same time the strong continuities between that Harappan civilization and its antecedents, right back to the earlier neolithic, are becoming more and more evident.

	The main difficulty for the Indian evidence arises from the extremely close affinities between Vedic Sanskrit and the Old Iranian language of the Avesta. This clearly argues for relatively recent processes at work relating the two areas. One is tempted, then, to suggest that some phenomena of élite dominance were indeed at work during the first millennium bc, or rather earlier, and that the élites of the two areas were closely related. But it is important to observe that this does not militate against the presence of Indo-European speech in north India and Pakistan at a somewhat earlier period. Some sort of ‘two wave’ hypothesis of this kind may do more justice to the complexity of things for the Indian subcontinent than any simpler explanation.

	Above all we need to know very much more about the early archaeology of nomad pastoralism. We need to see whether the sequence of six stages outlined above does really correspond to the reality. These are questions for the future. Meanwhile it is useful to bear both hypotheses in mind. By doing so, and by admitting that at present both have a certain degree of plausibility, we are helpfully reminded how little we at present know. These questions are not in principle unanswerable. When we consider how much we have learnt in recent years about the origins of the Indus civilization,279 and when we recall that the important evidence now available from Turkmenia is mainly the result of fairly recent work by Soviet archaeologists, there are certainly grounds for optimism.





9.



