[]

[cover]

In Search of Respect

Second Edition

Philippe Bourgois’s ethnographic study of social marginalization in
inner-city America won critical acclaim when it was first published in
1995. For the first time, an anthropologist had managed to gain the
trust and long-term friendship of street-level drug dealers in one of
the nation’s roughest ghetto neighborhoods – East Harlem. This new
edition adds a prologue describing the major dynamics that have altered
life on the streets of East Harlem in the years since the first edition.
In a new epilogue, Bourgois brings up to date the stories of the people
– Primo, Caesar, Luis, Tony, Candy – whom readers come to know in this
remarkable window onto the world of the inner-city drug trade.

Philippe Bourgois is Professor and Chair of the Department of
Anthropology, History and Social Medicine at the University of
California, San Francisco. He has conducted fieldwork in Central America
on ethnicity and social unrest and is the author of Ethnicity at Work:
Divided Labor on a Central American Banana Plantation (Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1989). With photographer Jeff Schonberg he is writing
a book on homeless heroin addicts in San Francisco.

http://www.ucsf.edu/dahsm/pages/faculty/bourgois.html

Praise for the. . .

FIRST EDITION OF IN SEARCH OF RESPECT

“A poignant and riveting description of the violent world of crack
dealers in East Harlem. Once I began reading this book I could not put
it down.”

– William Julius Wilson, Lewis P. and Linda L. Geyser

University Professor at Harvard University

“Remarkable field research. . . . Philippe Bourgois . . . lived for
three and a half years in a tenement apartment in East Harlem –
otherwise known as El Barrio – studying the culture, the mores, the
values, the behavior, the fears, and the self-inflicted wounds of
several members of a gang of drug dealers with whom he patiently
established close relations.”

– Richard Bernstein, The New York Times

“With this devastating ethnography of the raw realities of the crack
trade on the streets of Spanish Harlem, Bourgois lays bare the struggle
for individual dignity amidst collective destitution in the underbelly
of the richest society on earth. He offers a powerful indictment of the
United States, exposing the country’s dirty secret of savage inequality
and state neglect. This book is a red-hot gauntlet thrown in the face of
the national mythology of the American dream to reveal its twin: the
real nightmare of Darwinian violence.”

– Loïc Wacquant, University of California-Berkeley and Centre de
sociologie européenne du Collège de France

“This explosive book is not for the gentle reader or the faint of heart.
Bourgois invents a new genre – an ‘up in your face’ anthropology. Hello,
America – where ‘hard working’ low-income crack dealers engage in the
only work for which they have the qualifications, while they dream of
reentering a legal job market that is decisively closed to them.
Bourgois invites readers to confront a culture of violence, terror, and
death that is just a few subway stops from the Metropolitan Museum of
Art. . . . Though Bourgois is brutally honest and refuses to sanitize
the ugliness or let his crack-selling subjects off the hook, after one
reads the merciless life stories told to the constant background of
gunshots, he makes it hard to blame these mixed-up aggressors who are
also the victims of America’s failed promises.”

– Nancy Scheper-Hughes, author of Death Without Weeping:
The Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil

“Philippe Bourgois’s profoundly disturbing book dispels much of the
received wisdom on this sector of society. No other account combines so
insightfully a structural assessment of their way of life with their own
understanding of their circumstances.”

– Eric R. Wolf, Distinguished Professor of Anthropology,
City University of New York

“[The book] offers one of the most closely observed accounts we are
likely to get of the urban crack scene. It is not an attractive world
and Bourgois – hearing stories of gang rape as an accepted rite of
adolescent passage, seeing mothers casually pushing strollers into crack
houses, and witnessing the calculated use of violence as an accepted
business practice – does not hesitate to express his disgust. At the
same time, Bourgois seeks to understand the sources of such behavior. .
. . A fascinating account.”. . . .

– Michael Massing, The New York Review of Books

“In Search of Respect . . . brings the lives of these crack sellers into
brilliant focus. Bourgois’s raw and poignant book delivers a message
about the economics of exclusion that should shake public perceptions of
the inner-city drug trade. For anyone interested in the brutal truth
about drug dealing in our inner cities, In Search of Respect is the
place to look.”

– Greg Donaldson, The Washington Post

“Vigorous and often harrowing, this book is an eye-opener.”

– Kirkus Review

“The beauty of the book is in the author’s sharing of his academic mind
with the organic intellect of the people who are forced to live in
ghettos for economic reasons. Philippe has put together between two
covers the harsh reality of the streets. . . . In Search of Respect:
Selling Crack in El Barrio is must reading for those who care to learn.”

– Piri Thomas, poet and author of Down These Mean Streets

“Bourgois spent hundreds of nights with a handful of small-time, mainly
Nuyorican dealers and, as they got high and recovered from the daily
grind, recorded their comments about work, politics, sexuality,
substance abuse, and style. . . . The crack dealers’ talk – ribald,
morbid, and improvisatory – crackles with a brio that would be the envy
of Quentin Tarantino.”

– Adam Shatz, The Nation

“Once in awhile, a new book will offer up a rich, deep, interesting,
even exciting look at the entrenched, complex social problems that
plague the country’s most troubled urban neighborhoods. Philippe
Bourgois’s book does just that.”

– Marjorie Valbrun, The Philadelphia Inquirer

“An intimate, disturbing portrait of an alternate world in which the
crack-dealing and -using minority dominates public space. . . . The
author does not absolve his subjects of individual responsibility, but
he compellingly concludes that drugs are more a symptom than the root of
the problem: class and ethnic ‘apartheid.’”

– Publishers Weekly

“[The book] intercuts five years’ worth of interviews with Puerto Rican
crack dealers in New York’s El Barrio district with popular press and
scholarly research on informal economies and immigrant communities, as
well as numerous informative yet unobtrusive statistics. . . . For
Bourgois, the dealers’ main problem is not lack of skills – they manage
a complex system involving marketing, distribution of resources, and
human relations – but rather their lack of ‘cultural capital’ –
literacy, savvy in handling city agencies, or the ability to switch
between the street and white-collar worlds.”

– Carolina Gonzalez, The San Francisco Bay Guardian

Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences

Mark Granovetter, editor

The series Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences presents
approaches that explain social behavior and institutions by reference to
relations among such concrete entities as persons and organizations.
This contrasts with at least four other popular strategies: (a)
reductionist attempts to explain by a focus on individuals alone; (b)
explanations stressing the causal primacy of such abstract concepts as
ideas, values, mental harmonies, and cognitive maps (thus,
“structuralism” on the Continent should be distinguished from structural
analysis in the present sense); (c) technological and material
determinism; (d) explanations using “variables” as the main analytic
concepts (as in the “structural equation” models that dominated much of
the sociology of the 1970s), where structure is that connecting
variables rather than actual social entities.

The social network approach is an important example of the strategy of
structural analysis; the series also draws on social science theory and
research that is not framed explicitly in network terms, but stresses
the importance of relations rather than the atomization of reductionism
or the determinism of ideas, technology, or material conditions. Though
the structural perspective has become extremely popular and influential
in all the social sciences, it does not have a coherent identity, and no
series yet pulls together such work under a single rubric. By bringing
the achievements of structurally oriented scholars to a wider public,
the Structural Analysis series hopes to encourage the use of this very
fruitful approach.

Mark Granovetter

Other books in the series:

1.  Mark S. Mizruchi and Michael Schwartz, eds., Intercorporate
    Relations: The Structural Analysis of Business
2.  Barry Wellman and S. D. Berkowitz, eds., Social Structures: A
    Network Approach
3.  Ronald L. Breiger, ed., Social Mobility and Social Structure
4.  David Knoke, Political Networks: The Structural Perspective
5.  John L. Campbell, J. Rogers Hollingsworth, and Leon N. Lindberg,
    eds., Governance of the American Economy
6.  Kyriakos Kontopoulos, The Logics of Social Structure
7.  Philippa Pattison, Algebraic Models for Social Networks
8.  Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust, Social Network Analysis:
    Methods and Applications
9.  Gary Herrigel, Industrial Constructions: The Sources of German
    Industrial Power
10. Philippe Bourgois, In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio
11. Per Hage and Frank Harary, Island Networks: Communication, Kinship,
    and Classification Structures in Oceania
12. Thomas Schweizer and Douglas R. White, eds., Kinship, Networks and
    Exchange
13. Noah E. Friedkin, A Structural Theory of Social Influence
14. David Wank, Commodifying Communism: Business, Trust, and Politics in
    a Chinese City
15. Rebecca Adams and Graham Allan, Placing Friendship in Context
16. Robert L. Nelson and William P. Bridges, Legalizing Gender
    Inequality: Courts, Markets and Unequal Pay for Women in America
17. Robert Freeland, The Struggle for Control of the Modern Corporation:
    Organizational Change at General Motors, 1924–1970
18. Yi-min Lin, Between Politics and Markets: Firms, Competition, and
    Institutional Change in Post-Mao China
19. Nan Lin, Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action
20. Christopher Ansell, Schism and Solidarity in Social Movements: The
    Politics of Labor in the French Third Republic
21. Thomas Gold, Doug Guthrie, and David Wank, eds., Social Connections
    in China: Institutions, Culture, and the Changing Nature of Guanxi

IN SEARCH OF RESPECT

Selling Crack in El Barrio

Second Edition

PHILIPPE BOURGOIS

University of California, San Francisco

[images]

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo,
Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo

Cambridge University Press 32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY
10013-2473, USA

www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521815628

© First edition Cambridge University Press 1996
© Second edition Philippe Bourgois 2003

This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to
the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no
reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission
of Cambridge University Press.

First published 2003
13th printing 2010

Printed in the United States of America

A catalog record for this publication is available from the British
Library.

IISBN 978-0-521-81562-8 Hardback
ISBN 978-0-521-01711-4 Paperback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred
to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such
Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

For Emiliano

Born Anew at Each A.M.

The street’s got its kicks, man,
like a bargain shelf.
In fact, cool-breeze, it’s got
love like anywhere else.

Vaya!

It’s got lights that shine up the dark
like new.
It sells what you don’t need
and never lets you forget
what you blew.

It’s got high-powered
salesmen who push mucho junk,
and hustlers who can swallow you
up in a chunk.
Aha, check it out.

It’s got out beautiful children
living in all kinds of hell,
hoping to survive and making it well,
swinging together in misty darkness
with all their love to share
smiling their Christ-like forgiveness
that only a ghetto cross can bear.
Oh, yeah, vaya, check it out!

Hey, the street’s got life, man,
like a young tender sun,
and gentleness
like a long awaited dream to come.
Oye, vaya, check it out.

The children are roses,
with nary a thorn.
Forced to feel racist scorn.

Ha, ha, vaya, check it out!

Our children are beauty
with the right to be born.
Born anew at each A.M.
like a child out of twilight
flying towards sunlight
born anew at each A.M.

Punto!

[imeges]

CONTENTS

Acknowledgments

Preface to the 2003 Second Edition

Introduction

1. Violating Apartheid in the United States

2. A Street History of El Barrio

3. Crackhouse Management: Addiction, Discipline, and Dignity

4. “Goin’ Legit": Disrespect and Resistance at Work

5. School Days: Learning to be a Better Criminal

6. Redrawing the Gender Line on the Street

7. Families and Children in Pain

8. Vulnerable Fathers

9. Conclusion

Epilogue

Epilogue 2003

Notes

Bibliography

Index

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book could not have been written without my friends and neighbors
in El Barrio who welcomed me so openly and generously. I changed
everyone’s name and camouflaged the street addresses to protect
individual privacy. Above all, I thank my close friend whom I have
called Primo in these pages. He followed my work since the beginning,
and he guided much of it. His comments, corrections, and discussions on
the half-dozen versions of the manuscript that he read and/or listened
to were most helpful. The other major character, whom I have called
Caesar, also provided me with analytical insights and critiques on
various early drafts of this book. Similarly, Candy was extraordinarily
helpful and supportive throughout the fieldwork process and in the early
stages of writing. María provided me with comments and moral support
right through the final phases of writing the book. More recently,
Esperanza and Jasmine, who appear only in the epilogue to this second
edition, greatly facilitated my follow-up visits to El Barrio by making
me feel warmly welcome in their homes and among their extended families
following the publication of the first edition.

I also want to thank the following institutions for their generous
financial support: the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation, the Russell
Sage Foundation, the Social Science Research Council, the Ford
Foundation, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (grants R01 DA10164 and
R03 DA06413), the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research,
the United States Bureau of the Census, and at San Francisco State
University Marilyn Boxer, Brian Murphy, and Joe Julian. I appreciated
having institutional research affiliations with The Research Institute
for the Study of Man, the Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños of Hunter
College, Columbia University’s School of Architecture and Urban
Planning, and San Francisco State University’s Urban Institute and
Anthropology Department. Of course, I am most grateful for the faculty
position I hold in the Department of Anthropology, History, and Social
Medicine at the University of California, San Francisco, which provides
me with the long-term financial and logistical security that permits me
to write books on social suffering and injustice in the United States.

I am grateful to Marc Edelman, Robert Merton, and the late Eric Wolf,
who gave generously of their time to provide me with detailed critiques
of substantial portions of the manuscript. No one comes close, however,
to the brilliance, precision, and inspired obsession of Loïc Wacquant
when it comes to editing text and critiquing intellectual argument. The
first half of this book was practically rewritten by him in a
forty-eight-hour nonstop binge of editing that only he would have the
energy, clarity of mind, and delicacy of plume to deliver just in time.
Dozens of other friends, students, colleagues, and mentors also read
drafts of this book – or at least heard portions of its central
arguments. Many useful insights or points of information were conveyed
to me in informal conversations after seminars, classes, and
conferences, or even at parties. Some of the feedback was critical, and
I did not always incorporate it in the text, but I am thankful for its
constructive engagement. In this vein, I thank the late Pierre Bourdieu,
who made possible the French translation of this book in his series, and
who, more importantly, provided so much clarity and inspiration with his
critique of the practice of symbolic power in reproducing hierarchy;
Karen Colvard, John Devine, Amy Donovan, Eloise Dunlap, Angelo Falcon,
Jerry Floersch, Charles Hale, Arthur Kleinman, Antonio
Lauria-Petrocelli, Gloria Levitas, Roberto Lewis-Fernandez, Jeff
Longhofer, Peter Lucas, Susan Meiselas, Jim Quesada, Clara Rodriguez,
the late Ulysses Santamaria, Saskia Sassen, Nancy Scheper-Hughes, Carol
Smith, Carl Taylor, Frank Vardi, Joel Wallman, Eric Wanner, Terry
Williams, William Julius Wilson, and my grandmother, the late Peggy
Regler.

I owe a great deal to Mark Granovetter, the series editor at Cambridge,
who intervened on my behalf with comments and support at a crucial phase
in the writing when I was despairing of ever finishing. My in-house
editors at Cambridge – Emily Loose, Russell Hahn, and especially
Elizabeth Neal, followed by Mary Child and Alia Winters – were also
extremely helpful. The copy editors, Nancy Landau and Phyllis L. Berk,
greatly improved the final quality of the text, catching several dozen
embarrassing errors and cleaning up an untold number of awkward sentence
constructions.

The original manuscript could not have been produced without the typing,
emotional support, and ethical backbone of Harold Otto and Ann Magruder,
who both became respected friends despite working side by side with me
for so many anxiety-filled months. Others who provided crucial research
and logistical support at the Russell Sage Foundation include Eileen
Ferrer, James Gray, Clay Gustave, Pauline Rothstein, Madge Spitaleri,
Camille Yezzi, and Adrienne Zicklin. At San Francisco State University,
Thoreau Lovell kindly provided me with after-hours computer access and
frequent technical advice. At the Research Institute for the Study of
Man, Florence Rivera Tai was of great help and friendship.

Reading Piri Thomas’s Down These Mean Streets when I was in high school
planted the seed for this book. I owe him a great debt for making me
confront poverty, racism, and drugs in the city where I grew up. It is a
special honor and pleasure for me, consequently, to have his permission
to publish in the front the fax he sent me after reading a manuscript
version of this book.

Finally, I want to thank my family. I will always be grateful to Charo
Chacón-Méndez for immigrating from Costa Rica directly to El Barrio,
where we married at the very beginning of this research project. Her
help was invaluable during our residence in the neighborhood. I
apologize for imposing so much anxiety on her when I regularly stayed
out all night on the street, and in crackhouses, for so many years. I
hope that is not one of the reasons we are no longer together. If it is,
I regret it profoundly. Our son, Emiliano (Nano), loved El Barrio. He
was never intimidated by the street. His cerebral palsy was first
diagnosed when we had no health insurance by a brusque, harried intern
in a free clinic a few blocks from our tenement. I suspect that Nano’s
tremendous self-confidence, and his wonderful social skills, were
partially forged by the success with which he carved respect for himself
from even the toughest street hustlers on our block. He melted
everyone’s heart while proudly learning to use his walker over broken
sidewalks littered with crack vials. Better yet, all through the often
frustrating process, full of scrapes and tumbles, Nano exuded that
magical joy-of-living that only two-and-something-year-olds know the
secret to. He helped me appreciate some of the joys of life on the
street. The bright flash in his eyes continues to guide me a dozen years
later as he enters adolescence full of energy, appreciation, and empathy
for most everyone around him.

My mother and father were also supportive throughout the research and
writing of this book. I am sure I was deeply shaped by the fact that my
mother violated apartheid almost every weekday during the 1980s through
the 1990s while working with literacy programs in the South Bronx. In
the same vein, my father provided me with the wonderful experience of
growing up as a New Yorker in a bicultural household. His “typically
French” trenchant criticisms of U.S. culture, and especially his
abhorrence of the excesses of racism and class inequality in New York
City, were a wonderful antidote to the stultifying ideological
perspectives that bombarded those of us who grew up at the height of the
Cold War in the United States. Perhaps the fact that he escaped on June
7, 1944, from I. G. Farben Community Camp Dwory at Auschwitz instilled
in me a commitment to document institutionalized racism in my own
lifetime, especially in my own hometown. He may also have first
sensitized me to addication when I was a teenager by telling me, as we
were sharing a cigarette, “I was one of the stupid ones in the camps who
used to trade his bread for tobacco.” More importantly, my father’s
ongoing humble outrage over the fact that so many of those living
directly downwind from the Auschwitz gas chambers – himself included –
managed to either ignore or joke about the smell of burning human flesh
at the height of the Holocaust motivated me, I think, to write this book
on the everyday violence of U.S. apartheid at the turn of the
twenty-first century.

– University of California, San Francisco
August 2002

PREFACE TO THE 2003 SECOND EDITION

In the seven years since the first edition of this book went to press in
the fall of 1995, four major dynamics altered the tenor of daily life on
the streets of East Harlem and deeply affected the lives of the crack
dealers and their families depicted in these pages: 1) The U.S. economy
entered the most prolonged period of sustained growth in its recorded
history; 2) the size of the Mexican immigrant population in New York
City and especially in East Harlem increased dramatically; 3) the war on
drugs escalated into a quasi-official public policy of criminalizing and
incarcerating the poor and the socially marginal; and 4) drug fashion
trends among inner-city youth rendered marijuana even more popular and
crack and heroin even less popular among Latinos and African Americans.

In 2002, crack, cocaine, and heroin were still sold on the block where I
lived, but they were sold less visibly by a smaller number of people. It
was still easy to purchase narcotics throughout East Harlem, but much of
the drug dealing had moved indoors, out of sight of the police. There
were fewer small-time hawkers competing openly on street corners,
shouting out the brand names of their drugs. Most importantly, heroin
and crack continued to be spurned by Latino and African American youth
who had witnessed as children the ravages that those drugs committed on
the older generations in their community. Recovered crack addicts in New
York City even developed a new genre of autobiographical literature
(Stringer, 1998; S. and Bolnick, 2000). Nevertheless, in the U.S. inner
city there remained an aging hard-core cohort of addicts. It is
difficult to trust the accuracy of surveys on drugs that are conducted
over the telephone by government-sponsored interviewers, but the
National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, which has been conducted every
year in the United States since 1994, did not report a decrease in
“frequent crack use” during the 1990s (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2000). Hospital emergency room and arrest
statistics, however, reported dramatically decreasing cocaine-positive
blood tests among males during the late 1990s through the year 2000
(CESAR FAX, 2001).

In most large cities, crack was most visibly ensconced in predominantly
African American neighborhoods on the poorest blocks. Crack sales spots
often continued to be located in or near large public housing projects,
vacant lots, and abandoned buildings. In New York City, Puerto Rican
households also continued to be at the epicenter of the ongoing cyclone
of crack consumption – even if it was more self-contained than it used
to be.

In contrast to crack, heroin consumption increased in many cities during
the latter half of the 1990s and early 2000s. Throughout most of the
United States, heroin became cheaper and purer, belying any claims that
the U.S. war on drugs was winnable. Heroin’s new appeal, however, was
primarily among younger whites outside the ghetto for whom crack was not
a drug of choice. Heroin, especially in intravenous form, remained
unpopular among Latino and African American youth in the inner city. In
East Harlem, crack-and heroin-copping corners in the year 2001 appeared
to be almost geriatric scenes, with the average age of addicted clients
hovering in their late thirties through late forties and early fifties.

To summarize, in 2002 both heroin and crack continued to be
multibillion-dollar businesses that ravaged inner-city families with
special virulence. The younger generations of East Harlem residents,
however, were more involved as sellers than as consumers. Those Latino
and African American youth who did use crack or heroin generally tried
to hide the fact from their friends. We understand poorly why drug
fashions change so markedly, but at the opening of the twenty-first
century, we were lucky in the United States that for more than a dozen
years, marijuana and malt liquor beer had been the substances of choice
for use and abuse by African American and Latino youth who participate
in street culture (Golub and Johnson, 1999).

More important than changing drug-consumption fashions or the posturing
of politicians over drug war campaigns was the effect of the dramatic
long-term improvement in the U.S. economy, which resulted in record low
rates of unemployment in the late 1990s. Somewhat to my surprise, some
of the crack dealers and their families featured in this book benefited
from this sustained economic growth spurt, at least up to its nosedive
in 2001–02. Slightly less than half of the characters in this book
managed to enter the lower echelons of the legal labor market prior to
the 2001–02 economic downturn. I outline this with greater personal
details in the new epilogue to this second edition, but to provide a
brief overview during the 2001–02 recession: One dealer was a unionized
doorman, another a home health-care attendant, another a plumber’s
assistant. Three others were construction workers for small-time
unlicensed contractors. One was a cashier in a discount tourist souvenir
store. Two of the sisters of the crack dealers depicted in this book
were nurses aides and another was a secretary. One of the women
companions of one of the crack dealers was a bank teller, another was a
security guard, and a third sold Avon products. One of the sons of the
dealers was a cashier in a fast food restaurant, while another sold
drugs and yet another two were incarcerated for the sale of drugs and
petty burglary, respectively. Three or four of the dealers were still
selling drugs, but most of them were selling marijuana instead of crack
or heroin. Another three of the dealers were in prison with long-term
sentences and, ironically, were probably employed at well below minimum
wage in the burgeoning prison-based manufacturing sector.

In short, the dramatic improvement in the U.S. economy in the late 1990s
forced employers and unions to integrate increasing numbers of
marginalized Puerto Ricans and African Americans into the labor market.
This represented a structural contrast to the late 1980s and early 1990s
when the research for this book was conducted and the economy was
weaker. Nevertheless, even at the height of the surge in the U.S.
economy in the summer of 2000, a large sector of street youth found
themselves excluded. These marginals had become almost completely
superfluous to the legal economy; they remained enmeshed in a still
lucrative drug economy, a burgeoning prison system, and a quagmire of
chronic substance abuse and everyday interpersonal violence. From a
long-term political and economic perspective, the future did not bode
well for the inner-city poor of New York, irrespective of the
shorter-term fluctuations in the national and regional economy, as was
evidenced by the economic downturn following the September 11, 2001,
World Trade Center disaster. In the year 2000, the United States had the
largest disparity between rich and poor of any industrialized nation in
the world – and this gap was increasing rather than decreasing (New York
Times, September 26, 2001:A12; see also U.S. Census Bureau, 2001). At a
more local level, over the last three decades of the twentieth century,
the state of New York suffered the largest growth in income inequality
of all fifty states in the nation (New York Times, January 19, 2000:B5).

A side effect of New York’s strong but poorly paid entry-level
employment market was the accelerated immigration of undocumented
Mexicans fleeing rural poverty, who were prepared to work hard for
poverty wages. When I left the neighborhood in 1991, Mexican immigration
was, of course, already extremely visible, and I discussed the rising
violent tensions between young Puerto Ricans and new Mexican immigrants.
In the original epilogue to the English edition written in late 1994 and
included in this edition, I provide statistics on the rapid rise in the
local Mexican population. This increase proceeded at an even faster pace
during the second half of the 1990s and was palpably visible on the
street where I lived. In 1991 on the blocks immediately surrounding me,
there were at least three buildings entirely occupied by Mexican new
immigrants (not to mention two by rural Senegalese new immigrants). On
one of my recent return visits to prepare the preface for this second
edition, I found that an entire block (next to the one where I lived)
had “become Mexican.” Throughout the rest of East Harlem, dozens of
Mexican restaurants and specialty grocery stores were visible. In
contrast, when I resided there, I knew of only one Mexican restaurant
and it did not sport a sign, presumably because it was not licensed to
sell food. In short, yet another new wave of ethnic succession was
remaking East Harlem at the dawn of the twenty-first century on the
fringes of the U.S. economy, but striving for the American Dream.

Throughout East Harlem, new small businesses in the year 2002 were
visible on formerly boarded-up, abandoned blocks. On the block where I
lived, for example, the revitalization that I described as incipient in
1994 had accelerated significantly. The garbage-strewn lot, which had
stood vacant for well over a dozen years on one side of the apartment
where I lived, was occupied by a row of newly constructed four-story
tenements. The large, abandoned building on the other side of my
tenement, which had been burned down ten years before I moved onto the
block, was a renovated halfway house for mothers recovering from
substance abuse. There were five new legal businesses on the block: two
hairdressers, a video rental store, a Chinese takeout restaurant, and a
pizzeria.

Only one of the two original grocery stores on the block still sold
drugs and its sales were limited to marijuana. Heroin could still be
obtained on the corner, purer than ever, but no longer from three
competing brand-name companies. At night, the working class majority of
the population still ceded much of their control of public space to drug
dealers and addicts, just as they had in the late 1980s and early 1990s
when I lived there. Overall, however, the significantly strengthened
economy, buttressed by the coincidences of evolving drug fashions and
the logic of large-scale, low-wage labor migration streams, had
reinvigorated working class culture on the street, decreasing the
destructive magnetism of drugs, crime, and violence for those pursuing
upward mobility.

In contrast to the invigorating effects on the neighborhood of private
sector growth and of undocumented working class migration, the U.S.
public sector continued its policy of malign neglect toward the inner
city, especially toward Latino and African American neighborhoods.
During the 1990s, the formerly underfunded and rachitic U.S. social
welfare safety net was refurbished into an expensive, rigorous, criminal
dragnet. The already enormous U.S. penal system grew vertiginously to
become a bona fide criminal industrial complex larger in the year 2000
in relative per capita terms than that of any other nation in the world
except Russia and Rwanda. The U.S. incarceration rate doubled during the
1990s; it was six to twelve times higher than that of any of the nations
in the European Union (Wacquant, 1999:72). The sheer mass of people
locked up assumed an aura of apartheid when one examines the racial
disparities involved (Wacquant, 2000). According to objective
statistical probability, one in three African American males could
expect to be incarcerated in their lifetime, compared to one in
twenty-five white males and one in six Latinos. The ethnic disparities
in incarceration rates were driven in the 1990s and 2000s by the “War on
Drugs.” African Americans were twenty times more likely to be
incarcerated on drug offenses than were whites. In New York State, where
89 percent of the prisoners are African American or Latino, this
carceral segregation is even more dramatic (Macallair and Taqi-Eddin,
1999).

The mayor of New York City from 1993 to 2001, Rudolph Giuliani, became
known worldwide for promoting a zero-tolerance approach to petty crime,
implementing the notorious “fixing broken windows” policy (Kelling and
Coles, 1996). He targeted “quality-of-life crimes,” which meant
aggressively arresting beggars, window washers, fare dodgers on the
subway, and black and Latino youth dressed in hip hop style who loitered
on the street. This policy came at a high cost in human rights
violations due to a dramatic increase in racially targeted police
brutality culminating in public scandals, such as the torture of a
Haitian immigrant who was repeatedly sodomized with a broken broom stick
by police interrogators in a precinct office, and the murder of an
unarmed Guinean immigrant who was shot forty-one times in the foyer of
his own apartment building. New York’s get-tough-on-crime policy was
also extraordinarily expensive. The number of New York City police
dramatically increased by more than 7,000 officers in the 1990s to
40,000, the largest in its history, even as the budgets for health,
education, foster child care, public education, and so on were
streamlined. During the 1990s, New York State spent more than $4.5
billion building new prisons. This figure does not include operating
costs, which in 1998 ran $32,000 per inmate per year in the upstate
prisons and more than $66,000 per capita per year on Riker’s Island, New
York City’s municipal jail (Camp and Camp, 1998).

Proponents of repressive drug enforcement policy point to significantly
reduced crime rates in New York City during the late 1990s. They fail to
note, however, that New York did not lower its crime rate significantly
more than those cities that did not criminalize street people or
increase police arrest rates. In fact, statisticians have calculated
that states that increased their prison populations the most in the
1990s benefited from a smaller reduction in crime rate than those states
with below-average increases in incarceration (New York Times, September
28, 2000). Most importantly, crime in New York, as well as throughout
the nation, had already begun dropping in the years before the New York
City’s mayor’s get-tough-on-crime measures were instituted in 1994.
Policy analysts who crunch numbers argue that the overall improvement of
the economy and the demographic shifts that have reduced the number of
eighteen- to twenty-year-olds have had a far larger effect on decreasing
crime rates than have changes in crime-control strategies (Blumstein and
Wallman, 2000). Academic and statistical policy critiques
notwithstanding, New York City policing became a triumphant symbol for
neoliberal solutions to urban plight: “locking up petty delinquents and
especially addicts” and “criminalizing misery” (Wacquant, 1999:74, 151).
The unsightliness of the poor living in crisis was removed from white,
middle class public space in the city. With the festering signs of
social suffering safely sanitized, property values soared and tourism
reached record highs.

Almost surprisingly, most of the dealers I befriended, with the
exception of the younger, inexperienced, and more violent ones, have
managed to avoid incarceration. The immediate concrete effect of the
escalation in the war on drugs in the late 1990s on the lives of the
major characters in this book has been the strict enforcement of federal
public housing one-strike-you’re-out rulings by New York City officials.
The presence of a felon in a household living in public housing in the
mid-1990s became legal cause for all the members of that household to be
evicted, no matter their age or level of social vulnerability. Many
cities have not chosen to enforce this federal edict aggressively, but
New York City did. Most of the dealers consequently were evicted from
their homes, usually with their extended families; most – including the
two main characters in this book – were forced to move out of Manhattan
or even out of state. Throughout New York City, grandparents found
themselves on the street for sheltering their grandson or granddaughter
on their living room couch. It did not matter that a grandmother may
have been senile and was unaware of the criminal activity of her
grandchild or was perhaps intimidated by the child (cf. New York Times,
March 27, 2002). Most dramatically, because of New York’s unconditional
enforcement of one-strike-you’re-out, in three separate cases newborns
whose mothers allowed dealers (who are major characters in this book) to
live with them ended up taking refuge in homeless shelters or doubling
up in the living rooms of relatives.

The most troubling trend is the ongoing pattern of destruction befalling
most of the children of the crack dealers in this book. I have returned
to New York at least once or twice a year since the publication of the
first edition of this book. I seek out the characters from the book to
say hello and catch up on the old days. On my follow-up visits I have
had a chance to meet, as budding adolescents and subsequently as young
adults, the former children of the crack dealers, many of whom appear
only occasionally in these pages. Spending time with these children
provided me with yet another glimpse of the chronic social suffering
that continued to be generated in East Harlem despite any positive
fluctuation in the economy, and despite the decrease in youthful
hard-drug consumption. The most vulnerable inner-city residents are the
children of children. They are chewed up and spit out by the American
Dream, only to find themselves recycled a dozen or so years later at
extraordinary financial and human cost into the prison industrial
complex.

San Francisco, April 2002

INTRODUCTION

Man, I don’t blame where I’m at right now on nobody else but myself.

Primo

I was forced into crack against my will. When I first moved to East
Harlem – “El Barrio”¹ – as a newlywed in the spring of 1985, I was
looking for an inexpensive New York City apartment from which I could
write a book on the experience of poverty and ethnic segregation in the
heart of one of the most expensive cities in the world. On the level of
theory, I was interested in the political economy of inner-city street
culture. From a personal, political perspective, I wanted to probe the
Achilles heel of the richest industrialized nation in the world by
documenting how it imposes racial segregation and economic
marginalization on so many of its Latino/a and African-American
citizens.

I thought the drug world was going to be only one of the many themes I
would explore. My original subject was the entire underground (untaxed)
economy, from curbside car repairing and baby-sitting, to unlicensed
off-track betting and drug dealing. I had never even heard of crack when
I first arrived in the neighborhood – no one knew about this particular
substance yet, because this brittle compound of cocaine and baking soda
processed into efficiently smokable pellets was not yet available as a
mass-marketed product.² By the end of the year, however, most of my
friends, neighbors, and acquaintances had been swept into the
multibillion-dollar crack cyclone: selling it, smoking it, fretting over
it.

I followed them, and I watched the murder rate in the projects opposite
my crumbling tenement apartment spiral into one of the highest in
Manhattan.³ The sidewalk in front of the burned-out abandoned building
and the rubbish-strewn vacant lot flanking each side of my tenement
began to crunch with the sound of empty crack vials underfoot. Almost a
decade later, as this book goes to press, despite the debates of the
“drug experts” over whether or not the United States faces a severe
“drug problem,” this same sidewalk continues to be littered with drug
paraphernalia. The only difference in the mid-1990s is that used
hypodermic needles lie alongside spent crack vials in the gutter. Heroin
has rejoined crack and cocaine as a primary drug of choice available in
the inner city as international suppliers of heroin have regained their
lost market share of substance abuse by lowering their prices and
increasing the quality of their product.⁴

The Underground Economy

This book is not about crack, or drugs, per se. Substance abuse in the
inner city is merely a symptom – and a vivid symbol – of deeper dynamics
of social marginalization and alienation. Of course, on an immediately
visible personal level, addiction and substance abuse are among the most
immediate, brutal facts shaping daily life on the street. Most
importantly, however, the two dozen street dealers and their families
that I befriended were not interested in talking primarily about drugs.
On the contrary, they wanted me to learn all about their daily struggles
for subsistence and dignity at the poverty line.

According to the official statistics, my neighbors on the street should
have been homeless, starving, and dressed in rags. Given the cost of
living in Manhattan, it should have been impossible for most of them to
afford rent and minimal groceries and still manage to pay their
electricity and gas bills. According to the 1990 census, 39.8 percent of
local residents in East Harlem lived below the federal poverty line
(compared to 16.3 percent of all New Yorkers) with a total of 62.1
percent receiving less than twice official poverty-level incomes. The
blocks immediately surrounding me were significantly poorer with half of
all residents falling below the poverty line.⁵ Given New York City
prices for essential goods and services, this means that according to
official economic measures, well over half the population of El Barrio
should not be able to meet their subsistence needs.

In fact, however, people are not starving on a massive scale. Although
many elderly residents and many young children do not have adequate
diets and suffer from the cold in the winter, most local residents are
adequately dressed and reasonably healthy. The enormous, uncensused,
untaxed underground economy allows the hundreds of thousands of New
Yorkers in neighborhoods like East Harlem to subsist with the minimal
amenities that people living in the United States consider to be basic
necessities. I was determined to study these alternative
income-generating strategies that were consuming so much of the time and
energy of the young men and women sitting on the stoops and parked cars
in front of my tenement.

Through the 1980s and 1990s, slightly more than one in three families in
El Barrio received public assistance.⁶ The heads of these impoverished
households have to supplement their meager checks in order to keep their
children alive. Many are mothers who make extra money by baby-sitting
their neighbors’ children, or by housekeeping for a paying boarder.
Others may bartend at one of the half-dozen social clubs and after-hours
dancing spots scattered throughout the neighborhood. Some work “off the
books” in their living rooms as seamstresses for garment contractors.
Finally, many also find themselves obliged to establish amorous
relationships with men who are willing to make cash contributions to
their household expenses.

Male income-generating strategies in the underground economy are more
publicly visible. Some men repair cars on the curb; others wait on
stoops for unlicensed construction subcontractors to pick them up for
fly-by-night demolition jobs or window renovation projects. Many sell
“numbers” – the street’s version of offtrack betting. The most visible
cohorts hawk “nickels and dimes” of one illegal drug or another. They
are part of the most robust, multibillion-dollar sector of the booming
underground economy. Cocaine and crack, in particular during the
mid-1980s and through the early 1990s, followed by heroin in the
mid-1990s, have been the fastest growing – if not the only – equal
opportunity employers of men in Harlem. Retail drug sales easily
outcompete other income-generating opportunities, whether legal or
illegal.⁷

The street in front of my tenement was not atypical, and within a
two-block radius I could – and still can, as of this final draft –
obtain heroin, crack, powder cocaine, hypodermic needles, methadone,
Valium, angel dust,⁸ marijuana, mescaline, bootleg alcohol, and tobacco.
Within one hundred yards of my stoop there were three competing
crackhouses selling vials at two, three, and five dollars. Just a few
blocks farther down, in one of several local “pill mills,” a doctor
wrote $3.9 million worth of Medicaid prescriptions in only one year,
receiving nearly $1 million for his services. Ninety-four percent of his
“medicines” were on the Department of Social Services’ list of
frequently abused prescription drugs. Most of these pills were retailed
on the corner or resold in bulk discounts to pharmacies. Right on my
block, on the second floor above the crackhouse where I spent much of my
free time at night, another filthy clinic dispensed sedatives and
opiates to flocks of emaciated addicts who waited in decrepit huddles
for the nurse to raise the clinic’s unidentified metal gates and tape a
handwritten cardboard DOCTOR IS IN sign to the linoleum-covered window.
I never found out the volume of this clinic’s business because it was
never raided by the authorities. In the projects opposite this same pill
mill, however, the New York City Housing Authority police arrested a
fifty-five-year-old mother and her twenty-two- and sixteen-year-old
daughters while they were “bagging” twenty-one pounds of cocaine into
$10 quarter-gram “jumbo” vials of adulterated product worth over $1
million on the street. The police found $25,000 cash in
small-denomination bills in this same apartment.

In other words, millions of dollars of business takes place within a
stone’s throw of the youths growing up in East Harlem tenements and
housing projects. Why should these young men and women take the subway
to work minimum wage jobs – or even double minimum wage jobs – in
downtown offices when they can usually earn more, at least in the short
run, by selling drugs on the street corner in front of their apartment
or school yard? In fact, I am always surprised that so many inner-city
men and women remain in the legal economy and work nine to five plus
overtime, barely making ends meet. According to the 1990 Census of East
Harlem, 48 percent of all males and 35 percent of females over sixteen
were employed in officially reported jobs, compared to a city wide
average of 64 percent for men and 49 percent for women.⁹ In the census
tracts surrounding my apartment, 53 percent of all men over sixteen
years of age (1,923 out of 3,647) and 28 percent of all women over
sixteen (1,307 out of 4,626) were working legally in officially censused
jobs. An additional 17 percent of the civilian labor force was
unemployed but actively looking for work compared to 16 percent for El
Barrio as a whole, and 9 percent for all of New York City.¹⁰

The difficulty of making generalizations about inner-city neighborhoods
on the basis of official U.S. Census Bureau statistics cannot be
overemphasized. Studies commissioned by the Census Bureau estimate that
between 20 and 40 percent of African-American and Latino men in their
late teens and early twenties are missed by the Census. Many of these
individuals purposely hide their whereabouts, fearing reprisals for
involvement in the underground economy.¹¹ A good example of the
magnitude of concealment in the inner city is provided by a 1988 New
York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) report, which calculates that 20
percent more people lived on their premises than were officially
reported in the official rolls. The Housing Authority arrived at this
“estimate of overcrowding” by cross-tabulating statistics from the
Welfare Department and the Board of Education with the increase in
expenditures of their maintenance departments.¹² On the blocks
immediately surrounding my tenement a vague idea of how many men were
missed by the Census is provided by the imbalance between males and
females over sixteen years of age: 3,647 versus 4,626. In other words,
if one assumes an equal ratio of males to females, 979 men, or 21
percent of the number counted, were missing. In New York City as a
whole, 16 percent more men over sixteen years of age would have been
needed for there to be a perfect balance between adult males and
females. Using this same yardstick of men to women, in El Barrio as a
whole 24 percent of all men were “missed.”

[images]

Sources: Housing Environments Research Group, City University of New
York; Kevin Kearney, New York City Housing Authority; New York City
Department of City Planning

The difficulty of estimating the size of the underground economy – let
alone drug dealing – is even thornier.¹³ By definition, no Census Bureau
data exists on the subject. Because fewer households than individuals
are missed by the Census in urban settings, one possible measure for the
size of the underground economy is the figure for households that
declare no “wage or salary income.” This provides only the very roughest
comparative measure for the size of the underground economy in different
neighborhoods because some households survive exclusively on retirement
income or on strictly legal self-employment revenues. Furthermore, this
proxy figure measures drug dealing even more tenuously since many,
perhaps most, of those households that rely on the untaxed economy for
supplemental income, work at legal tasks and shun drugs. Conversely,
many people involved in the underground economy also work at legally
declared jobs. Nevertheless, one has to assume that a high proportion of
households with no wage or salary income probably rely on some
combination of untaxed, undeclared income in order to continue
subsisting, and that drug dealing represents an important source of this
supplemental income. In any case, according to official Census Bureau
statistics, 40 percent of all households in El Barrio as a whole
received no legally declared wages or salary, compared to 26 percent for
New York City as a whole. The blocks immediately surrounding my
apartment were probably slightly more enmeshed in the underground
economy, with only 46 percent of the 3,995 households reporting wage or
salary income. The percentage of households receiving public assistance
is another useful figure for gauging the relative size of the
underground economy, since no household can survive on welfare alone and
any legal income reported by a household receiving public assistance is
deducted from its biweekly welfare check and its monthly food stamps
allotment. On the blocks surrounding my tenement 42 percent of all
households received public assistance compared to 34 percent in East
Harlem as a whole and 13 percent for all households in New York City.¹⁴

Table 1. Comparative Social Indicators by Neighborhood from 1990 Census

[images]

Sources: New York City Department of City Planning, Population Division
1992 [August 26]; New York City Department of City Planning 1993
[March]; New York City Department of City Planning 1993 [December]; 1990
Census of Population and Housing Block Statistics.

Street Culture: Resistance and Self-Destruction

The anguish of growing up poor in the richest city in the world is
compounded by the cultural assault that El Barrio youths often face when
they venture out of their neighborhood. This has spawned what I call
“inner-city street culture": a complex and conflictual web of beliefs,
symbols, modes of interaction, values, and ideologies that have emerged
in opposition to exclusion from mainstream society. Street culture
offers an alternative forum for autonomous personal dignity. In the
particular case of the United States, the concentration of socially
marginalized populations into politically and ecologically isolated
inner-city enclaves has fomented an especially explosive cultural
creativity that is in defiance of racism and economic marginalization.
This “street culture of resistance” is not a coherent, conscious
universe of political opposition but, rather, a spontaneous set of
rebellious practices that in the long term have emerged as an
oppositional style. Ironically, mainstream society through fashion,
music, film, and television eventually recuperates and commercializes
many of these oppositional street styles, recycling them as pop
culture.¹⁵ In fact, some of the most basic linguistic expressions for
self-esteem in middle-class America, such as being “cool,” “square,” or
“hip,” were coined on inner-city streets.

Purveying for substance use and abuse provides the material base for
contemporary street culture, rendering it even more powerfully appealing
than it has been in previous generations. Illegal enterprise, however,
embroils most of its participants in lifestyles of violence, substance
abuse, and internalized rage. Contradictorily, therefore, the street
culture of resistance is predicated on the destruction of its
participants and the community harboring them. In other words, although
street culture emerges out of a personal search for dignity and a
rejection of racism and subjugation, it ultimately becomes an active
agent in personal degradation and community ruin.

[images]

Repopulating El Barrio: The stuffed animals were arranged by the former
superintendent of this abandoned building to protest the decay of his
block, which had become a haven for drug dealing. Photo by Henry
Chalfant.

As already noted, it is impossible to calculate with any accuracy what
proportion of the population is involved in the untaxed, underground
economy. It is even harder to guess the number of people who use or sell
drugs. Most of El Barrio’s residents have nothing to do with drugs.¹⁶
The problem, however, is that this law-abiding majority has lost control
of public space. Regardless of their absolute numbers, or relative
proportions, hardworking, drug-free Harlemites have been pushed onto the
defensive. Most of them live in fear, or even in contempt, of their
neighborhood. Worried mothers and fathers maintain their children locked
inside their apartments in determined attempts to keep street culture
out. They hope someday to be able to move out of the neighborhood.

[images]

Memorial to a youth murdered not far from the Game Room. He had aspired
to be a professional boxer. Photo by Oscar Vargas.

The drug dealers in this book consequently represent only a small
minority of East Harlem residents, but they have managed to set the tone
for public life. They force local residents, especially women and the
elderly, to fear being assaulted or mugged. The sight of emaciated
addicts congregating visibly on street corners provokes pity, sadness,
and anger among the majority of East Harlemites who do not use drugs.
Most important, on a daily basis, the street-level drug dealers offer a
persuasive, even if violent and self-destructive, alternative lifestyle
to the youths growing up around them.

No matter how marginal they may be in absolute numbers, the people who
are carving out hegemony on inner-city streets cannot be ignored; they
need to be understood. For this reason, I chose addicts, thieves, and
dealers to be my best friends and acquaintances during the years I lived
in El Barrio. The pathos of the U.S. inner city is most clearly
manifested within the street dealing world. To borrow the cliché, “in
the extraordinary we can see the ordinary.” The extreme – perhaps
caricatural – responses to poverty and segregation that the dealers and
addicts in this book represent, afford insight into processes that may
be experienced in one form or another by major sectors of any vulnerable
population experiencing rapid structural change in the context of
political and ideological oppression. There is nothing exceptional about
the Puerto Rican experience in New York, except that the human costs of
immigration and poverty have been rendered more clearly visible by the
extent and rapidity with which the United States colonized and
disarticulated Puerto Rico’s economy and polity. On the contrary, if
anything is extraordinary about the Puerto Rican experience, it is that
Puerto Rican cultural forms have continued to expand and reinvent
themselves in the lives of second- and third-generation immigrants
around a consistent theme of dignity and autonomy. Indeed, some Puerto
Rican scholars refer to this as Puerto Rico’s “oppositional mentality,”
forged in the face of long-term colonial domination.¹⁷

Ethnographic Methods and Negative Stereotyping

Any detailed examination of social marginalization encounters serious
problems with the politics of representation, especially in the United
States, where discussions of poverty tend to polarize immediately around
race and individual self-worth. I worry, consequently, that the life
stories and events presented in this book will be misread as negative
stereotypes of Puerto Ricans, or as a hostile portrait of the poor. I
have struggled over these issues for several years because I agree with
those social scientists who criticize the inferiorizing narratives that
have predominated in much of the academic and popular literature on
poverty in the United States.¹⁸ At the same time, however, countering
traditional moralistic biases and middle-class hostility toward the poor
should not come at the cost of sanitizing the suffering and destruction
that exists on inner-city streets. Out of a righteous, or a “politically
sensitive,” fear of giving the poor a bad image, I refuse to ignore or
minimize the social misery I witnessed, because that would make me
complicitous with oppression.¹⁹

This book consequently confronts the contradictions of the politics of
representation of social marginalization in the United States by
presenting brutal events, uncensored as I experienced them, or as they
were narrated to me, by the perpetrators themselves. In the process, I
have tried to build an alternative, critical understanding of the U.S.
inner city by organizing my central arguments, and by presenting the
lives and conversations of the crack dealers, in a manner that
emphasizes the interface between structural oppression and individual
action. Building on the analytic framework of cultural production theory
and drawing from feminism, I hope to restore the agency of culture, the
autonomy of individuals, and the centrality of gender and the domestic
sphere to a political economic understanding of the experience of
persistent poverty and social marginalization in the urban United
States.

As I have already noted, traditional social science research techniques
that rely on Census Bureau statistics or random sample neighborhood
surveys cannot access with any degree of accuracy the people who survive
in the underground economy – and much less those who sell or take
illegal drugs. By definition, individuals who have been marginalized
socially, economically, and culturally have had negative long-term
relationships with mainstream society. Most drug users and dealers
distrust representatives of mainstream society and will not reveal their
intimate experiences of substance abuse or criminal enterprise to a
stranger on a survey instrument, no matter how sensitive or friendly the
interviewer may be. Consequently, most of the criminologists and
sociologists who painstakingly undertake epidemiological surveys on
crime and substance abuse collect fabrications. In fact, one does not
have to be a drug dealer or a drug addict to hide the details of one’s
illicit activities. Even “honest” citizens, for example, regularly
engage in “underground economy” practices when they finesse their
deductions on income tax returns. In short, how can we expect someone
who specializes in mugging elderly persons to provide us with accurate
data on his or her income-generating strategies?

The participant—observation ethnographic techniques developed primarily
by cultural anthropologists since the 1920s are better suited than
exclusively quantitative methodologies for documenting the lives of
people who live on the margins of a society that is hostile to them.
Only by establishing long-term relationships based on trust can one
begin to ask provocative personal questions, and expect thoughtful,
serious answers. Ethnographers usually live in the communities they
study, and they establish long-term, organic relationships with the
people they write about. In other words, in order to collect “accurate
data,” ethnographers violate the canons of positivist research; we
become intimately involved with the people we study.

With this goal in mind, I spent hundreds of nights on the street and in
crackhouses observing dealers and addicts. I regularly tape-recorded
their conversations and life histories. Perhaps more important, I also
visited their families, attending parties and intimate reunions – from
Thanksgiving dinners to New Year’s Eve celebrations. I interviewed, and
in many cases befriended, the spouses, lovers, siblings, mothers,
grandmothers, and – when possible – the fathers and stepfathers of the
crack dealers featured in these pages. I also spent time in the larger
community interviewing local politicians and attending institutional
meetings.

The explosion of postmodernist theory in anthropology in the 1980s and
1990s has critiqued the myth of ethnographic authority, and has
denounced the hierarchical politics of representation that is inherent
to anthropological endeavors. The self-conscious reflexivity called for
by postmodernists was especially necessary and useful in my case: I was
an outsider from the larger society’s dominant class, ethnicity, and
gender categories who was attempting to study the experience of
inner-city poverty among Puerto Ricans. Once again, my concerns over
these complicated issues are conveyed in my contextualization and
editing of the tape-recorded crackhouse conversations. In fact, they are
reflected in the very structure of the book.

While editing thousands of pages of transcriptions I came to appreciate
the deconstructionist cliché of “culture as text.” I also became acutely
aware of the contradictory collaborative nature of my research strategy.
Although the literary quality and emotional force of this book depends
entirely on the articulate words of the main characters, I have always
had the final say in how – and if – they would be conveyed in the final
product.²⁰

Having raised the specter of poststructural theoretical critiques, I
must now express my dismay at the profoundly elitist tendencies of many
postmodernist approaches. Deconstructionist “politics” usually confine
themselves to hermetically sealed academic discourses on the “poetics”
of social interaction, or on clichés devoted to exploring the
relationships between self and other. Although postmodern ethnographers
often claim to be subversive, their contestation of authority focuses on
hyperliterate critiques of form through evocative vocabularies, playful
syntaxes, and polyphonous voices, rather than on engaging with tangible
daily struggles. Postmodern debates titillate alienated, suburbanized
intellectuals; they are completely out of touch with the urgent social
crises of the inner-city unemployed. Scholarly self-reflection often
degenerates into narcissistic celebrations of privilege. Most important,
however, radical deconstructionism makes it impossible to categorize or
prioritize experiences of injustice and oppression. This subtly denies
the very real personal experience of pain and suffering that is imposed
socially and structurally across race, class, gender, sexuality, and
other power-ridden categories.

Irrespective of the petty theoretical infighting of academic
intellectuals, the unique insights provided on the methodological level
by the participant—observation techniques of cultural anthropology are
further fraught with fundamental analytical and political tensions.
Historically, ethnographers have avoided tackling taboo subjects such as
personal violence, sexual abuse, addiction, alienation, and
self-destruction. Part of the problem is rooted in anthropology’s
functionalist paradigm, which imposes order and community on its
research subjects. Furthermore, the methodological logistics of
participation—observation requires researchers to be physically present
and personally involved. This encourages them to overlook negative
dynamics because they need to be empathetically engaged with the people
they study and must also have their permission to live with them. This
leads to an unconscious self-censorship that shapes the research
settings and subjects anthropologists choose to study. It is easier to
obtain the “informed consent” of the individuals one is writing about if
one is addressing relatively harmless, “quaint” subjects. Finally, on a
more personal level, extreme settings full of human tragedy, such as the
streets of East Harlem, are psychologically overwhelming and can be
physically dangerous.

Anthropology’s obsession with the “exotic other” has discouraged
anthropologists from studying their own societies and puts them at risk
of exoticizing what they find when they study close to home; hence, I
guarded myself consciously in this work from a voyeuristic celebration
of street dealers and inner-city street culture. The dearth of
ethnographic research on devastating urban poverty, especially in the
1970s and 1980s, is also related to the fear – addressed earlier – of
succumbing to a pornography of violence that reinforces popular racist
stereotypes. Most ethnographers offer sympathetic readings of the
culture or people they study. Indeed, this is enshrined in the
fundamental anthropological tenet of cultural relativism: Cultures are
never good or bad; they simply have an internal logic. In fact, however,
suffering is usually hideous; it is a solvent of human integrity, and
ethnographers never want to make the people they study look ugly. This
imperative to sanitize the vulnerable is particularly strong in the
United States, where survival-of-the-fittest, blame-the-victim theories
of individual action constitute a popular “common sense.” The result, as
I have noted, is that ethnographic presentations of social
marginalization are almost guaranteed to be misread by the general
public through a conservative, unforgiving lens. This has seriously
limited the ability of intellectuals to debate issues of poverty, ethnic
discrimination, and immigration. They are traumatized by the general
public’s obsession with personal worth and racial determinism.

In the United States there are few nuances in the popular understanding
of the relationships between social structural constraints and
individual failure. As a result, intellectuals have retreated from the
fray and have unreflexively latched on to positive representations of
the oppressed that those who have been poor, or lived among the poor,
know to be completely unrealistic. Indeed, I have noticed this when
presenting the main arguments of this book in academic settings.
Progressive and often cultural nationalist colleagues – who are almost
always middle class – often seem to be incapable of hearing the
arguments I am making. Instead, some react in outrage at superficial
images taken out of context. It is as if they are so terrified of the
potential for “negative connotations” that they feel compelled to
suppress complex, unpleasant messages before even listening to them.
Ironically, many of their criticisms in these public academic settings
embody central dimensions of precisely what I am trying to convey in
these pages about the individual experience of social structural
oppression.

Critiquing the Culture of Poverty

El Barrio and the Puerto Rican experience in the United States has
generated a disproportionally large literature. Puerto Ricans have been
called the “most researched but least understood people in the United
States.”²¹ The last major ethnographic work in El Barrio to receive
national attention was Oscar Lewis’s La Vida in the mid-1960s, and it
illustrates perfectly the problems inherent in ethnographic method and
in life history case studies more specifically. In fact, La Vida as well
as Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s 1965 report on the Negro family are
frequently cited as the studies that scared a generation of social
scientists away from studying the inner city.²² Lewis collected
thousands of pages of life-history accounts from one extended Puerto
Rican family in which most of the women were involved in prostitution.
The “culture of poverty” theory that he developed out of this – and
other – ethnographic data from Mexico, focused almost exclusively on the
pathology of the intergenerational transmission of destructive values
and behaviors among individuals within families. Lewis’s approach is
rooted in the Freudian culture and personality paradigm that dominated
anthropology in the 1950s. He fails to note how history, culture, and
political-economic structures constrain the lives of individuals. With
the advantage of thirty years of hindsight, it is easy to criticize
Lewis for his overly simplistic theoretical framework. Class
exploitation, racial discrimination, and, of course, sexist oppression,
as well as the subtleties of contextualized cultural meanings are not
addressed in Lewis’s psychologically reductionist descriptions of
desperately poor Puerto Rican immigrants. Nevertheless, despite its lack
of scholarly rigor, Lewis’s compellingly written book on daily life in
El Barrio and the shantytowns of Puerto Rico became a best seller in the
United States, where it resonated with Protestant work ethic notions of
rugged individualism and personal responsibility. Despite the author’s
progressive political intent and his personal sympathy for the socially
marginal, critics interpret his volume as confirming the deep-seated
contempt for the “unworthy” poor that permeates U.S. ideology.

It is no accident that it was an anthropologist who coined the concept
of the culture of poverty and focused data collection on individual
behavior. The simple practical fact of the discipline’s methodology –
participant—observation – gives it access to documenting individual
actions in minute detail. Structures of power and history cannot be
touched or talked to. Specifically, in the New York City Puerto Rican
context, the self-destructive daily life of those who are surviving on
the street needs to be contextualized in the particular history of the
hostile race relations and structural economic dislocation they have
faced. Embroiled in what seemed like a whirlpool of suffering during my
ethnographic research, it was often hard for me to see the larger
relationships structuring the jumble of human interaction all around me.
In the heat of daily life on the streets of El Barrio I often
experienced a confusing anger with the victims, the victimizers, and the
wealthy industrialized society that generates such an unnecessarily
large toll of human suffering. For example, when confronted with a
pregnant friend frantically smoking crack – and possibly condemning her
future baby to a life of shattered emotions and dulled brain cells – it
did no good for me to remember the history of her people’s colonial
oppression and humiliation, or to contextualize her position in New
York’s changing economy. Living in the inferno of what the United States
calls its “underclass,” I, like my neighbors around me and like the
pregnant crack addicts themselves, often blamed the victim.

Political economy analysis is not a panacea to compensate for
individualistic, racist, or otherwise judgmental interpretations of
social marginalization. In fact, a focus on structures often obscures
the fact that humans are active agents of their own history, rather than
passive victims. Ethnographic method allows the “pawns” of larger
structural forces to emerge as real human beings who shape their own
futures. Nevertheless, I often caught myself falling back on a rigidly
structuralist perspective in order to avoid the painful details of how
real people hurt themselves and their loved ones in their struggle for
survival in daily life. Again, this analytical and political problem can
be understood within the context of the theoretical debate over
structure versus agency, that is, the relationship between individual
responsibility and social structural constraints. The insights from
cultural production theory – specifically, the notion that street
culture’s resistance to social marginalization is the contradictory key
to its destructive impetus – is useful to avoid reductionist
structuralist interpretations. Through cultural practices of opposition,
individuals shape the oppression that larger forces impose upon them.²³

The difficulty of relating individual action to political economy,
combined with the personally and politically motivated timidity of
ethnographers in the United States through the 1970s and 1980s have
obfuscated our understanding of the mechanisms and the experiences of
oppression. I cannot resolve the structure-versus-agency debate; nor can
I confidently assuage my own righteous fear that hostile readers will
misconstrue my ethnography as “giving the poor a bad name.”
Nevertheless, I feel it imperative from a personal and ethical
perspective, as well as from an analytic and theoretical one, to expose
the horrors I witnessed among the people I befriended, without censoring
even the goriest details.²⁴ The depth and overwhelming pain and terror
of the experience of poverty and racism in the United States needs to be
talked about openly and confronted squarely, even if that makes us
uncomfortable. I have documented a range of strategies that the urban
poor devise to escape or circumvent the structures of segregation and
marginalization that entrap them, including those strategies that result
in self-inflicted suffering. I have written this in the hope that
“anthropological writing can be a site of resistance,” and with the
conviction that social scientists should, and can, “face power.”²⁵ At
the same time, as already noted, I continue to worry about the political
implications of exposing the minute details of the lives of the poor and
powerless to the general public. Under an ethnographic microscope
everyone has warts and anyone can be made to look like a monster.
Furthermore, as the anthropologist Laura Nader stated succinctly in the
early 1970s, “Don’t study the poor and powerless because everything you
say about them will be used against them.”²⁶ I do not know if it is
possible for me to present the story of my three and a half years of
residence in El Barrio without falling prey to a pornography of
violence, or a racist voyeurism – ultimately the problem and the
responsibility is also in the eyes of the beholder.

1 VIOLATING APARTHEID IN THE UNITED STATES

We love listening to you talk. It makes us laugh. You sound just like a
television advertisement.

giggling eight-year-old

My research on the streets of Spanish Harlem almost came to a disastrous
end just after the halfway point when I inadvertently “disrespected”
Ray, the man who owned the crackhouses where I spent much of my time
between 1985 and 1990. It was just after midnight, and Ray was visiting
his most profitable sales point to make sure the manager of the
late-night shift had opened punctually. Business was booming and the
heavyset, thirty-two-year-old Puerto Rican crack entrepreneur was
surrounded by his coterie of employees, friends, and wanna-be
acquaintances – all eager for his attention. We were on the corner of
110th Street by the entrance to the Lexington Avenue subway station
right in front the abandoned four-story tenement building occupied by
Ray’s dealers. He had camouflaged the ground floor as an after-hours
bootleg social club and pool hall. Ray and many of his employees had
grown up in this very tenement before its Italian owner burned it down
to collect its insurance value. Their corner has long been nicknamed “La
Farmacia” because of the unique diversity of psychoactive substances
available: from standard products like heroin, Valium, powder cocaine,
and crack to more recherché, offbeat items like mescaline and angel
dust.¹

Learning Street Smarts

In retrospect I wince at my lack of street smarts for accidentally
humiliating the man who was crucial not only to my continued access to
the crack scene, but also to my physical security. Perhaps, despite my
two and a half years of crackhouse experience at that point, I was
justified in being temporarily seduced by the night’s friendly aura. Ray
was leaning on the front bumper of his gold Mercedes smiling and
chatting – happy with life. His followers and employees were also happy
because Ray had just treated us all to a round of beers and had promised
to order some lobster takeout from the lone surviving hole-in-the-wall
Chinese restaurant down the block. We all loved it when Ray was in one
of his good moods; it made the man capable of unpredictable largesse,
which contrasted dramatically with his usual churlishness. The night was
young, and comfortably warm. The emaciated junkies, crackheads, and
intravenous coke freaks who gather on La Farmacia’s corner twenty-four
hours a day, seven days a week, had retreated respectfully across the
street, occasionally eyeing our closely knit group enviously. We
controlled the space.

Perhaps it was also only normal for me to want to bask in my
increasingly close and privileged relationship with the “main man.”
Earlier that week Ray had confided to me the intimate details of his
stickup artist past. According to his account, he had specialized in
holding up drug spots until he was ambushed by a hidden lookout while
fleeing with $14,000 from a high-volume heroin outlet. It ended with a
rooftop shoot-out and a four-and-a-half-year prison sentence for him.
His sister posted bail following his arrest by recovering the $14,000
wad of bills that he had managed to stuff into a half-empty can of
roofing tar just before his arrest.

Perhaps my guard was also down because Ray had just made a point, in
front of everyone, of buying me a bottle of Heineken’s instead of the
fifteen-cents-cheaper can of Budweiser that everyone else had received.
He had said loudly and clearly for everyone to hear, “Felipe, you drink
Heineken’s don’t tcha’?” I felt even more privileged when I saw that he
had purchased a Heineken for himself as well, as if to distinguish us
from the run-of-the-mill street drinkers by our distinctively green
imported bottles.

Surrounded by all this good feeling and security, I thought it might be
a good moment to share my minor media coup from earlier that day: a
photograph of me on page 4 of the New York Post standing next to Phil
Donahue following a prime-time television debate on violent crime in
East Harlem.² I hoped this would impress Ray and his entourage, raising
my credibility as a “real professor,” capable of accessing the
mainstream world of white-dominated daytime television. I was eager to
legitimize my presence because there were still a few people in Ray’s
network who suspected that I was an imposter – nothing more than a
fast-talking closet drug addict, or a pervert – pretending to be a
“stuck-up professor.” Worse yet, my white skin and outsider class
background kept some people convinced to the very end of my residence in
the neighborhood that I was really a narcotics agent on a long-term
undercover assignment.

I noticed Ray stiffen uncharacteristically as I proudly pushed the
newspaper into his hands – but it was too late to stop. I had already
called out loudly for everyone to hear “Yo! Big Ray! Check out this
picture of me in the papers!” A half-dozen of the voices surrounding the
large man were already urging him to read the caption on the photo.
There was an eager silence as he fumbled awkwardly with the newspaper,
not quite knowing how to hold the pages open without having them flap
loudly in the gentle breeze. I tried to help by pointing directly to the
lines where the caption began. Flustered, he feigned indifference and
tried to throw the newspaper into the gutter, but the voices of his
admirers were calling out aggressively now for him to read the blurb
under my picture. “Come on Ray! What’s the matter? What’s it say? Read
it! Read it!” Unable to save face, he desperately angled the paper to
get a fuller beam from the streetlight above us, and screwed his face
into an expression of intense concentration. I suddenly realized what
the problem was: Ray did not know how to read.

Unfortunately, he tried. He painfully stumbled through the entire
caption – ironically entitled “The Calm After the Storm” – his face
contorted into an expression akin to that of a dyslexic second-grader
who has been singled out for ridicule by his teacher. The eager silence
of his followers was broken by embarrassed, muffled giggles. Ray’s
long-buried and overcompensated childhood wound of institutional failure
had burst open. He looked up; regained his deadpan street scowl, threw
down the paper, and screamed, “Fuck you Felipe! I don’t care about this
shit! Get out of here! All of you’s!” He then somewhat clumsily pushed
his oversized body into his Mercedes, revved the motor, and screeched
his tires as he sped away from the corner impervious to the red light,
or to the Auschwitz-like survivors on La Farmacia’s far curb who dodged
his flying wheels and continued to hawk Valium, adulterated heroin,
cocaine, and animal tranquilizers.³

Primo, my closest friend on the streets – the central character of this
book and the manager of Ray’s other crackhouse, known as the “Game
Room,” located in a bogus video arcade two doors down from the
rat-infested tenement where I lived with my wife and infant child –
turned to me with a worried expression, “Yo, Felipe! You dissed the fat
nigga’.” Someone else picked the crumpled newspaper out of the gutter
and started to read the offending article and to comment on the quality
of the photograph. Most of the other hangers-on simply lost interest,
disappointed that there would be no more freebees from the head drug
dealer that night. They straggled back inside the crackhouse to listen
to rap music, play pool, and watch anxious addicts pour through the
doors clutching handfuls of dollar bills.

The Parameters of Violence, Power, and Generosity

Ray recovered his dignity by redefining his anger as a legitimate
concern over the potential breach of security that my exposure in the
press represented. The next time I ran into him as he was delivering a
fresh shipment of crack vials and picking up the midshift’s sales at the
Game Room next to my house, he pulled me aside gruffly, speaking in a
loud voice for all to hear:

Felipe, let me tell you something, people who get people busted – even
if it’s by mistake – sometimes get found in the garbage with their heart
ripped out and their bodies chopped up into little pieces . . . or else
maybe they just get their fingers stuck in electrical sockets. You
understand what I’m saying?

He then hurried out to his double-parked Lincoln Continental with
black-tinted windows, stumbling clumsily over a curled linoleum fragment
in the Game Room entrance. To my dismay, his teenage girlfriend, who was
waiting impatiently chewing gum in her powerful lover’s car, chose this
moment to look up from her scowl and eyeball me intensely. Terrified
lest Ray think that on top of everything else I was flirting with his
new girlfriend, I stared at the ground and lamely hung my head.

Primo was worried. He had known Ray all his life. As a child, Ray, who
is ten years older than Primo, had been the leader of two loosely knit
youth gangs that Primo and most of Ray’s other employers had been
involved with in their early teens: the TCC (The Cheeba [marijuana]
Crew)⁴ and la Mafia Boba (the Sly Mafia).⁵ He had taught Primo how to
steal car radios and burglarize downtown businesses. I tried to laugh
off Ray’s warning and recover some of my flustered dignity by cracking
one of the misogynist jokes they frequently used to dismiss their boss’s
nasty mood swings: “The fat yak is on the rag. He’ll get over it. Chill
out man.” But Primo shook his head somewhat apologetically; he pulled me
out of the Game Room onto the curb to tell me in a hushed voice, that I
should make myself scarce around the Game Room for the next few weeks.
“You don’t understand Felipe, that nigga’ is crazy. He’s respected on
the streets. People know about him. He was wild when he was a kid. He’s
got juice.” When I interrupted Primo somewhat confrontationally in a
loud voice with “You mean you’re scared of Ray?” Primo responded with
what at that stage in our friendship was still a rare admission of
vulnerability,

Hell yeah! I know that nigga’ since I was little. He was weird man. Used
to think he would rape me or something. Because he’s a big nigga’, and
I’m a little guy back then. I’m only fifteen, boy. And he used to talk
crazy shit like, “One of these days I’m gonna get that ass.” And I used
to wonder if that was true. I never used to dare to be alone with him.

To press his point Primo camouflaged his memories of childhood terror by
proceeding casually with an account of how Ray and his best childhood
friend, Luis, once raped an old male transient in the empty lot next to
the Game Room. I had turned my tape recorder off, unconsciously
enforcing the taboo on public discussions of rape. Caesar, however,
Primo’s best friend who was working as lookout at the Game Room, joined
us outside and insisted I document the tale. He mistook my expression of
shock to be a sign of fear that someone passing by on the street might
be suspicious or angry at seeing a “white boy” holding out a tape
recorder to two Puerto Rican men.

Caesar: Take the recorder out, ain’t no one going to do nothing to you
here Felipe.

Primo: Yeah! They fucked some dirty old man bum in the butt. They
followed him in the yard over there [pointing to the garbage strewn
rubble to our right].

Caesar: Yeah! Yeah!

Primo: Ray and Luis takes turns boning the man in the ass right over
there [walking halfway into the lot to mark the spot].

Caesar: Real crazy. Yeah! Ray’s a fuckin’ pig; Ray’s a wild
motherfucker. He’s got juice. You understand Felipe? Juice! . . . On the
street that means respect.

Ignoring Caesar’s outburst, Primo proceeded to explain how Ray at that
very moment was debating whether or not to have Luis – his fellow
rapist, childhood friend, and employee – killed rather than having to
spend money on legal fees following Luis’s recent arrest while
delivering a bundle⁶ of crack to the Game Room crackhouse.
Coincidentally, the cost of a murder contract was the same as the fee
demanded by Luis’s lawyer: $3,000. Even though Luis – who was also
Primo’s first cousin – had grown up as Ray’s best friend, he was no
longer trusted because of his crack habit. He hustled money compulsively
from everyone around him, and, worse yet, he had a reputation as a
chiota, a stool pigeon. It was rumored that several years earlier he had
broken down under police interrogation following an arrest for burglary
and reported his own godmother’s husband for fencing stolen objects.

These assertions and rumors of Ray’s ruthlessness and even cruelty were
an integral part of his effectiveness at running his network of
crackhouses smoothly. Regular displays of violence are essential for
preventing rip-offs by colleagues, customers, and professional holdup
artists. Indeed, upward mobility in the underground economy of the
street-dealing world requires a systematic and effective use of violence
against one’s colleagues, one’s neighbors, and, to a certain extent,
against oneself. Behavior that appears irrationally violent, “barbaric,”
and ultimately self-destructive to the outsider, can be reinterpreted
according to the logic of the underground economy as judicious public
relations and long-term investment in one’s “human capital
development.”⁷ Primo and Caesar explained this to me in less academic
terms early on in my relationship to them.

Primo: It’s not good to be too sweet sometimes to people, man, because
they’re just gonna take advantage of you. You could be a nice and sweet
person in real life but you gotta have a little meanness in you and play
street. Like, “Get the fuck outta my face.” Or “I don’t give a fuck.”
That way you don’t let nobody fuck with you later.

Caesar: Yeah, like me. People think that I’m wild.

Primo: Out here, you gotta be a little wild in the streets.

Caesar: You’ve got to be a little wild for this neighborhood, Felipe.
[gunshots] What did I tell you?

You can’t be allowing people to push you around, then people think that
you’re a punk and shit like that. And that’s the whole point: making
people think you’re cool so that nobody bothers you.

You don’t really want to be a bully or violent or nothing. But you can’t
let people push you around, because when the other guys see that, they
want to do the same thing too. You get that reputation, like, “That
nigga’s soft.”

And there’s a way of not having really big fights or nothing, but having
the rep – like “That dude’s cool; don’t mess with him” – without even
having to hit nobody.

And then there’s the other way of just total violence.

Fully aware of the potential consequences of Ray’s public warning in
front of the crackhouse, I gave him a wide berth. Primo and his lookout
Caesar cooperated fully to protect me. We worked out a modus vivendi so
that I could continue visiting them at the Game Room during working
hours without risking a confrontation with Ray. Primo “hired” one of the
addicts on the corner to warn with a whistle whenever he saw Ray’s car
approaching so that I could slip out of the crackhouse to the safety of
my apartment building two doors down.

After several weeks of maintaining this cautious low profile at the Game
Room, I was still not rehabilitated. Primo warned me that Ray had
foreboding dreams about me:

Ray dreamt you was some kind of agent – like an FBI or CIA agent – no it
was more like you was from Mars or something, that you was sent here to
spy on us.

Everyone took this symbolic warning seriously because dreams have a
powerful significance in Puerto Rican culture. Meshed with the
Afro-Caribbean religious practices of Santería, their import may even be
greater in the hybrid “Nuyorican culture” of second- and
third-generation New York–born Puerto Ricans in the inner city.

My camouflaged visits to the crackhouse continued for almost three more
months until finally one night Ray arrived on foot instead of by car,
surprising us all in the midst of an uproarious conversation. Primo and
I were trying to calm the lookout, Caesar, who had drunk too much rum
and coincidentally was venting his resentment of Ray’s authoritarianism.
Caesar, who was nicknamed “C-Zone” because of the frequency of his drug
and alcohol binges, had to be watched closely and taken seriously
because of his propensity for gratuitous violence. In our attempts to
quiet Caesar down, we had been ineffectively warning him of Ray’s rules
against obstreperous behavior in his crackhouses.

Caesar: Ray’s been riffin’ [complaining]? He’s gonna come in and say I’m
not allowed no more to associate?

Primo: Don’t worry. Just don’t make no noises. Don’t worry about it.

Caesar: I’ll tell you about Ray. He’s the fattest, laziest, son of a
bitch in the fuckin’ East. ’Cause he’s a drink-Budweiser,
be-fatmotherfucker. [pausing to vomit in the trash can at the entrance]
He’s one of those motherfuckers that whenever the fuck, he feel good,
everybody else gotta watch out.

He don’t wanta let anybody make money. Well, I teach that nigga’ . . .
Ah’ kill that fat-assed Michelin man. The only reason I don’t kill that
fat son of a bitch is because I’m going to fuck him up.

[facing me] You recording this shit, Felipe? Fuck you man!

[turning back to Primo] You talking a lotta shit too, Primo, because
you’re scared of that fat motherfucker. But ah’ kill him. Ah’ kill that
fat motherfucker. I kill him. . . . He’s just a black, ugly nigga’, a
black-a-claus, a fat yak.

[spinning back to me again] I’m scared if I’m sober. I wouldn’t talk
this shit . . . [pointing to the tape recorder] but since I drunk, I
kill that fat son of a bitch.

Understand? [screaming directly into the microphone] Ah’ kill that
motherfucker!

Primo: [changing his tone somewhat aggressively] You wouldn’t do shit.

Caesar: [in an almost sober tone] I would too. I would even murder
someone. That shit is like wild. Ah’m’a nut case man. What’s the matter?
You never thought about that shit, man?

Primo: You must be a simpleton to do something like that.

Caesar: Just think! I should become a wild murderer, man.

Primo: You believe that shit, Philippe?

Philippe: Yes. I believe it. I just don’t want to be around when he does
the killing.

Right at this point, just as we were on the verge of coaxing Caesar into
laughing to defuse his mounting rage, Ray stepped into the Game Room
unannounced. My racing adrenaline immediately subsided when Ray merely
smiled at me and cracked an insignificant, hostile joke about how skinny
I looked and how awkwardly my pants fit. We all laughed with relief –
even Caesar, who had suddenly become as subdued and bewildered as me.

Over the next few months my relationship with Ray gradually improved
until by the end of a year I had achieved the same levels of confidence
with the man that I had originally enjoyed prior to my gaffe in exposing
his illiteracy. I remember with relief when he began greeting me, once
again, with his usual question, “How’s that book comin’ Felipe? Finished
yet?” thereby communicating to everyone within earshot that I had his
formal permission to be prying into his personal business.

Ray’s followers did not remain loyal to him solely out of fear and
violence. Some of the older members of his network genuinely liked him.
He was capable of reciprocating friendship. For example, Candy, an old
childhood friend of his and one of only two women who sold for him
during the years I frequented his crackhouses, described him
affectionately:

He was like a Gumby Bear as a kid. He was always a nice kid.

[pausing thoughtfully] He was wild; but not wild in the sense for you to
hate him.

We were like brothers and sisters. He always helped me out. And don’t
get me wrong, when he gave me money he always did it out of the goodness
of his own heart.

The Barriers of Cultural Capital

Whether Ray was a Gumby Bear, a violent pervert, or an omnipotent street
don “with juice,” my long-term relationship with the man ultimately
uncovered a vulnerability that he kept hidden in his street persona. In
his private conversations with me over his aspirations for the future,
he often seemed naive or even learning-disabled. He was completely
incapable of fathoming the intricate rules and regulations of legal
society despite his brilliant success at directing a retail network for
crack distribution. To borrow the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu’s
analytical category, Ray lacked the “cultural capital” necessary to
succeed in the middle-class – or even the working-class – world.
Ironically, by the time I left New York in August 1991, my relationship
to Ray became problematic once again, but this time because he trusted
me too much. He expected me to serve as his cultural broker to the
outside world, ultimately demanding that I help him launder his money.
It began with a harmless phone call: “Felipe, do you know how I can get
a picture I.D.?”

Despite all his cars, and the wads of cash padding his pockets, Ray did
not even have a driver’s license or any other form of legal
identification. He was helpless outside the cocoon of El Barrio’s
streets. He had no concept of how to deal with bureaucracies. New York
City’s Department of Motor Vehicles rejected the photocopy of his birth
certificate when he applied for a license, insisting that he needed a
picture I.D. I explained to him what a passport was, and how to obtain
one. Soon he was asking me to accompany him through all the bureaucratic
hoops that kept him from being able to operate as a legal entrepreneur.
He wanted me to come with him to police auctions to review the lists of
tax-defaulted and drug-bust confiscated buildings that the City of New
York sponsors several times a year. His dream was to buy an abandoned
building, renovate it, and establish a legal business. Careful not to
offend the man in any way, I always concocted excuses to avoid
unwittingly becoming a facilitator to his money-laundering schemes,
which inevitably failed miserably as soon as he encountered
institutionalized bureaucracies or any kind of formal paperwork.

The first legal business Ray attempted to establish was a Laundromat. He
was unable to wade through the bureaucratic maze of permits, however,
and gave up after a few weeks. He then bought the lease on a bodega, a
corner grocery store, and thought he had obtained the rights to its
secondhand liquor license and health permit, but ran afoul of the
bureaucracy once again and abandoned the project. His most successful
foray into the legal economy was his purchase of the lease on a former
garment factory a few blocks uptown from the Game Room. He converted it
into a “legitimate” social club, renting the space out for parties and
selling beer without a liquor license. He was proud of this new
operation and considered it legal because he kept it rigorously “clean.”
He expressly forbade drugs from being sold on the premises. New York
City closed the social club down in 1992, following the implementation
of the Peoples with Disabilities Act, as it was not wheelchair
accessible.

Confronting Race, Class, and the Police

Ray represented only one of the many complex personal relationships and
ethical contradictions I had to balance while living in the crack-dealer
scene. Before I even was able to establish my first relationship with a
crack dealer I had to confront the overwhelming reality of racial and
class-based apartheid in America. When I first moved into my irregularly
heated tenement opposite a massive conglomeration of high-rise,
subsidized housing projects sheltering more than five thousand
families,⁸ I was painfully aware of my outsider status whenever I
initially attempted to access any street-dealing scenes. The first time
I walked home from the subway station I went down a side street that
happened to be a heroin “copping corner” where a half dozen different
“companies” competed with each other to sell ten-dollar glassine bags
with official, ink-stamped logos. I was greeted by a hail of whistles
and echoing shouts of ”bajando [coming down]” – the coded alarms that
lookouts posted on dealing corners use to announce the approach of a
potential undercover agent to the “pitchers” who make the actual
hand-to-hand sales. Everyone began scattering in front of me as if I had
the plague; all of a sudden the block was desolate. I felt as if I was
infested with vermin, as if my white skin signaled the terminal stage of
some kind of contagious disease sowing havoc in its path. On this
occasion my feelings were hurt; I had been feeling lonely and had walked
a block out of my way to reach this particularly busy corner precisely
because of the exciting bustle of activity surrounding it. In my hopeful
naiveté I had thought that the eager knots of pedestrians coming and
going signaled the location of one of the street fairs that often grace
East Harlem streets like a splash of charm in springtime – relics from a
small-town past.

In the long run it was not my conspicuous profile as a potential
undercover narcotics agent that became my biggest obstacle to accessing
crackhouses and copping corners but, rather, my white drug addict
profile. I was almost never harassed by the street sellers; at worst,
they simply fled from me or ignored me. On the other hand, I was
repeatedly stopped, searched, cursed, and humiliated by New York City
police officers on the beat. From their perspective there was no reason
for a white boy to be in the neighborhood unless he was an undercover
cop or a drug addict, and because I am skinny they instantly assumed the
latter. Only one time was I able successfully to impersonate a narcotics
officer when stopped by angry police officers. I was in a corner grocery
store-cum-numbers joint on my block, buying an ice-cream sandwich and a
beer with one of Primo’s part-time crack dealer lookouts, when a
heavyset white undercover police officer pushed me across the ice-cream
counter, spreading my legs and poking me around the groin. As he came
dangerously close to the bulge in my right pocket, I hissed in his ear,
“It’s a tape recorder.” He snapped backward, releasing his left hand’s
grip on my neck, whispering a barely audible “Sorry.” Apparently he
thought he had inadvertently intercepted an undercover officer from
another unit because before I could get a close look at his face he had
exited. Meanwhile the marijuana sellers stationed in front of the
bodega, observing that the undercover had been rough with me when he
searched through my pants, suddenly felt safe and relieved, confident
that I was a white drug addict rather than an undercover; and one of
them – the tallest and burliest with flashing eyes that suggested recent
ingestion of angel dust – promptly came barreling through the door to
mug everyone waiting in line at the cash register.

Many of my approximately bimonthly encounters with the police did not
end so smoothly. My first encounter with the police was my worst. It was
2:00 a.m. and I was on a notorious crack-copping corner three blocks
from where I lived, chatting with a street dealer who was the former
boyfriend of one of my neighbors. He had told me to wait with him
because his shift had just ended and as soon as the night manager
collected the receipts he was going “to go party” and he wanted me to
accompany him. I was eager to please him; happy that I had finally found
an entrée into this new and particularly active crack scene. He was
already introducing me to his colleagues and competitors as a long lost
friend and neighbor of his “ex-girl,” thereby finally dispelling their
conviction that I was a police officer. All of a sudden a patrol car
flashed its lights, tooted its siren, and screeched to a halt next to
us. To my surprise the officers called out to me and not to my
crack-dealing acquaintance: “Hey, white boy! Come ovah’ hea’h.” For the
next fifteen minutes I found myself shouted at, cursed, and generally
humiliated in front of a growing crowd of crack dealer/addict
spectators. My mistake that night was to try to tell the police officers
the truth when they asked me, “What the hell you doin’ hea’h?” When they
heard me explain, in what I thought was a polite voice, that I was an
anthropologist studying poverty and marginalization, the largest of the
two officers in the car exploded:

What kind of a fuckin’ moron do you think I am. You think I don’t know
what you’re doin’? You think I’m stupid? You’re babbling, you fuckin’
drug addict. You’re dirty white scum! Go buy your drugs in a white
neighborhood! If you don’t get the hell out of here right now,
motherfucka’, you’re gonna hafta repeat your story in the precinct. You
want me to take you in? Hunh? . . . Hunh? Answer me motherfucka’!

After ineffectual protests that merely prompted further outrage, I was
reduced to staring at the ground, mumbling “Yes sir” and shuffling
obediently to the bus stop to take the next transportation downtown.
Behind me I heard: “If I see you around here later, white boy, ah’m’a’
take you in!”⁹

I eventually learned how to act appropriately. By my second year on the
street my adrenaline would no longer pump in total panic when police
officers pushed me against a wall and made me stand spread-eagled to be
patted down for weapons and drugs. My accent proved to be a serious
problem in these encounters because patrol officers in East Harlem are
almost always white males from working-class backgrounds with heavy
Irish- or Italian-American dictions. In contrast to the Puerto Rican and
African-American children on my block, who used to marvel at what they
called my “television advertisement voice,” the police officers assumed
I was making fun of them, or putting on airs when I spoke politely to
them in complete sentences. I learned that my only hope was to shorten
my encounters with the patrol officers by staring at the ground, rapidly
handing over my driver’s license, and saying “yes-sir-officer” or
“no-sir-officer” in minimalist, factual phrases. When I tried to sound
sincere, friendly – or even polite – I risked offending them.

Conversely, on the occasions when the police tried to be polite to me
their actions only reinforced my sense of violating hidden apartheid
laws. On one occasion a squad car overtook me as I was riding my
bicycle, to make sure I was not lost or insane: “You know where ya’
going? This is Harlem!” Another time as I was sitting on my stoop at
sunset to admire the spectacular colors that only New York City’s summer
smog can produce, a patrolman on the beat asked me, “What’re you doing
here?” I quickly showed him my driver’s license with my address to prove
I had a right to be loitering in public. He laughed incredulously. “You
mean to tell me you live here! What’sa’ matter with you?” I explained
apologetically that the rent was inexpensive. Trying to be helpful, he
suggested I look for cheap rent in Queens, a multiethnic, working-class
borough of mixed ethnicity near New York City’s airports.

Racism and the Culture of Terror

It is not merely the police who enforce inner-city apartheid in the
United States but also a racist “common sense” that persuades whites,
and middle-class outsiders of all colors, that it is too dangerous for
them to venture into poor African-American or Latino neighborhoods. For
example, when I moved to East Harlem, virtually all of my friends,
whether white, black, or Latino/a, berated me for being crazy and
irresponsible. Those who still visited me would often phone me in
advance to make sure I would meet them downstairs as they descended from
their taxis. Indeed, most people still consider me crazy and
irresponsible for having “forced” my wife and infant son to live for
three and a half years in an East Harlem tenement. When we left the
neighborhood in mid-1990, several of my friends congratulated us, and
all of them breathed a sigh of relief.¹⁰

Most people in the United States are somehow convinced that they would
be ripped limb from limb by savagely enraged local residents if they
were to set foot in Harlem. While everyday danger is certainly real in
El Barrio, the vast majority of the 110,599 people – 51 percent
Latino/Puerto Rican, 39 percent African-American, and 10 percent “other”
– who lived in the neighborhood, according to the 1990 Census, are not
mugged with any regularity – if ever. Ironically, the few whites
residing in the neighborhood are probably safer than their
African-American and Puerto Rican neighbors because most would-be
muggers assume whites are either police officers or drug addicts – or
both – and hesitate before assaulting them. Primo’s primary lookout at
the Game Room crackhouse, Caesar, was the first person to explain this
to me:

Felipe, people think you’re a fed [federal agent] if anything. But
that’s good; it makes them stay away from you.

Think about it: If you was selling shit on the street and you see a
white guy coming by, you wouldn’t really want to bother with him.

But then again, some people also think, “he’s white and he’s in the
neighborhood, so he must be crazy.” If they didn’t, they’d just come up
to you and crack you in the face and take your wallet.

You’re lucky. Look at me, I’m Puerto Rican. If I was to walk into
Bensonhurst,¹¹ they would figure, “we could beat the shit out of this
dude.” They might think that I got to be crazy or something but they
will test me or kick my ass.

During all the years I spent on the streets of El Barrio walking around
at all hours of the night, I was mugged only once – and that was at 2:00
a.m. in a store where everyone else was also robbed at the same time. My
wife, who is Costa Rican, was never mugged and she circulated freely
throughout the neighborhood – although she was cautious after dark.
During the span of these same years, at least a half-dozen of our
friends living downtown in safer neighborhoods were mugged. I do not
mean to overstate the safety of El Barrio; my seventy-year-old Filipino
landlord was mugged in the hallway of our apartment building in broad
daylight while walking out of his ground-floor apartment. As I noted in
the Introduction, everyone is conscious of the real possibility of
assault. Even the toughest of the drug dealers in Ray’s network would
ask a friend to accompany them for protection when they were carrying
money or drugs after dark.

Violence cannot be reduced to its statistical expression, which would
show that most murders and beatings in any given inner-city neighborhood
remain confined to a small subgroup of individuals who are directly
involved in substance abuse and the underground economy, or who are
obviously vulnerable, such as frail, elderly persons. Street culture’s
violence pervades daily life in El Barrio and shapes mainstream
society’s perception of the ghetto in a manner completely
disproportionate to its objective danger. Part of the reason is that
violent incidents, even when they do not physically threaten bystanders,
are highly visible and traumatic. For example, during my first thirteen
months of residence in El Barrio I witnessed a slew of violent
incidents:

-   A deadly shotgun shooting outside my apartment window of a
    drug-dealing woman (who also happened to be the mother of a
    three-year-old child).
-   A bombing and a machine-gunning of a numbers joint by rival factions
    of the local Mafia – once again, within view of my window.¹²
-   A shoot-out and police car chase in front of a pizza parlor where I
    happened to be eating a snack with my wife.
-   The aftermath of the fire-bombing of a heroin house by an unpaid
    supplier around the block from where I lived.
-   A half-dozen screaming, clothes-ripping fights.

None of these particular incidents came close to threatening me
physically, but their traumatic nature and prominent public visibility
contributed to a sense of an omnipresent threatening reality that
extended far beyond the statistical possibility of becoming a victim.¹³
To analyze the very different contexts of South America and Nazi
Germany, anthropologist Michael Taussig has coined the term “culture of
terror” to convey the dominating effect of widespread violence on a
vulnerable society.¹⁴ In contemporary Spanish Harlem one of the
consequences of the “culture of terror” dynamic is to silence the
peaceful majority of the population who reside in the neighborhood. They
isolate themselves from the community and grow to hate those who
participate in street culture – sometimes internalizing racist
stereotypes in the process. A profound ideological dynamic mandates
distrust of one’s neighbors.¹⁵ Conversely, mainstream society
unconsciously uses the images of a culture of terror to dehumanize the
victims and perpetrators and to justify its unwillingness to confront
segregation, economic marginalization, and public sector breakdown.

I had a professional and personal imperative to deny or “normalize” the
culture of terror during the years I lived in El Barrio. Many local
residents employ this strategy. They readjust their daily routines to
accommodate the shock of everyday brutality in order to maintain their
own sense of sanity and safety. To be successful in my street
ethnography, I had to be relaxed and enjoy myself on the street. I had
to feel comfortable while hanging out surrounded by friends and basking
in relaxed conversation. This is not difficult during daylight hours or
even during the early evening, when El Barrio streets often feel warm
and appealing. Children are running every which way playing tag and
squealing with delight; one’s neighbors are out strolling and often
pause to strike up a friendly conversation; a loudspeaker pulses salsa
music from a tenth-story housing project window so that everyone on the
street below can step in tune for free. In short, there is a sense of
community in the neighborhood despite the violence. In fact, most
residents even know the nicknames of their more hostile or suspicious
neighbors.

Having grown up in Manhattan’s Silk Stocking district just seven blocks
downtown from El Barrio’s southern border delineated by East 96th
Street, I always appreciated the shared sense of public space that
echoes through Spanish Harlem’s streets on warm sunny days. In the safe
building where I grew up downtown, neighbors do not have nicknames, and
when one shares the elevator with them, they usually do not even say
hello or nod an acknowledgment of existence.¹⁶ I enjoyed the illusion of
friendly public space that the working-class majority in El Barrio are
often able to project during daylight hours. It was the dealers
themselves who frequently shattered my sense of optimism and insisted
that I respect the violent minority who really controlled the streets
when push came to shove. In one particular instance toward the end of my
residence I had commented to Caesar in the Game Room that the
neighborhood felt safe. His outraged comical response was particularly
interesting in that it traced the full ambiguous cycle of the culture of
terror by demonstrating the instrumental brutality of the people who
were supposed to be protecting us. Both the criminals and the police
play by the rules of the culture of terror:

Caesar: Yo Pops [waving Primo over], listen to this. [turning to me]
Felipe thinks the block is chill.

Well let me tell you Felipe, what happened earlier today, because all
day it was wild on this block. I didn’t even have to watch HBO today. I
just had to look out the window and I had a full array of murder and
beat down and everything. There was even a fire. I saw an assortment of
all kinds of crap out there.

It all started when two crackheads – an older man and a black dude –
yoked this girl. They beat her down and took her jewelry. Punched her in
the eye; just cold bashed her. She was screaming and the old guy kicked
her some more. It was in the daytime like around two.

Then the cops came and caught the muggers and beat them down. There was
at least twenty cops stomping out them two niggas because they resisted.

And they should never have attempted that shit because they got the
beat-down of their lives. The cops had a circus with the black kid’s
face. Hell yeah! They were trying to kill that kid. That’s why they
needed two ambulances.

Homeboy got hurt! Both of them was in stretchers bleeding hard. It
wasn’t even a body there. It was just a blob of blood that was left
over. The cops had pleasure in doing it.

It was not a normal beat-down like: throw-you-up-on-a-car extra hard.
I’m talking about “take your turn, buddy” [grinning]; hold ‘em right
here [punching] and BOOM and BOOM. And this guy goes BOOM [pretending to
fall unconscious].

Even ‘Buela [grandma] saw it from the window next to me. And she was
yelling and someone else was yelling, “Abuse! Abuse! Police brutality!”

If I woulda had a little video camera I woulda sent it to Al Sharpton.¹⁷
Because it was a black dude that they did that beat-down to. Coulda
caused a major political scandal and Sharpton woulda been right up here
with that wack perm he’s got.

Philippe: How does it make you feel to see the cops doing that?

Caesar: I was feeling really sorry for myself because I was thinking
about getting hit. I could feel the pain they was feeling ’Cause I know
what it is to be beat down by cops. They don’t let up; they be trying to
kill you, man! They do it with pleasure [grinning].

That’s stress management right there. That’s release of tension. That’s
my-wife-treated-me-dirty-you’ll-pay. That’s terrorism with a badge.
That’s what that is.

The cops look forward to that. They get up in the morning and go, “Yeah,
Ah’m’a’ gonna kick some minority ass today.” [rubbing his hands together
and licking his lips]

I could tell that attitude, because I would be the same if I was a
police officer. ’Cause you take the badge for granted. The badge gets to
your head. You know what I’m saying? Makes you feel like you’re
invincible; like you could do whatever you goddamn well please.

I would have the same attitude. I’m going to hurt somebody today. I
don’t care if he’s white or Puerto Rican. And I’m going to have pleasure
in doing it. I’m full into it. And I would be a happy married man
because I wouldn’t fight with my wife.

I don’t even know why they have human police officers. They should just
put animals out there patrolling the streets. Word up! ’Cause they’re
worse than animals. It’s like they’re animals with a mind.

Internalizing Institutional Violence

Although we did have to worry about the danger of police brutality, it
was not one of our primary daily concerns. There was always a strong
undercurrent of anxiety over the risk of arrest, but we were
considerably less worried about being brutalized by the police if they
raided the crackhouse compared to what we risked at the hands of our
fellow inmates in the holding pen. Judges in Manhattan almost never send
anyone to prison for selling or buying small quantities of drugs the
first time they are arrested. A hand-to-hand sale of crack to an
undercover officer usually results in a two- to four-year suspended
felony sentence. I have never even heard of a simple customer being
brought to trial – much less being convicted of anything. The problem in
an arrest is that one usually has to wait in a municipal jail holding
pen for forty-eight to seventy-two hours before being arraigned by the
judge in the special Narcotics Court.¹⁸

Our fate in these overcrowded “bullpens” was a frequent subject of
anxious discussion. I captured one such debate on my tape recorder.
Caesar’s non-drug-using cousin, Eddie, was reminding all of us in the
Game Room that we risked being sodomized in jail if the police picked us
up in a sweep that night. Eddie’s father was African-American, and
Caesar made sure to racialize his retort as well as demonstrate his
superior technical knowledge of the likelihood of sexual assault in a
New York City holding pen.

Eddie: Yo Caesar, don’t you come crying to me when they take that ass a’
yours downtown and bust your cherry. [laughter]

Caesar: [businesslike] Unnh-uhh! They don’t rape niggas in the bullpen
no more ’Cause a’ AIDS. You don’t even get raped on Riker’s [New York
City’s biggest municipal jail] no more.

You get raped when you go upstate where they got them big, black,
brick-Georgia, Georgia-Tech Bulldog, Black Muslim ham hocks that been in
the slammer twenty years.

They be runnin’ that little ass a’ yours. [jumping to within an eighth
of an inch of Eddie’s face] Because they bigger than you. They been
lifting weights. They big and they take your shit. [spinning around into
my face] And they take your arm like this [twisting my arm] and they put
it down and they dog it. [spinning around and seizing Eddie in a full
nelson] And they jerk it around. [pumping his crotch against Eddie’s
rear] And you like: [switching roles to grab at his head and pull his
hair, shrieking] AHHUUHH.

Because they got their large mammoth, lamabada-blada, Alabama black
snake with its magnets out plunging you. Alabama black snake found its
way to the assets boy!

[pausing to gauge our hesitant laughter] And they black. And they
cruddy. And they smell black. And they big. And they smell like James
Brown. And they spit their stuff in your shit. And you gotta be like a
lamb and wash drawers and shit, and socks. And you get juiced because
you give the biggest niggas’ bolos [penises] blow jobs. And that’s your
man [hugging Eddie violently].

And if you’re a new nigga’ [jumping into my face] and you’re a fag and
you like it and he want to dog you, you get the big black bogeyman and
shit. And they take your ass and stuff it with some mad concrete. They
fill your canyon. Word!

And if the faggots like you, they get you in trouble. [spinning back
around to face me] And they try to mush ‘em, “All right motherfucker,
you don’t wanta fuck me? I’m back with the black bohemians.”

[swinging around again into Primo’s face] And they’re taking that ass
and they make you a fag. And people out on the street, be recognizing
you! [swinging his face around yet again to within an eighth of an inch
of my nose]

I was especially sensitive to Caesar’s harangue that night because the
New York City police had just deployed their new elite Tactical
Narcotics Teams – appropriately nicknamed TNT – in El Barrio.¹⁹ TNT was
founded in 1989 to assuage popular outrage during the height of the
national just-say-no-to-drugs hysteria.²⁰ TNT’s specific directive was
to bust the small, street-level dealer rather than the wholesale
supplier. A week earlier, at 2:00 a.m., TNT had arrived in U-Haul trucks
to block off both ends of a notorious crack-copping block a few streets
down from the Game Room. They rounded up everyone loitering on the
sidewalk and even dragged people out of private apartments in the few
still-inhabited tenements on the block.

The night of Caesar and Eddie’s jousting over jailhouse rape, I had
forgotten my driver’s license. Not carrying a picture identification is
a sure guarantee for inciting police wrath. The recording from this
session ends with my voice cursing Caesar through cackles of nervous
background laughter:

Philippe: Outta’ my face Caesar! What the fuck’s the matter with you!
You’a fucking pervert, or what?

Primo, I’m outta here. You guys have made me petro [paranoid]. I’ll be
right back though, I’m just going upstairs to get my I.D.

Accessing the Game Room Crackhouse

In my first months on the block, I was not debating complex theoretical
points about how the United States legitimizes inner-city segregation,
or how victims enforce the brutality of their social marginalization. I
was primarily concerned with how to persuade the manager of the
crackhouse on my block that I was not an undercover police officer. I
remember vividly the night I first went to the Game Room. My neighbor
Carmen – a thirty-nine-year-old grandmother who I had watched over the
past three months become addicted to crack and transform herself into a
homeless ninety-nine-pound harpie abandoning her two-year-old twin
grandchildren – brought me over to the manager of the Game Room and told
him in Spanish, “Primo, let me introduce you to my neighbor, Felipe;
he’s from the block and wants to meet you.” Excited at the possibility
of finally accessing a crackhouse scene, my heart dropped when Primo
shyly giggled and turned his back on me as if to hide his face. Staring
out into the street, he asked Carmen in English, loud enough for me to
hear clearly, “What precinct did you pick him up at?” I hurriedly
mumbled an embarrassed protest about not being “an undercover” and about
wanting to write a book about “the street and the neighborhood.” I had
the good sense not to impose myself, however, and instead slunk into the
background onto the hood of a nearby parked car after buying a round of
beers. Even in my largesse I managed to prolong the awkwardness by
purchasing the wrong kind of beer – an unstreetwise brand whose taste
Primo did not like. He was only drinking 16-ounce bottles of a new brand
of malt liquor called Private Stock, which was being marketed on Harlem
billboards featuring beautiful, brown-skinned women draped in scanty
leopard skins and flashing bright, white teeth, to attract a fresh
generation of young, inner-city street alcoholics.

Despite my inauspicious first evening, it took less than two weeks for
Primo to warm up to my presence. I was aided by having to pass the Game
Room literally every day, and usually several times a day, in order to
reach the supermarket, the bus stop, or the subway. Primo would usually
be standing outside his pseudo video arcade surrounded by a little
clique of teenage girls vying for his attention. At first we just nodded
politely to each other, but after a week he called out, “Hey guy, you
like to drink beer, don’t you?” and we shared a round of Private Stocks
with Maria, his fifteen-year-old girlfriend, and his current lookout,
Benito – anglicized and commodity fetishized into “Benzie” – a short,
loud-voiced twenty-year-old whose exaggerated street swagger hid the
limp caused by the dumdum bullet lodged in his left femur.

A few hours, and beers, later my pulse quickened when Primo invited me
into the back of the Game Room to where the crack supply was hidden
behind a false linoleum panel, and he laid out a dime bag of powder
cocaine. It was the “We Are the World” brand, which was sold across the
avenue under a half-block-long mural celebrating the late-1980s rock
concert of the same title for famine relief in Ethiopia. “You like to
sniff too?” Worried that I was going to ruin rapport – or, worse yet,
confirm my suspected police officer status – for turning down his offer,
I discovered to my surprise that both Primo and his lookout, Benzie,
were thrilled to be hanging out with someone who was “such good people”
that he did not even “sniff.” This was my first encounter with the
profound moral – even righteous – contradictory code of street ethics
that equates any kind of drug use with the work of the devil, even if
almost everybody on the street is busy sniffing, smoking, shooting, or
selling.

Primo, Benzie, Maria, and everyone else around that night had never been
tête-à-tête with a friendly white before, so it was with a sense of
relief that they saw I hung out with them out of genuine interest rather
than to obtain drugs or engage in some other act of perdición. The only
whites they had ever seen at such close quarters had been school
principals, policemen, parole officers, and angry bosses. Even their
schoolteachers and social workers were largely African-American and
Puerto Rican. Despite his obvious fear, Primo could not hide his
curiosity. As he confided in me several months later, he had always
wanted a chance to “conversate” with an actual live representative of
mainstream, “drug-free” white America.

Over the next few weeks, I regularly spent a few hours at the Game Room
crackhouse chatting with Primo and whoever else was on duty that shift –
either little Benzie or Caesar. To my surprise, I became an exotic
object of prestige; the crackhouse habitués actually wanted to be seen
in public with me. I had unwittingly stepped into a field of power
relations where my presence intimidated people. My next challenge,
consequently, was to break through the impressions-management game
playing that inverse power relationships inevitably entail. For example,
I had triggered within Primo a wave of internalized racism whereby he
enthusiastically presented himself as superior to “the sinvergüenza
mamao’ [shameless scum] all around us here.” He kept trying to
differentiate himself “from all these illiterate Puerto Ricans” who
“work in factorías” I was especially embarrassed when he began letting
me know how good he thought it was for the development of his mind to be
talking with me. At the same time, however, he still thought I might be
an undercover police officer. Almost a month after I met him, he said,
“I don’t care if tomorrow you come and arrest me, I want to talk to you.
You’re good people.” It was not until three years later that Primo would
casually describe me to others as “the white nigga’ who always be
hangin’ with me.” As a matter of fact, I still remember the night when I
first graduated to “honorary nigga’” status. Primo had imbibed more
alcohol than usual, and I had walked him up to his girlfriend Maria’s
sister’s high-rise project apartment to make sure he would not get
mugged in the stairway, because the elevators were broken as usual.²¹
Upon our safe arrival, swaying in the doorway, he grabbed me by the
shoulders to thank me: “You’re a good nigga’, Felipe. You’re a good
nigga’. See you tomorrow.”

[images]

Tape-recording Primo in his mother’s housing project stairwell. Photo:
Susan Meiselas.

It was not until two years later at 2 a.m. in the stairwell of Primo’s
mother’s high-rise project, where Primo and Benzie had gone to sniff a
“speedball” (combination of heroin and cocaine), during New Year’s week
that they told me what their first impressions of me at the Game Room
had been. Primo had ripped open a $10 glassine envelope of heroin and
dipped his housekey into the white powder in order to lift a dab to his
left nostril. He sniffed deeply, repeating the motion deftly two more
times to his right nostril before sighing and reaching out for me to
hand him the 40-ounce bottle of Ole English malt liquor I was swigging
from. Benzie, meanwhile, was crushing the contents of a $15 vial of
cocaine inside a folded dollar bill by rolling it between his thumbs and
forefingers, which gets rid of any clumps and crystals and makes it
easier to sniff. He then dipped a folded cardboard matchbook cover into
the inch-long pile of white powder and sniffed dryly twice before laying
it down gently in the corner of the stair he was sitting on:

Primo: When I first met you, Felipe, I was wondering who the hell you
were, but, of course, I received you good because you sounded
interesting; so, of course, I received you good. [reaching for the
cocaine] Te recibí como amigo, con respeto [I welcomed you as a friend,
with respect].

Benzie: [interrupting and handing me the malt liquor bottle] Felipe, I’m
going to tell you the honest truth – and he knows it. [pointing to
Primo] The first time I met you I thought that you was in a different
way. . . . But I would really rather not tell you. [sniffing from the
heroin packet with Primo’s key]

Philippe: [drinking] It’s all right don’t worry; you can tell me. I
won’t get angry.

Benzie: Yeah . . . well . . . [turns to Primo to avoid eye contact with
me, and sniffs again] yeah, you remember? I used to tell you, you know,
the way he used to talk. The way he used to be. That I thought maybe . .
. you know, . . . How you call it? That some people are bisexual. Even
though you had a wife, I thought you was like . . . dirty.

It was really ’Cause of the way you talk and ’Cause of the way you act.
You always asking a lot of questions, and a lot of gay people be like
that – you know, trying to find out the way you are.

But then after a while, when I got to know you [grabbing the bottle from
me], I saw the way you was hanging; and I got to know you better; but
still, I always had that thought in my head, “Man, but, but this nigga’s
a faggot.” [drinking]

Primo: [cutting Benzie short] Damn, shut up man! You’re going to give
Felipe a complejo [complex]. [putting his arm over my shoulder] It was
just ’Cause you was white. He was thinking, “Quién es éste blanquito?”
[Who is this white boy?]

Philippe: So was it my accent? My voice? The way I move my body?

Benzie: Yeah, like your accent . . .

Primo: [interrupting] I told him you were an anfropologist, and that the
way you speak is just like intelligent talk. I mean you just speak your
way. And maybe, we don’t understand a few words, but it’s all right.

But when you talk Spanish, then you really be sounding different. Then
you really be sounding different. You know, when you talk Spanish, you
sound like an Español [Spaniard].

Even my mother thought you was gay, but that was because she was only
talking to you through the phone. [gunshots] One day she asks me [in
Spanish], “Who’s this little white boy who’s always calling here? Is he
a pato [faggot] or something?” [Quién es este blanquito que siempre
llama aqué? Es pato o al go así?]

And I said [once again in Spanish], “No! What are you talking about? He
is a professor. He speaks Spanish and English and French.” [No! De qué
tú hablas? El es profesor. Habla español, inglés, y francés.]

At the time I heard this, I could not stop myself from feeling some kind
of vain personal pique at having been misidentified sexually, because by
that time I fancied myself to be at least minimally streetwise. In
retrospect I am relieved that during the first few years of my fieldwork
I thoroughly misread street cues and did not suspect I was giving off
“dirty sexual pervert” vibes. Being self-conscious about my sexual image
in the homophobic context of street culture might have interfered with
my ability to initiate comfortable relationships with the crack dealers.

African-American/Puerto Rican Relations on the Street

Racial tension in El Barrio is not just focused around whites. Ray’s
network was intensely internally segregated. It was almost exclusively
composed of second-generation, New York—born Puerto Ricans.²² Although
Ray himself would be classified as “black” by Anglo society – as would
almost half of his employees – most were explicitly hostile to
African-Americans. Only two of the approximately two-dozen dealers I met
working for Ray were African-American. Both had hispanicized their
nicknames: Sylvester, for example, was called Gato, the Spanish word for
cat. The other African-American dealer, who went by the name Juan,
confided to me in private that he found the atmosphere at the social
club crackhouse on La Farmacia’s corner distinctly hostile:

Blacks and Puerto Ricans really don’t get along here. See that plaque
there, that says “Latin Family"? Well, some people take that seriously.
It’s a lot of racism. When I come through the door I have to have an aim
and a purpose. If I go and I sit in a seat and I cross my legs, all of a
sudden they’ll be gathering together, speaking in Spanish, like “Yo,
who’s that?” They’ll even tell you in English, “Yo, you better be
chill.”

Caesar was more explicit about racial tension in the Game Room – at
least when he was drinking.

I’m Klu Klux Klan. Ah’ kill black people. You know why I hate black
people? Because they’re black; they stink; they smell like shit. And
they’re lazy motherfuckers. I swear to God I hate their fucking guts.

I even hate Puerto Ricans that afro. I hate them like any other black
man. [running his hands through Primo’s hair] Fuck Primo too, because
he’s got an afro and he’s black. I kill him.

[facing me] I hate whites too. I kill them all. But not you Felipe. You
all right, you a good nigga’. But if you didn’t hang out with us I’d
kill you.

You know why I hate moyos [racist Puerto Rican term for blacks] because
it was a black man who killed my sister – stabbed her eighteen times in
the projects.

They get me pissed off, because why did they got to do these things to
me? I’m already fucked up as it is. I hate everybody.

For all his explicit racism, Caesar emulated African-American street
culture, which has an almost complete hegemony over style in the
underground economy.

I used to want to be black when I was younger. I wanted to be with that
black style. ’Cause they’re badder. Like malos [bad]. Yeah! Malo malos!
More rowdier.

I liked’ed evil black kids the most because I was learning how to be
schemish and steal fruit from the fruit stand and stuff like that.

Plus black people like to dress hard – like rugged. You know what I’m
saying? Look wild, like black. Black, just being black. Cool.

’Cause the Spanish people I used to hang with, their style was kind of
wimpy, you know.

Look, right now, it’s the moyos be bringing in the marked necks and the
A.J.’s.

That be the moyos with the fly clothes.

Regardless of the complexities of racial tension, class polarization,
and everyday street style, in the long term everyone in Ray’s network
came to accept me – and most people appeared genuinely to like having me
around. Of course, there were dozens of other people on the periphery of
Ray’s scene, or in other dealing networks, who never grew to trust me.
This was especially true of African-American sellers and younger Puerto
Rican teenage dealers, whose relationship to white society is more
self-consciously oppositional—hostile than that of their parents or even
their older brothers. Nevertheless, I felt comfortable in my role as
“professor” and “anthropologist” writing a book. On several occasions it
almost became problematic when marginal members of Ray’s network, and
even outsiders, accosted me angrily for never tape-recording them,
claiming that they “deserved to be at least a chapter” in my book. I had
originally worried that the main characters in this book might resent
the fact that an outsider was going to use their life stories to build
an academic career. My long-term goal has always been to give something
back to the community. When I discussed with Ray and his employees my
desire to write a book of life stories “about poverty and
marginalization” that might contribute to a more progressive
understanding of inner-city problems by mainstream society, they thought
I was crazy and treated my concerns about social responsibility with
suspicion. In their conception everyone in the world is hustling, and
anyone in their right mind would want to write a best seller and make a
lot of money. It had not occurred to them that they would ever get
anything back from this book project, except maybe a good party on
publication day. On several occasions my insistence that there should be
a tangible political benefit for the community from my research project
spawned humiliating responses:

Caesar: Felipe, you just talking an immense amount of shit. Because we
talk huge amounts of crap that don’t mean a goddamned thing – into the
air.

Like, like we on Oprah Winfrey or the Donahue Show – which doesn’t mean
shit. That’s not going to help the community. It’s not going to help us.
It’s not going to change the world in an eensy-weensy bit at all. It’s
just talk. Flap the lip.

Of course, I hope Caesar is wrong; but maybe his cynicism is more
realistic than my academic idealism.

About halfway through my research, the main characters in this book,
with whom I have developed deeper relations, began following the details
of my writing habits and urging me to make speedier progress. They
wanted to be part of “a best seller.” For example, when I came down with
a debilitating tendinitis in my wrists and forearms from spending too
many hours at my word processor, Caesar and Primo became genuinely
worried and disappointed. I realized that our relationships had
developed an almost psychotherapeutic dimension.

Caesar: [grabbing my arms and twisting them] Don’t be giving up on us,
Felipe. Don’t be fuckin’ up. We could beat you up for this.

[turning to Primo] I think Felipe is going out of his mind. I think
we’re going to have to put pressure on him.

[giggling] You’re our role model here. You can’t be fuckin’ around. We
could beat you down for shit like that. Word up!

I ain’t lettin’ you leave us until I get something in writing with your
name on it, as a lifetime reference. You gonna have to give me at least
a chapter, regardless. I know my words is going to be in your chapters
because my stories is so good that you can’t leave them out.

[hugging me] I think the students are becoming more advanced than the
teacher here, educational-wise. I think Felipe’s in a deep depression. I
think he’s got a writer’s block thing.

2 A STREET HISTORY OF EL BARRIO

[East Harlem is] a nursery of all kinds of law-breakers; there are nests
of narcotics, thieving, stealing, cheating and every conceivable kind of
law-breaking. The country is flooded with criminals from here. A taxi
driver would not dare go through 113th Street east of Second Avenue
after dark: an armored car would be the only thing safe.

Catholic priest, 1930s¹

The intimate details of the lives of the crack dealers and their
families revealed in this book cannot be understood in a historical
vacuum. Second- and third-generation Puerto Rican immigrants in New York
City need to be placed in the context of their grandparents’ and
great-grandparents’ oppressive colonial history. The strategic physical
location of the island of Puerto Rico in the middle of the Caribbean at
the very heart of the most important trans-Atlantic shipping routes has
always made world superpowers covet the territory jealously – almost
ever since Christopher Columbus first set foot on the Island in 1493 and
Ponce de León conquered it in 1508. Dogmatic strategic-military concerns
that have nothing to do with economic logic or with the welfare of
Puerto Rico’s residents have arbitrarily distorted the political and
economic administration of the Island for almost five hundred years.
Although the original Spanish conquerors imported African slaves and
established sugar cane plantations, Puerto Rico was never an
economically profitable colony. It was always, above all, a locus for
military control; hence the reactionary tenacity with which Spain held
on to the territory through the entire nineteenth century, long after
the rest of the Americas had been decolonized in the 1820s. More
recently, the failure of Puerto Rico to achieve a viable form of
political and economic development over the past century has spawned
what is proportionately one of the most massive population dislocations
of the twentieth century.

When the United States invaded Puerto Rico in 1898, it continued the
Spanish pattern of putting military concerns above economic logic. Since
1952 the Island has held the ambiguous political title of “Free
Associated Commonwealth.” It is subject to U.S. rule, but its residents
are not allowed to vote in presidential elections and have no
enfranchised representatives in the U.S. Congress. The territory’s
colonial status is regularly denounced in the United Nations.
Ironically, Puerto Rico continues to be a financial liability to its
political overlord. Like the Spanish crown one hundred years ago, the
U.S. federal government spends money to maintain military and political
control of the territory and to subsidize its insolvent economy. Since
the 1970s, federal transfers in the form of food stamps and social
security insurance have accounted for almost a third of Puerto Rico’s
personal income. In 1992, more than 50 percent of the Puerto Rican
population qualified for food stamps.² Caesar insightfully summed up the
political basis for Puerto Rico’s relationship to the United States late
one night while on duty at the Game Room:

Caesar: The only reason the U.S. acknowledges P.R., is because it’s
close to Cuba – a shorter distance to destroy communism. I mean we don’t
have nothin’ to offer. There’s no natural resources. There’s no oil;
there’s no gold; there’s not even good water there. They have nothing.

What they got? Rum? The U.S. already got Kentucky, Tennessee, all the
southern states make moonshine.

From Puerto Rican Jíbaro to Hispanic Crack Dealer

In the early 1900s, the United States actively transformed Puerto Rico’s
economy, rendering it even less responsive to local needs and culture
than it had been under Spanish domination. Immediately following the
U.S. military occupation, land and power were concentrated under the
ownership of large U.S.-owned agro-export companies. Hundreds of
thousands of small farmers were forced to leave their plots of land in
the Island’s central highlands to seek wage-labor employment on the
immense sugar plantations that soon covered much of Puerto Rico’s most
fertile coastal plains. Since World War II, these uprooted farmers and
their descendants have often been referred to as “jíbaros,” a term that
could be translated in English as “hillbillies.” The term jíbaro conveys
a stereotypical image of a ruggedly independent subsistence farmer who
wears a straw hat, wields a wide machete, and squats [ñangotea] on the
packed-earth patio [batey] of his country home to receive visitors at
the end of a hard day’s work in the fields. Although bearing an
ambiguously pejorative connotation, the jíbaro has emerged as a symbol
of Puerto Rican cultural integrity and self-respect in the face of
foreign influence, domination, and diaspora. The original Spanish
meaning of the word jíbaro was “wild.” Jíbaros were supposed to have
been the descendants of escaped African slaves, Taino Amerindians, and
European and Moor stowaways who refused to work as sugar cane cutters on
Spanish colonial plantations. Instead, throughout the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, they homesteaded on their Island’s rugged interior
hills and rejected the laws and social conventions of Spanish-dominated
high society. They lived outside the jurisdiction of the urban-based
state.³

There is an appealing parallel between the existence of a former jíbaro
society that refused colonial plantation wage labor and rejected elitist
Spanish cultural forms out of a sense of indomitable self-respect, and
the oppositional content of street culture’s resistance to exploitation
and marginalization by U.S. society. At the same time, the concept of
jíbaro should not be reified into a simple culturalist category as a
traditional relic from the rural past. Jíbaros have been repeatedly
reinvented and redefined by rapidly changing political and economic
contexts. The category now sometimes includes not only sugar plantation
laborers, but also factory workers and even second-generation U.S.-born
inner-city residents. Primo, for example, occasionally referred to
himself and to his friends as jíbaros, but he burst out laughing when I
told him about the post—World War II image of jíbaros ñangoteando in
their bateys to discuss the day’s events. He not only did not know what
the word batey meant, but he assured me that

the only time I’ve ever “ñangoteado” was in the [prison] bullpen. But
yeah, a whole bunch of us Puerto Ricans got down, ñangoteando, and we
talked a lotta shit for hours.⁴

Primo may not be aware that his grandfathers and certainly his
great-grandfathers had probably been small farmers who were forced to
become seasonal sugar cane laborers when U.S. multinational companies
took over Puerto Rico’s rural economy. He is well aware, however, of the
massive emigration that followed Puerto Rico’s economic transformations.
The figures are impressive: In the fifteen years following World War II,
an average of 40,000 people left Puerto Rico annually. More than 75,000
left in 1953 alone. Coincidentally, this is the same year that Primo’s
mother, at the age of seventeen, abandoned her plantation shack in the
cane fields of the coastal village of Arroyo to rent an apartment in
East Harlem and find work in an inner-city sweatshop as a seamstress.
Another 586,000 Puerto Ricans followed in her footsteps in the 1960s
seeking new homes and jobs in the ghettos of New York City.⁵ Few other
countries in the world have exported such a large proportion of their
population over such a short period of time to such a culturally hostile
and economically alien host. Even the 2 million Irish who emigrated and
the 1 million who starved during the potato famine of the late 1840s do
not exceed in proportional numbers the 1.5 million Puerto Ricans – fully
one-third of the total population of the Island who were wrenched from
sugar cane fields, shantytowns, and highland villages to be confined to
New York City tenements and later to high-rise public housing projects
in the two decades after World War II.⁶ At the time of the 1980 Census,
36 percent of all Island-born Puerto Ricans between the ages of
twenty-five and forty-four were living in the mainland United States.⁷

Most Puerto Rican immigrants in the 1940s and 1950s found work in light
manufacturing – specifically, garment factories – precisely at the
historical moment when these jobs were beginning to leave the city in
large numbers as the global economy was being restructured.⁸ Service
positions replaced manufacturing jobs as New York City became the
logistical nodal point for the multinational corporations that have been
closing their local production plants to relocate overseas where labor
is cheaper. In the twenty years following Primo’s birth in 1967, in East
Harlem’s municipal hospital, almost half a million factory workers lost
their jobs as manufacturing employment dropped by 50 percent in New York
City.⁹

To summarize, New York—born Puerto Ricans are the descendants of an
uprooted people in the midst of a marathon sprint through economic
history. In diverse permutations, over the past two or three generations
their parents and grandparents went: (1) from semisubsistence peasants
on private hillside plots or local haciendas; (2) to agricultural
laborers on foreign-owned, capital-intensive agro-export plantations;
(3) to factory workers in export-platform shantytowns; (4) to sweatshop
workers in ghetto tenements; (5) to service sector employees in
high-rise inner-city housing projects; (6) to underground economy
entrepreneurs on the street. Primo captured the pathos of these
macrostructural dislocations when I asked him why he sometimes called
himself a jíbaro:

Primo: My father was a factory worker. It says so on my birth
certificate, but he came to New York as a sugarcane cutter. Shit! I
don’t care; fuck it! I’m just a jíbaro. I speak jíbaro Spanish. Hablo
como jíbaro [I speak like a jíbaro].

One particular economic sector has benefited greatly from Puerto Rico’s
repeated social and economic metamorphoses: the U.S.-based multinational
corporations who dominate its local economy. They have taken advantage
of the Island’s generous tax concessions to convert Puerto Rico into a
haven for inflated corporate profits. This economic distortion was, once
again, largely fueled by military strategic considerations. Following
the Cuban revolution in 1959, the United States wanted to convert Puerto
Rico into a free world showcase for capitalist economic development. The
result has been a development strategy based on promoting private sector
initiative through a policy of ten-year tax exemptions on investment in
productive facilities. These tax giveaways have encouraged multinational
corporations to manipulate transfer pricing schemes via local
subsidiaries. The Island has the highest corporate profit rate of any
country in the western hemisphere. As Puerto Rico’s secretary of state
boasted in 1990, “There is no single country in the world that produces
as much net income for U.S. companies as Puerto Rico.”¹⁰

The economic imperatives shaping the lives of Puerto Ricans have been
compounded ideologically by an overtly racist “cultural assault.” This
is symbolized by the U.S. colonial administration’s English-only policy
in Puerto Rican schools until 1949.¹¹ For those who emigrated from the
Island, culture shock has obviously been more profound. Literally
overnight, the new immigrants whose rural-based cultural orientation and
self-esteem was constructed around interpersonal webs of respeto
[respect] organized around complex categories of age, gender, and
kinship found themselves transformed into “racially” inferior pariahs.
Ever since their arrival in the United States they have been despised
and humiliated with a virulence that is specific to North America’s
history of polarized race relations and ethnically segmented immigrant
labor markets.

The overwhelming changes imposed so rapidly on the formerly rural-based
Puerto Rican population translate statistically into high rates of
unemployment, substance abuse, broken families, and deteriorated health
in New York’s inner city. Few other ethnic groups, except perhaps Native
American Indians, fared more poorly in official statistics than the
896,753 Puerto Ricans who lived in New York City at the time of the 1990
Census. They have the highest welfare dependency and household poverty
rates, as well as the lowest labor force participation rates, of any
other ethnic group in the city. In fact, in 1989 their poverty rate (38
percent) was double that of New York City’s (19 percent). One
statistical survey showed their family poverty rate in the late 1980s to
be 500 percent higher than New York City’s average.¹²

Although the 1990 Census documents significant improvement for several
major cohorts of the Puerto Rican population – especially those who do
not live in New York City – epidemiological health indexes reveal that
Puerto Ricans suffer disproportionate hardship. This ranges from having
the fastest growing HIV infection rates, the highest rates of bedridden
disability, the most deaths caused by cirrhosis of the liver, and the
highest rates of suicide attempts. In March 1993, Puerto Rican median
household income in the United States was over $14,000 less than that
for whites ($33,355 versus $18,999), and over $4,000 less than that of
other latino groups.¹³

Confronting Individual Responsibility on the Street

From the safety of a desk or a reading chair, the Puerto Rican
population’s history of economic dislocation, political domination,
cultural oppression, and large-scale migration easily accounts for why
street culture in El Barrio might be so brutally self-destructive. On
the street, however, faced with violent, substance-abusing individuals,
a political-economy explanation for cause and effect is not so evident.
To put it in more moralistic terms, when face to face with individuals
like Ray, Primo, or Caesar, one feels that no amount of “historical
apology” and “structural victimization” exempts them from the
consequences of their often violent, self-destructive, and parasitical
actions. On a daily basis in their interpersonal interactions they
impose suffering on their families, neighbors, and friends.

I discussed this complex theoretical issue of the relationship between
structure and agency with most of the crack dealers I befriended. They,
like most people in the United States, firmly believe in individual
responsibility. For the most part, they attribute their marginal living
conditions to their own psychological or moral failings. They rarely
blame society; individuals are always accountable. Perhaps this comes
from blending the stubborn individualism of a jíbaro past with the
pioneer puritanism of the Anglo-immigrant legacy of the United States,
and then pressure-cooking the syncretic result in the
survival-of-the-fittest pragmatics of New York City’s underground
economy. At the same time, there exists in El Barrio an alternative,
younger-generation variant of street culture that is almost political in
its opposition to mainstream society. This tension was frequently
manifest between Primo and his friend Caesar, who was five years
younger:

Philippe: So you see what I’m saying about your not having money, and
there being racism, and . . .

Primo: [interrupting] Felipe it’s not only the white man . . . that
makes it harder for us. We’re poor, that’s true, but we’re supposed to
struggle and make something of ourselves. It’s just a harder struggle
’Cause we’re poor.

Caesar: [interrupting] We’re never gonna inherit nothing, unless we hit
the Lotto.

Primo: [ignoring Caesar] You have to do good for yourself in order to
achieve, and you have to achieve in life in order to get somewhere. If
you lay back, it’s ’Cause you want to lay back, and then you want to cry
out for help later. The struggle’s harder for the poor, but not
impossible; just harder.

When you’re poor, you gotta have faith and respect for your own self.

If I have a problem it’s because I brought it upon myself. Nobody gotta
worry about me; I’m gonna handle it. It’s my problem.

Caesar: That’s a lotta bullshit man. This country’s based on making your
money. Everybody wanna make money, live in the suburbs, and die.

Primo: Shut up Caesar. I hate it when you talk shit.

East Harlem’s Immigrant Maelstroms

Ultimately, much of the analytical tension in this book focuses on how
individuals deal with the forces that oppress them. In the case of El
Barrio there is a another historical legacy of social marginalization
that has nothing to do with Puerto Rico’s colonial quandaries. When one
situates Ray’s crack dealers within the microhistory of East Harlem –
and, more specifically, within the ten-square-block easternmost corner
of their neighborhood – an almost ecological explanation for their lives
of crime, violence, and substance abuse emerges. In short, the streets
of East Harlem have always produced violent, substance-abusing felons no
matter what immigrant ethnic group happened to be living there at the
time.

The very first foreign immigrants, of course, were the Dutch, who stole
Manhattan Island from the indigenous peoples who used to hunt and fish
there. The only contemporary legacy of the Dutch is the neighborhood
name for the post office, Hell Gate, on 110th Street, around the corner
from Ray’s Social Club crackhouse. It is an anglicized version of the
Dutch name for the bay, Hellegat [sinkhole],¹⁴ that is formed by the
curve in the East River just above 96th Street. Three hundred and fifty
years later, the lowland marshes along the bay of Hell Gate became the
easternmost section of El Barrio where I lived and where Ray’s
crack-houses flourished. During the early 1600s, the area was the site
of repeated bloody skirmishes between the encroaching Dutch Calvinist
farmers and the original indigenous inhabitants. The last Amerindians
forced out of what was to become the Hell Gate postal district were the
Reckgawawanc in 1669. Soon after, East Harlem was covered with
profitable Dutch-owned tobacco farms.¹⁵ During the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, before becoming one of the epicenters of immigrant
poverty and substance abuse in New York City, East Harlem passed through
a fashionable period as a countryside retreat for wealthy New Yorkers.
Downtown Manhattan was a full hour and a half away by stagecoach. Even
Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s great-grandfather owned property in the
patchwork of bucolic stream valleys and small farms that crisscrossed
the district.¹⁶ East Harlem’s pristine rural isolation ended in the late
1800s with the ambitious construction of a massive network of
inexpensive, privately owned public transportation arteries, coupled
with large public sector investments by the City of New York in basic
municipal infrastructure: The Harlem River Railroad along Park Avenue in
the late 1830s; the Third Avenue Horse Railroad in 1870; the First
Avenue Trolley in the 1880s; and, finally, the IRT Lexington Avenue
Subway, which opened in 1903.¹⁷

Shortly after the turn of the century, consequently, East Harlem had
convenient and inexpensive public transportation making it accessible to
all of Manhattan, the Bronx, and parts of Brooklyn. These large-scale
infrastructural construction projects inaugurated the arrival of the
first wave of immigrant wage laborers in the 1880s and 1890s, converting
East Harlem into one of the poorest and most culturally diverse
neighborhoods in the history of the United States. The first permanent
urban residents in the late 1800s were German and Irish Catholic
construction workers who laid the trolley tracks and dug the subway
tunnels that eventually crisscrossed all of Manhattan Island. They were
followed by Central and Eastern European Jews who were fleeing the
already overcrowded Lower East Side of Manhattan. East Harlem’s cheap
tenement apartments and its efficient public transportation made it an
ideal locale for factory workers from downtown Manhattan sweatshops. The
turn-of-the-century Jewish immigrants were accompanied or followed by a
significant presence of African-Americans and Scandinavians. By 1920, in
addition to two thriving Greek Orthodox churches, the neighborhood
boasted New York City’s highest concentration of Finns and Norwegians.

All accounts of East Harlem from this period grope for adjectives to
describe its ethnic diversity. It was variously dubbed a “League of
Nations” and a “kaleidoscopic sequence of racial additions.”¹⁸ The 1920
census cites the presence of 27 different nationalities: “Perhaps in few
other spots throughout the world are so many races to be found in so
small an area. The life in many parts of the Old World is reenacted
here.”¹⁹ Social scientists in those years almost automatically
interpreted national and ethnic diversity to be a negative, prime-moving
sociological force: “Always, where so many tongues are found, Old-World
mores of mothers and fathers temper the New World habits of their boys
and . . . retard their progress.”²⁰

The Italian Invasion of East Harlem

It was in this multicultural working-class context that tens of
thousands of rural southern Italians arrived at the turn of the century.
They rapidly converted the neighborhood into what the Mayor’s Committee
on City Planning called in 1937 “probably the largest Italian colony in
the Western hemisphere.”²¹ The very first Italians who arrived in the
1880s were brought by the management of the First Avenue Trolley to
break a strike of Irish track layers.²² The Italian immigrant shantytown
coexisted tensely with an older conglomeration of shanties only two
blocks away on 104th Street, which remained occupied by the striking
Irish workers who had all been fired. Over the next three decades,
competition for jobs and housing expressed itself in extreme ethnic
segregation. Ethnic hostility penetrated even the most personal and
spiritual dimensions of daily life. Local churches, for example, closed
their doors to the new immigrants. A neighborhood study sponsored by a
local Protestant church in 1910 somehow calculated that 79.5 percent of
the community’s residents were “nonassimilable.”²³ When the German and
Irish Catholics celebrated their first mass on December 4, 1884, in a
large new church, Our Lady of Mount Carmel, built to minister to the
same Hell Gate corridor served by Ray’s crackhouses, the resident priest
made the new Italian parishioners sit in the basement. Not until 1919
were Italian immigrants allowed to mingle freely with the rest of the
parishioners.²⁴

[images]

Fifth Avenue between 116th and 117th Streets, 1889. Photo courtesy of
the Museum of the City of New York.

The handful of octogenarian Italian residents still living in the
neighborhood along Pleasant Avenue – the five-block-long easternmost
avenue of East Harlem – could still remember the names of the warring
Irish and Italian gangs from that transition period. They enjoyed
enumerating the blocks, and even the precise buildings, occupied by each
different nationality group. During these first few decades, the Italian
new-immigrants were pushed into the dirtiest, poorest avenues closest to
the East River, whose banks – where Pleasant Avenue is now located –
were described in 1900 as “all dumps, broken cars, broken wagons . . .
junkyards, broken bottles, and rags.”²⁵ This easternmost upper corner of
the neighborhood is the exact same territory where Ray’s network
operated during my residence in El Barrio.

The racist uproar that accompanied the turn-of-the-century influx of
rural southern Italians – mostly from Sicily – reverberated throughout
larger New York City. Alarmed politicians denounced East Harlem’s newest
residents as being of “African racial stock.” They were contrasted
unfavorably to northern Italians living in other parts of the city, who
were said to be “Germanic.”²⁶ As early as 1893, the New York Times
condemned the “lawlessness and vindictive impulses of the many
immigrants from southern Italy living in East Harlem.”²⁷

Perhaps the most insidious manifestation of this ideological assault on
the sense of cultural dignity and individual self-worth of the Italian
immigrants was the practices and attitudes of those representatives from
mainstream society who were supposed to be assimilating the immigrant
children into Anglo-American culture. Schoolteachers reported that “the
Italians are not eager to learn . . . they are very slow,” and that
“they . . . keep to themselves.” A social worker complained that when
she “asked an Italian family what they missed most here in America,” the
reply was “‘Living with our animals.’” Social science researchers from
the period, despite their generally progressive orientations and their
concern for writing socially responsible reports on behalf of the poor,
could not help but reproduce the contemporary stereotypes that were so
hostile to working-class immigrant Italians: “There is much delinquency
and there are many feeble-minded and morons in the neighborhood.”²⁸ In
fact, Frederick Thrasher, the scholar generally credited with pioneering
gang research, reported matter-of-factly in the 1930s that “all boys in
the district were found to be on a lower intelligence level than the
norms for their ages.”²⁹ We now have sensitive autobiographical accounts
of these years confirming the effects of prejudice on Italian-American
adolescents living in the neighborhood.

We soon got the idea that “Italian” meant something inferior, and a
barrier was erected between children of Italian origin and their
parents. This was the accepted process of Americanization. We were
becoming Americans by learning how to be ashamed of our parents.³⁰

The Puerto Rican “Invasion” of El Barrio

Predictably, when rural Puerto Rican immigrants began entering the
neighborhood in the 1930s and 1940s, they received as negative a
reception as had the Italians one or two generations earlier. Replacing
Italians and Jews in the garment factories in the mid-1900s – just as
Italians had replaced the Irish on the trolley track construction sites
in the late 1800s – Puerto Ricans became the butt of physical and
ideological assault. Leonard Bernstein’s classic musical West Side
Story, from the 1950s, captured for popular consumption an adolescent
street-gang version of the structural antagonisms existing at the time
between Italians and Puerto Ricans. In a less romanticized vein, the now
classic autobiographies of Nuyorican literature – Piri Thomas’s Down
These Mean Streets and Edward Rivera’s Family Installments – document in
eloquent detail how newly arrived twelve- and thirteen-year-olds from
rural Puerto Rico felt as they fought the Italian-American youths who
were defending their traditional turf from the newest, darker-skinned
immigrants. All the members of Ray’s network who were more than
twenty-five to thirty years old, vividly remembered being beaten up by
Italian gangs from “Vinnie-land,” which is what they called the
easternmost blocks along the East River – First Avenue and Pleasant
Avenue. Caesar’s thirty-seven-year-old cousin, who moved out of the
neighborhood and became an insurance agent in suburban Connecticut,
summarized to me this historical transition:

I remember when the whites moved out. I lived on 112th and we used to
have fights with the Italians all the time. Those were the gang years.
There was a lot of mafiosos around there – they still there.

We used to have a lot of fights with the Italians down over here on
First Avenue [pointing out the window].

I even remember seeing an Italian beat a guy to death. You know, like
with bats.

[gunshots] but it wasn’t with guns . . . maybe some zip guns.

[more gunshots] Now it’s Uzis.

At the street level, opposition to the metamorphosis of Little Italy
into El Barrio during the post—World War II period was not limited to
adolescent youth gangs. Local members of organized crime syndicates
forced local landlords to maintain white segregated buildings. This was
particularly true for the easternmost corner where I lived and where Ray
maintained his crackhouses. For example, according to middle-aged
residents, the first Puerto Rican immigrants were not able to move onto
the particular block I lived on until Joe Rao, a hit man for the
Genovese crime family, passed away in the early 1970s. Shortly after I
moved into the neighborhood a real estate agent with dreams of
gentrification complained to me that one of the lieutenants of the
Genovese family had warned her to “think about who you want to rent to”
when he saw a middle-class African-American couple visit a tenement she
had just renovated.

Popular memory emphasizes the violence of the Italian—Puerto Rican
confrontation, but in fact the very first link in East Harlem’s latest
chain of ethnic succession in the 1930s was the flight of upwardly
mobile Jews, who left for more middle-class, homogeneously white
neighborhoods. This was noted on the opening page of a report
commissioned by the Jewish Welfare Board in 1931.

The influx of Puerto Ricans (among whom there is a considerable Negro
element) . . . into East Harlem has been a significant factor in
displacing the Jewish population which is moving largely to the Bronx
and Brooklyn.³¹

The African-Americans who already populated isolated blocks within the
neighborhood and represented 14 percent of the population, according to
the 1930 Census, aroused less ire.³² They may have been tolerated
because of their restriction to segregated buildings and blocks. Perhaps
their more profound socialization into North American—style racism
resulted in more accommodating or self-effacing behavior. Hence, a
researcher in the late 1920s noted with approval that barriers between
black and white children were being broken down by the local librarian
who “reads to them about little Black Sambo and tells them stories.”³³
Less than twenty years later, however, the community was experiencing
three-way race riots: African-American versus Italian-American versus
Puerto Rican. In 1946, the neighborhood inspired a virulent Time
Magazine editorial: “[It] is a venomous, crime-ridden slum called East
Harlem, [populated] by hordes of Italians, Puerto Ricans, Jews, and
Negroes.”³⁴

In general, however, it was the new Puerto Rican immigrants who
generated the most antipathy on the part of mainstream society. They
were poorer than everyone else. In fact, according to a 1929 hospital
study, they were literally starving: “The large majority of Puerto Rican
children examined were suffering from malnutrition.”³⁵ Their health
problems were, of course, expressed in a racist idiom. For example, from
the 1920s through the 1940s public health hysteria erupted over the
epidemics of tuberculosis and venereal disease that Puerto Rican
immigrants were supposed to be infesting New York with. The nation’s top
medical specialists on tropical diseases “scientifically” legitimized
the pariah status of Puerto Rican immigrants in New York:

Dr. Haven Emerson, a Columbia University expert on tropical diseases,
says . . . that every Porto Rican³⁶ has within him germs of tropical
diseases, venereal diseases and those which are looked on as minor “dirt
diseases.” This health problem does not worry the Porto Rican as much as
it does New Yorkers for he has acquired an immunity to it. Pulmonary
diseases show an increase in rate due to the prevalence amongst these
people. They have primitive notions of child care due to conditions in
which they lived in Porto Rico. Many never saw a cow and do not know
about the use of canned milk. . . . The Italian mother is more
intelligent for she at least can use goat’s milk.³⁷

Once again, as in the case of Italian immigrants a generation earlier,
academic discourse reflected the contemporary prejudices. One master’s
thesis completed by a second-generation Italian-American in 1931 refers
to Puerto Ricans as “Spics,” and notes that they are “invading” East
Harlem.³⁸ Another thesis completed in 1930 describes Puerto Ricans as
“bringing . . . low morals and low standards of living.”³⁹ A 1935 study
commissioned by the Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York claims
that Puerto Ricans in East Harlem have “a marked and serious inferiority
in native ability.” Their average IQ scores were said to be 20.5 points
lower than that of native-born Americans. The researchers complained
that “few bright or even average Puerto Ricans were found.”⁴⁰ With less
academic and institutional legitimacy, a popular guidebook in the
post—World War II period stated matter-of-factly:

Puerto Ricans were not born to be New Yorkers. They are mostly crude
farmers subject to congenital tropical diseases, physically unfitted for
the northern climate, unskilled, uneducated, non-English speaking, and
almost impossible to assimilate and condition for healthful and useful
existence in an active city of stone and steel.

. . . The Puerto Ricans all look alike, their names all sound alike and
if an inspector calls in one of the swarming flats in the teeming
tenements, nobody speaks English.

. . . Not only are many of these Puerto Ricans on relief [welfare]
within an hour after their feet land on a dock or a secondary airport,
but some are already booked on the dole in advance, while they are in
the air or on the water.⁴¹

Poverty and Ecological Disrepair

Regardless of which ethnic group has prevailed in East Harlem since the
1880s, researchers and commentators have virtually unanimously decried
the neighborhood’s concentrated poverty, condemning it judgmentally.

East Harlem is one of the worst districts in the city. The boys have no
respect for learning law or discipline . . . poverty and social
maladjustment prevail.⁴²

About one-half of the residents in the neighborhood may be classed as
poor, and the other half as very poor.⁴³

Physically, the neighborhood is repeatedly described as “congested and
filthy” with deficient public sector infrastructure. Hence, the
categorical criticism by a journalist in 1946: “Every service ... is
strained to the utmost . . . quite inadequate to care for such a
population load.”⁴⁴ Street descriptions from 1930 ethnographers could as
easily apply to the 1890s as they do to the 1990s:

The street was very dirty, refuse of various kinds such as watermelon
rinds, banana peelings, broken glass, old boxes and papers was
everywhere in evidence ... an empty store [had a broken window]. The
sidewalks, the doorsteps, the windows, all showed people in great
numbers.⁴⁵

The exceptionally concentrated and segregated poverty of East Harlem has
historically generated a denunciatory literature, both academic and
artistic. This may be due to the visible proximity of this poorest
neighborhood in Manhattan to the city’s richest residential district,
and because East Harlem is within walking distance of the most powerful
art galleries and publishing companies in the United States. Most of the
social science research on the neighborhood has involved some level of
participant—observation fieldwork, usually around the poverty—pathology
theme. In the 1920s and 1930s, the influential criminologist Thrasher,
mentioned earlier in this chapter, devoted the last decade and a half of
his life to studying juvenile delinquency in Italian Harlem. Through his
institute at New York University he funded dozens of master’s and
doctoral dissertations, all premised on his ecological diffusionist
notion of “interstitial areas.” He posited that crime and social
pathology emerged in expanding concentric circles from out of core urban
poverty areas.⁴⁶ As simplistic or atheoretical as Thrasher’s approach
may appear half a century later, his research represented a progressive
intellectual critique of the social Darwinist and racialist thinking of
his era.

In the Introduction I discussed the next major theory on poverty to
emerge, at least in part, on the basis of fieldwork in El Barrio. Known
as the “culture of poverty theory” and developed by the anthropologist
Oscar Lewis in the early 1960s, it was also originally intended to
contribute to a national call for attention to the plight of the urban
poor. Limited by the psychological-reductionist “culture and
personality” school that dominated U.S. anthropology at that time,
however, Lewis’s theory backfired. By focusing on the
poverty-reproducing psychological traits that are socialized into
children by dysfunctionally poor families, his material is often
interpreted as confirming the conservative, blame-the-victim
individualistic interpretations of the persistence of poverty that
dominate most popular thinking in the United States.

The artistic, literary, and multimedia productions the neighborhood has
inspired have better withstood the test of time than have the social
scientific theories. James Agee, the New York—based author who
immortalized sharecropper poverty in the deep South during the
Depression, made his way uptown to El Barrio during World War II
accompanied by the photographer Helen Levitt. They made an experimental
film on the energy of the children swarming the streets that is still
occasionally presented in major museum exhibitions. Of more popular
renown, El Barrio inspired Ben E. King’s 1961 hit single, “A Rose in
Spanish Harlem.”⁴⁷ Finally, and most important, much of the Nuyorican
literary genre is specifically set on East Harlem streets. This literary
movement continues to be highly productive and to receive international
worldwide recognition. In fact, it has emerged as a symbol of dignity
and cultural resistance to poverty and social marginalization in the
Puerto Rican diaspora.⁴⁸

The Reconcentration of Poverty in Easternmost East Harlem

Public-policy makers and social scientists have not shared in the
literary and artistic celebrations of East Harlem’s inhabitants. On the
contrary, as noted throughout this chapter, virtually all written
accounts, from the turn of the century through the 1950s, are
overwhelmingly negative in their portrayal of living conditions.
Ironically, many of the academic or policy-oriented reports specify that
the precise blocks where I lived and where Ray’s network of crack
dealers operated were the poorest and most delinquent section of Harlem.
For example, a 1935 ethnographic report notes, “The nearer one comes to
the East River . . . the more marked the deterioration.”⁴⁹

Presumably it was this persistent hypermarginalization that prompted in
the late 1950s a massive, multimillion-dollar “urban renewal” program in
the microneighborhood where the Game Room was located in the early
1990s. Typical of the public sector poverty policies from the period,
the result was the physical destruction of several dozen square blocks
of a functioning, working-poor community. Despite several denunciations
in the local press, tens of thousands of the last remaining
working-class Italian-Americans in the neighborhood were displaced by
bulldozers in the name of “slum clearance.”⁵⁰ Subsequently, several
thousand poor Puerto Rican and African-American families were moved into
the newly constructed red-brick high-rise housing projects to make it
one of the most concentrated foci of dislocated poverty and anomic
infrastructure in all of New York City.

In the early 1990s, according to the official statistics, 15,736 of the
40,162 families who lived in East Harlem resided in Housing Authority
projects. This figure does not include the additional 20 percent who
illegally overcrowded project apartments, or the several thousand
families who relied on other forms of subsidized housing, such as
Section-8. It is precisely this kind of physically concentrated and
ethnically segregated poverty that allows violently self-destructive
street cultures to engulf public space and vulnerable lives in so many
inner-city, marginal, working-class neighborhoods throughout the United
States.⁵¹

As urban renewal bulldozers were physically implementing economic and
racial segregation in the 1950s and 1960s, despairing social workers
filled the files of philanthropic aid societies with Pollyannaish
reports on the dramatic decay of community life in Italian Harlem –
slated to become El Barrio:

Basic requirements for even minimal living [are] lacking. . . .
Robberies are frequent. The looting of water pipes, radiators, toilets,
and bathtubs cause hardship to the remaining tenants. . . . Litter fills
vacant apartments and hallways. Rats are a serious health menace. They
occupy demolished buildings, and multiply and flourish in the buildings
that remain.

. . . Derelicts congregate in vacant apartments to drink or use drugs,
and people are fearful of entering or leaving their homes.

Nobody, not even an angel, can avoid trouble here! I feel sorriest for
the little kids – they’ve never known what a decent neighborhood is
like\!⁵²

With the advantage of historical hindsight these apocryphal social
worker reports confirm the cliché “plus ça change plus c’est la même
chose.” (The more it changes the more it remains the same.) As a matter
of fact, I was able to find a 1956 Community Service Society report
describing a semi-inhabited tenement going up in flames on precisely the
same corner where I was living in 1990:

On a day in August, at the corner of [X]th street and [Y] Avenue, we
joined a group of recreation workers watching a bonfire almost two
stories high, burning the last traces of a house. . . . Smoke was
blackening the wall of an adjacent, partially-occupied dwelling, where a
woman gazed in consternation.

. . . Dust from falling brick covered everything.

We became aware of an isolated window here and there – one with a flower
box or curtains, one framing a child’s face.⁵³

Twenty-four years later, I, too, found myself gazing in consternation
from my decrepit tenement apartment window at “a bonfire almost two
stories high, burning the last traces” of one of the few remaining
tenements across an empty lot, catercorner from mine.

From Speakeasy to Crackhouse

Most relevant from the perspective of the street dealers this book
analyzes, East Harlem has always been “one of the outstanding crime
breeding areas in greater New York City,” according to the experts on
delinquency.⁵⁴ Consistent with the first cash crop of the valley’s
original Dutch tobacco-growing settlers, purveying addictive substances
has been an important source of income generation for local residents.
Thrasher’s students, who combed the streets for their master’s and
doctoral theses in the late 1920s, denounced the proliferation of
“speakeasies on every side.”⁵⁵ They portray a filthy, demoralized
community unable to control its dens of iniquity.

Old brick buildings row on row, dingy, dreary, drab, wash flying like
strings of pennants from the fire escapes, garments of a none too
selected choice; streets littered with rubbish from push carts, busy
curb markets of the district; “mash” in dark heaps in the gutter, silent
evidence of a flourishing illegal industry; garbage in piles, thrown
from kitchens where heavy, oily fare is prepared for gluttonous
gourmands; pencilled or chalk lines on walls and side walks, indecent
expressions of lewd minds; ground floor shops, unattractive warehouses
of dusty stock; cellar pool rooms, “drink parlors,” many curtained or
shuttered, suggestive of their real business; human traffic busy about
nothing in this squalid congestion.⁵⁶

Sixty years later it is crackhouses and shooting galleries rather than
speakeasies that are “on every side.” While walking down my block,
instead of tripping over “mash heaps” (the prime ingredient for bootleg
liquor) I crunch under my feet plastic crack vials and an occasional
hypodermic needle.

Once again, many of the details of crime and vice in the
microneighborhood served by Ray’s network have remained the same since
the turn of the century. For example, La Farmacia’s corner, where Ray’s
most profitable social club crackhouse was located, has always been a
central locale for retail narcotics distribution. This is evident from
the paper trail left by the embattled public library serving the Hell
Gate corridor. It happens to be located a hundred yards from La
Farmacia’s corner, and during my residence the administrator of the
library was the head of the neighborhood’s Drug Busters Coalition. They
spent an unsuccessful year and a half attempting to shut a shooting
gallery that operated in an abandoned, city-owned building adjacent to
the library in full view of the only window in the library’s young-adult
section. Unable to pressure the public authorities to shut down the
shooting gallery, the Drug Busters Coalition negotiated a publicity
agreement with the Coca-Cola Company to provide funds to demolish the
shooting gallery tenement and build a children’s park. This private
sector—community collaboration, however, never materialized.

In the 1930s, instead of coke freaks, crackheads, and heroin junkies
parading in front of the local library, it was alcoholics who were
harassing patrons. In fact, the very same abandoned shooting gallery
tenement from the early 1990s appears to have been a speakeasy in the
late 1920s:

In the winter the janitor is called upon everyday or so to get drunk men
out of the library. In the morning drunken men are seen lying around on
the sidewalks so that policemen come and gather them up by the wagon
load. The house directly back of the library . . . was raided and locked
up for a year.⁵⁷

These details of the historical continuity of speakeasies, brothels,
crackhouses, and shooting galleries would be incidental if they did not
profoundly affect the quality of day-to-day interactions among the
majority of individuals who attempt to lead “healthy lives” in the
neighborhood. Once again, this is encapsulated by the hostile
relationship of the Hell Gate library to its surrounding blocks. The
librarians are angry about their working conditions and distrust their
patrons. Hence, early in my residence when I still had illusions about a
functioning public sector in the neighborhood, I took Angel, an
eleven-year-old neighbor, to the branch to get him a library card and to
introduce him to “the miracle of free books.” Not only were we
unsuccessful but we were humiliated in the process by a hostile
librarian. At the time, I assumed I fit the profile of a “dope fiend”
engineering a scheme to steal library books by manipulating the image of
an innocent child. In retrospect, I realized they might have thought I
was a pedophile trying to entrap a new victim.

The Omnipresence of Heroin and Cocaine

Within the neighborhood’s long heritage of a substance abuse—driven
underground economy, heroin and cocaine have been the most disruptive to
the daily quality of life. When the full economic effect of the new
federal government policies of criminalizing narcotics in the United
States were just being felt in the 1920s and 1930s, Thrasher’s students
already marveled at the remarkable profits to be made in the
neighborhood by selling morphine and cocaine. Forty years later an
undercover narcotics detective published a second-rate best seller, The
Pleasant Avenue Connection, on exactly the same subject.⁵⁸

Periodically, public opinion in the United States is swept by waves of
concern over the prevalence of drug use.⁵⁹ La Farmacia’s corner has
often been featured prominently in the spate of photojournalistic essays
that inevitably accompanies these almost cyclically recurring national
drug scares. This happened, for example, in 1990.⁶⁰ The blocks
surrounding La Farmacia’s corner were also described in detail in a 1951
social worker’s report commissioned by New York City’s Welfare Council,
entitled “The Menace of Narcotics to the Children of New York: A Plan to
Eradicate the Evil.” A junior high school youth is cited in the report
describing 110th Street as a place where “men line up to get their
injection . . . [and] almost go crazy.”⁶¹

Thirty-nine years later, on October 19, 1990, Ray’s clients made the
front page of one of New York City’s largest tabloids⁶² for doing the
exact same thing on the exact same corner, except that they were mixing
Ray’s cocaine with heroin in order to inject speedballs.

A plume of blood squirted into the dropper, mixing quickly with the
heroin solution. He squeezed the dropper pushing the blood into his
vein. . . . When he finished the others began the same dance of death.

. . . The junkies buy crack and heroin [and powder cocaine] on the
corner of 110th Street and Lexington Avenue – one of the busiest drug
locations in the city – and duck into . . . the lot to shoot.

For four decades, junior high school students have complained about the
maelstrom of drugs overwhelming these same East Harlem blocks: “‘There’s
always people out there putting needles in their arms,’ [said] sixth
grader Karima Sappe. They don’t care who comes around.’”⁶³ The situation
was so bad in 1990, the teachers at the middle school on 111th Street
covered the windows of their classrooms with black construction paper in
order to block the view of the city-owned vacant lot where Ray’s clients
injected speedballs. The teachers had their students draw a make-believe
sky with white chalk on the darkened windows.

Mafia Legacies in the Underground Economy

Once again, the historical continuity of visible substance abuse on the
blocks where Ray and his workers grew up and worked would be an
irrelevant coincidence if it did not have the profound effect of
repeatedly socializing new generations of ambitious, energetic
youngsters into careers of street dealing and substance abuse. Yet
again, much of a 1951 social worker’s report could have been written
without any changes in 1991:

Here is the way one boy put it: “Everybody is doing it. It is almost
impossible to make friends who are not addicts. If you don’t want to buy
the stuff, somebody is always there who is ready to give it to you. It
is almost impossible to keep away from it because it is practically
thrown at you. If they were to arrest people for taking the stuff, they
would have to arrest practically everybody.”⁶⁴

The same applies to Thrasher’s simple insights from the early 1930s that
the neighborhood’s “criminal traditions” initiated “a vicious cycle”
among youth:

The organization and operation [of] underworld crime in East Harlem
serves ... to promote and encourage the juvenile demoralization which
has later to eventuate in more crime.

The names of successful gangsters and racketeers have become by-words in
the mouths of the residents of the area and these men have often been
canonized by the juvenile and adolescent community of the streets and by
the gangs and clubs of boys and young men.⁶⁵

Thrasher’s students worried about the inappropriate reaction of Italian
children to crime films in local movie theaters. In other words, an
oppositional street culture was already being celebrated in the late
1920s:

There is one characteristic typical of these Italian child audiences
which has been noted by observations at various movies by social workers
and patrolmen in the area. Enthusiastic applause greets the success of
the villain and the downfall of any “cop” or representative of the
“Law.”⁶⁶

A material logic explains much of the uninterrupted historical appeal of
a criminally rooted oppositional street culture in East Harlem. The
extraordinary profit-making potential of the neighborhood’s underground
economy was first institutionalized by the Italian Mafia, who converted
the community into a supermarket for drugs and rackets. As early as 1893
a New York Times headline denounced organized crime in Italian Harlem:
“Mafia Code in New York . . . Assassination a Favorite Penalty for Real
or Fancied Wrong.”⁶⁷

Over the past century, organized crime has affected many intimate facets
of daily life in the neighborhood, redefining “common sense” in favor of
crime and violence. Journalists in the 1940s treated the corruption of
the local police force as an obvious statement of fact.⁶⁸ One of
Thrasher’s students during Prohibition was reprimanded by an exasperated
police officer for her naiveté: “Don’t you know the police are too well
paid to answer your questions.”⁶⁹ A 1946 New York Herald Tribune article
on the accessibility of weapons on East Harlem streets reads, once
again, much like a 1990s newspaper article, describing “arms ranging
from . . . sub-machine gun[s] to homemade rubber band pistols that
police say can fire a .22 caliber cartridge with sufficient force to
kill.”⁷⁰ In the same vein, Thrasher’s students documented the almost
routinized experience of murder in a manner that would be very familiar
to El Barrio residents in the 1990s. Indeed, it is interesting to
compare the following two fieldwork excerpts. The first fieldwork note
dates back to the late 1920s; I wrote the second in 1990:

A man sat outside in a chair by the door. He pointed to [building] 234
and said, “Two men killed here. Hands up. Sunday night. Men played cards
inside. No get money. Got away.” The floor was strewn with broken glass
from the doors and windows.⁷¹

[June 1990] Waiting bored for Ray outside the Social Club crackhouse,
Primo’s cousin Luis began chatting about the childhood memories the
block evoked. “Right there, right there on the wall [pointing]. Not
inside the Club, but outside towards the Avenue. Yeah, right on that
wall next to the fish store. I seen brains splattered right there.”

Dramatic public assassination is normalized throughout the neighborhood
by numerous “in memoriam” spray-paint graffiti paintings celebrating
fallen friends. On an abandoned building around the corner from my
tenement, a two-story graffiti “piece” advertised the famous Mafia hit
squad Murder Inc., reputed to have been based in the neighborhood in the
1970s and early 1980s.

Through the 1980s, most youths growing up in East Harlem knew that the
Genovese crime family – one of the five Sicilian “families” that run
organized rackets in New York City – traditionally controlled their
neighborhood. More concretely, local residents could point to the
individuals who publicly flaunt the economic success they have achieved
through violent crime. Coincidentally, “Fat Tony” Salerno, who was the
don of the Genovese family, kept a residence on the corner of the same
block where the Game Room and my tenement were located. My wife was the
first of us to discover this when she complained to a friend that the
produce stocked by the fruit store on our block was always rotten.
Through a barrage of laughter, she was advised not to shop there anymore
because her rotten-fruit sellers were really “Fat Tony’s boys.” They
were overseeing his still active numbers-running bank.⁷² These were the
same men who rushed down to the court to pay his $2 million
cash-up-front bail when he was arrested on February 25, 1985, exactly
three days before I moved into my apartment down the block. Halfway
through my residence, seventy-eight-year-old “Fat Tony” had 5 years
added to the 170-year sentence he was already serving in prison.⁷³

Despite his terminal incarceration, Fat Tony’s organization continued to
maintain several offices on the blocks surrounding me. Most were
old-fashioned whites-only social clubs. The most important one was
opposite the Our Lady of Mount Carmel Catholic church, where I baptized
my son. Geraldo Rivera put it on prime-time television, jumping up and
down outside the club, waving his finger at the black limousines
double-parked in front of the church, and stabbing his microphone into
the sullen faces of the tattooed Italian-Americans in their mid-twenties
standing guard on the curb. Another block farther down was Rao’s, one of
New York’s most exclusive restaurants in the 1980s. It was owned by
Vince, the eighty-year-old brother of Joe Rao mentioned earlier as the
person who obliged landlords to respect racial segregation through the
early 1970s.⁷⁴ His restaurant had a three-month waiting list –
presumably to screen the FBI officials who might be trying to pass as
downtown yuppies excited about genuine Italian food served in a unique
Mafia ambience. My “connected” Italian-American baby-sitter noted that
the floors above the restaurant were the official meeting hall for
high-level members of the Genovese clan. The windows on the top half of
the building were covered with corrugated metal to make it appear
semi-abandoned.

Out of fear of being killed, I made no concerted attempt to penetrate
what was left of the ranks of traditional organized crime on my
surrounding blocks. My caution was reinforced when a local real estate
agent – once again named Vinnie – was assassinated in a bank lobby two
days after I had applied for an apartment in one of his tenements. To
make their message clear to whichever faction of organized crime was
being sanctioned, the killers walked slowly out of the bank and left
Vinnie’s attaché case, which was stuffed with hundred-dollar bills,
lying on his bloodied stomach. I decided to limit myself to interacting
with Ray’s network. As a matter of fact, I did not even bother
requesting a refund of my application fee from Vinnie’s secretary lest
she surmise there was more than a coincidence between my visit to his
office and his subsequent murder.

I occasionally encountered one of Fat Tony’s loyal street lieutenants in
the Chinese takeout restaurant next to his produce shop on my block.
Even though he was always very friendly to me – obviously happy to see a
new white face in the neighborhood – I never dared ask him why he
sometimes made telephone calls at the pay phone on the corner while
flanked by two men carrying army-issued mobile communications knapsacks
and walkie-talkies. Nor did I ask him what was delivered to the basement
of his produce store by the young African-American man wearing a cowboy
hat and matching orange-pink leather outfit, who supervised the
unloading of dozens of “plaster of paris” sacks from the trunk of his
maroon Jaguar.

Although the Genovese family is said to be especially powerful in union
rackets, such as the New York City District Council via the United
Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners, there was something pathetic –
and at times comic – about the way their operations were decaying in
East Harlem during my years of residence in the neighborhood.⁷⁵ It is as
if they resisted the logic of upward mobility and ethnic succession that
the other four families have taken advantage of in New York City’s
underworld. One can detect a distinct lack of respect for the East
Harlem—based Genovese clan among the other New York City godfathers.
According to the FBI, when Paul Castellano, the head godfather of New
York’s infamous Mafia Commission, was arrested along with the four other
Mafia clan heads, he burst out laughing over how badly dressed Fat Tony
was.⁷⁶ The ultimate local humiliation of the Genovese family occurred
halfway through my residence when the studio apartment above Fat Tony’s
fruit stand—numbers bank was burglarized. Our Italian-American
baby-sitter was visibly shaken. “I says, ‘Where am I? The dark ages?’ I
says, ‘This can’t be!’” Even at the height of the race riots in the
1960s no one had dared touch any of the Italian-owned businesses in Fat
Tony’s vicinity, “There was respect for us back then.”

A local real estate agent who thought I was interested in purchasing
East Harlem tenements admitted that petty street crime had increased
since Fat Tony’s indictments in the late 1980s. She reassured me,
however, that the problem could be solved by installing steel doors – as
she had done on the building she herself had bought from Fat Tony
several years ago. She also noted that the federal racketeering
indictments had artificially depressed the local real estate market
because Fat Tony and his associates were hastily selling their tenements
to pay their lawyers’ fees. The real estate agent also assured me that
since the demise of the mob:

There’s just not a lot of negativity anymore about renting to a black
tenant. Back in 1985, you had to have a certain respect for the lay of
the land – if you understand what I mean. Now, they just don’t pay as
much attention to the neighborhood.

Once again, on the positive side, she explained that Fat Tony’s
“political clout” in City Hall had lasted long enough to ensure that the
blocks east of Second Avenue were not overwhelmed by city-financed
social welfare programs that were renovating abandoned tenements in the
late 1980s and early 1990s to resettle homeless families.

The Free Market for Crack and Cocaine

The demise of Mafia hegemony on the street occurred just as the
underground economy was redefining itself around cocaine and crack in
the mid-1980s, which were supplanting heroin as the undisputedly most
profitable product. The vigor of the crack—cocaine economy during the
late 1980s and early 1990s was largely the result of an aggressive
federal drug policy prioritizing the criminal repression of smuggling.
Sometime in the early to mid-1980s, marijuana importers working the
Latin American supply routes adapted to the escalating levels of
search-and-seizure they were facing at U.S. borders by switching from
transporting marijuana to trafficking in cocaine. Cocaine is much easier
to transport clandestinely because it takes up only a fraction of the
physical space occupied by the equivalent dollar value of marijuana.
U.S. inner cities consequently were flooded with high-purity cocaine at
bargain prices shortly after the federal government increased drug
interdiction efforts. According to the Drug Enforcement Administration,
the kilo price of cocaine dropped fivefold during the 1980s from $80,000
to $15,000.⁷⁷

The Colombian organized crime cartels who have historically maintained a
monopoly over cocaine production and transport, responded vigorously to
the new market opportunities in the early 1980s and violently bypassed
the traditional networks of the Italian-dominated Mafia that specialized
in heroin. The Colombians tapped directly into the entrepreneurial urge
that is such an integral facet of the American Dream. The magic of a
highly competitive market spawned a new, more profitable product –
crack, which is, as noted in the Introduction, merely an alloy of
cocaine and baking soda. The admixture of baking soda, however, allows
the psychoactive agent in cocaine to be released when smoked. Powder
cocaine, on the other hand, can only be sniffed or injected. The
capillaries in the lungs have a greater absorption capacity than the
arteries of the musculoskeletal system or the veins in the nostrils.
Consequently, crack delivers the psychoactive effects of cocaine to the
brain with maximum efficiency and speed. Furthermore, within minutes of
smoking, crack users crave another exhilarating rush of 2 minutes and a
half. They are not content with the subtler, longer-term high that comes
from sniffing powder cocaine. This makes crack a perfectly flexible
consumer commodity. Even though individual doses are inexpensive and
therefore accessible to the poor, a user with money can spend virtually
infinite sums in a single extended session of binging. This
technological and marketing breakthrough of alloying cocaine to baking
soda unleashed the energy of thousands of wanna-be mom-and-pop
entrepreneurs who were only too eager to establish high-profit,
high-risk retail crack businesses. Hence, in late 1985, the Game Room,
which had been a struggling candy store selling nickel bags of
marijuana, upgraded itself to become a video arcade purveying $10 vials
of crack.

Crack and cocaine inaugurated the next phase in the long tradition of
ethnic successions in East Harlem’s underground economy. New, energetic
networks like Ray’s filled the vacuum left by the Italian Mafia’s upward
mobility, and its clumsy fumbling of cocaine—crack marketing. Even on
the last two easternmost blocks of the Hell Gate corridor, where the
Mafia had once so proudly and violently ruled, upstart Puerto Rican,
African-American, and Dominican entrepreneurs began struggling for
control of sidewalk crack-sales points.

Although no longer as powerful as it once was locally, the old-fashioned
Mafia has left a powerful institutional and ideological legacy on East
Harlem by demonstrating decisively that crime and violence pay. This, of
course, is periodically reinforced by mainstream society with the
recurring financial scandals on Wall Street and in the banking world.
Caesar certainly absorbed the message, and put it into practice in his
job as lookout at the Game Room.

Caesar: The only way you could survive in this world is to be connected
or to be connected dirty. You got to be making your money dirty like the
Eye-talians.

And if you’re clean, you still got to be gettin’ over white-collar
dirty. Because you’re dirty. You’re already rich but you’re conniving,
sca-niving deals.

Like that thing they had on the news about them [savings and loan] banks
. . . like that Silverado shit that, that dude – that the taxpayers have
to pay billions of dollars ’Cause of that.

Why do these people get away with that? That’s what I want to know.

3 CRACKHOUSE MANAGEMENT: ADDICTION, DISCIPLINE, AND DIGNITY

Hell, yeah, I felt good when I owned the Game Room. In those days
everybody be looking for me; everybody needed me. When I drove up,
people be opening the door for me, and offering to wash my car. Even
kids too little to understand anything about drugs looked up to me.

Felix

The logistics of selling crack are not dramatically different from those
of any other risky private sector retail enterprise. Selling
high-volume, inexpensive products is an inherently boring undertaking
that requires honest, disciplined workers in order to be successful.
Such businesses are inherently rife with traditional management versus
labor confrontations, as well as internal jealousies or rivalries within
employee hierarchies. It is only the omnipresent danger, the high profit
margin, and the desperate tone of addiction that prevent crack dealing
from becoming overwhelmingly routine and tedious. The details of how the
Game Room was run during the years I lived next to it provide a good
example of these dynamics.

Living with Crack

Ray did not found the Game Room. The person who actually established the
250-square-foot video game arcade as a crackhouse was a childhood friend
of his named Felix, who was also Primo’s first cousin. Felix did not run
a tight operation; he reveled too much in street-corner glory and
consequently did not insulate himself from the police by hiring a
manager, or at least some intermediary worker-assistants, to make the
actual hand-to-hand sales. Instead, for the first year after opening
shop he ran every detail of his crackhouse operation with the exception
of the “cooking” of the crack – its processing – which he delegated to
his wife, Candy, in traditional patriarchal style. The bulk of Felix’s
energy at the Game Room was devoted to cultivating sexual liaisons with
addicted women – especially teenage girls.

[images]

The Game Room crackhouse. Photo by Philippe Bourgois.

During this early phase of the crack epidemic in late 1985, Primo was
one of Felix’s steadiest customers. He had lost his job as a
messenger-clerk at a typesetting shop, had broken up with his wife, and
had abandoned all pretense of supporting their two-and-a-half-year-old
son. Instead, he had returned home to his fifty-year-old mother’s
nineteenth-floor housing project apartment, where he shared a cramped
bedroom with one of his three older sisters. While his mother sewed all
day in the living room for an off-the-books garment subcontractor to
supplement her welfare payments, Primo dedicated himself full time to
hustling and robbing for his crack habit.

In later years, in front of his friends, workers, and even his
customers, Primo enjoyed reminiscing about the desperate year he spent
as a crack addict:

Primo: I was in my own habit world. I didn’t give a fuck about anything.

Let me tell you about one time when I was on a mission [crack binge]. I
wanted a blast [catching the eyes of his crack-addicted lookout Caesar].

Caesar: [spinning around from his position in the doorway] Yeah, yeah.
Your only worry was making a cloud in your stem [glass crack pipe].

Primo: One time I was with my homeboy and his girl. We saw this Mexican
sleeping on the floor in the lobby of my aunt’s building. He was just
probably drunk. He looked like he had a job, maybe, because a homeless
would not have had a gold ring.

As soon as I saw him, I just went, “Tú times la hora” [You got the
time]? And as he got the time [making the motion of looking at a
wristwatch], I grabbed him by the back of the neck, and put my 007
[knife]¹ in his back [grabbing me in a choke hold from behind], I put it
in his back – right here [releasing me to point to his lower spine]. And
I was jigging him hard! [grinning, and catching his girlfriend Maria’s
eye].

Caesar: Them Mexican people get drunk like real crazy man. Everybody be
ripping them off; they easy prey ’Cause they illegal most of them.

Primo: I said: “No te mueva cabrón o te voy a picar como un pernil”
[Don’t move motherfucker or I’ll stick you like a roasted pig]. [we all
chuckle.]

Yeah, yeah, like a piece of pernil – a pork shoulder . . . like how you
stab a pork shoulder when you want to put all the flavoring in the
holes.

Caesar: Everybody take Mexicans like a joke. It’s a little crime wave.
Mexicans be fucked-up with crime in New York. That’s like the new thing
to do.

Primo: The Mexican panicked. He looked like he wanted to escape, but the
more he tried to escape, the more I wouldn’t let go and the more I was
jigging him.

And I had a big 007. I wasn’t playing, either, I was serious. I would
have jigged him. If he would have made an attempt, I would have went
like CHKKK [grimacing painfully while twisting his wrist forward in a
slow-motion stab].

And I’d regret it later, but I was looking at that gold ring he had.
[chuckle].

I put the Mexican to the floor, poking him hard, and my homeboy’s girl
started searching him.

I said, “Take everything, man! Search for everything!”

She found his chain. I said, “Yo, take that asshole’s fucking ring too.”

He was going: [imitating a high-pitched whine] “Oh no! Por favor, por
favor!”

It must have been like a thing he treasured, maybe. He was saying “Take
whatever else, but not the ring.” I said, “Fuck that shit, you don’t
have enough money homeboy. [gruffly barking his words like a foreman at
a construction site] Take the fucking ring off his finger!”

After she took the ring we broke out. We sold the ring and then we cut
out on her to go get a blast.

Caesar: Yeah, yeah. You was smoking heavenly.

Primo: We left her in the park, she didn’t even get a cent.

Caesar: Smokin’ lovely.

Primo: She helped for nothing – got jerked.

Caesar: [frazzled by his images of smoking crack] The only reason I get
high is because I love it. The first blast is the best’est one. It’s
like a Ruffle potato chip. You just can’t have one. You need more,
’Cause it’s good.

It’s a brain thing. It’s thick. Once you take that first blast, then the
whole night is going to be a total adventure into madness. It’s just a
thing, you have to have more.

Primo: Chill the fuck out Caesar! Why you always be interrupting me when
I’m talking with Felipe?

At the height of his own crack-smoking days, Primo’s life took a
dramatic turn when Felix’s out-of-control machismo provided him with a
brand-new, well-paid job opportunity.

Felix was hanging around with some woman in a hotel in New Jersey. It
was on the second floor, and Candy – his wife – had found out about it
and came looking for him.

And so Felix jumped off from the second floor landing and he fucked up
his foot, so he couldn’t work.²

The next day Felix asked me if I would help him out. From that day on, I
just stood working here.

Once Felix’s ankle recovered, he maintained Primo as manager of daily
sales in order to devote even more time to hanging out on the street. He
came frequently to the Game Room to display his “sexual conquests” –
usually crack-addicted young women. Felix’s antics allowed Primo to keep
his job, which provided the stability and sense of self-worth that
finally allowed him to kick his crack habit after twelve months of
steady smoking.

Primo’s dream of going straight almost came to a crashing end when
Felix’s wife, Candy, who was six months pregnant at the time, shot Felix
in the stomach to punish him for sleeping with her sister. As soon as
Felix recovered from his hospital stay, he was sent “upstate” to prison
to serve an unrelated two- to four-year prison sentence for weapons
possession. Candy immediately sold the rights to the Game Room for
$3,000 to Ray, who himself had just completed a four-year sentence
upstate for assault with a deadly weapon, following his $14,000 rooftop
shoot-out above the heroin den he was holding up.

Restructuring Management at the Game Room

After a tense week or two of negotiations, which temporarily drove Primo
back to binging on crack, Ray maintained Primo as manager of the Game
Room on an eight-hour shift from 4:00 p.m. to midnight. The price of
vials was dropped to five dollars to make them more competitive with two
new teenage outfits operating in the stairwells of the housing project
opposite the Game Room where vials were selling for three dollars and
even two dollars on discount nights. Primo was to be paid on a
piece-rate basis, receiving one dollar for every five dollars he sold.
Primo had been held up at shotgun point several weeks earlier and
obtained the right from Ray to hire any lookouts or assistants he
wanted, so long as he paid them out of his own piece-rate wages. Ray
imposed stricter limits, however, on the behavior of noncustomer
visitors in order to reduce crowding and noise levels on the stoop in
front of the crackhouse.

Ray proved to be a brilliant labor relations manager. Over the years, I
watched him systematically extract higher and higher profit margins from
his problematic workers. Having grown up in El Barrio as a gang leader
in the early 1970s, he knew how to discipline his workforce firmly
without overstepping culturally defined rules of mutual respect. He knew
exactly where to set violent limits, and when to express friendship and
flexible understanding without ever revealing vulnerability.

Ray was particularly skillful in his manipulation of kinship networks to
ensure the loyalty of his often addicted and violent workers. The
majority of his employees were blood-related kin, or were affiliated
through marriage, or had been incorporated through a fictive kinship
arrangement. He asked Primo, for example, to be the godfather of one of
his sons, thereby establishing a compadre relationship. The institution
of compadrazgo is a powerful tradition in Puerto Rican culture that
sanctifies solidarity and reciprocal obligations between men.
Ironically, several generations earlier, back in the mountains of rural
Puerto Rico, local landlords had probably manipulated this same
paternalistic godfather institution to coerce the indebted day-labor of
Ray and Primo’s grandfathers or great-grandfathers.³ In his more modern
context, Ray also benefited from the contemporary street-culture kinship
arrangements that oblige women to establish serial households with
different men through their life cycles. Hence, his childhood friendship
with his employee, Luis, was cemented into a quasi kin-relationship by
their having fathered children with the same woman.

In the first few weeks following his takeover of the Game Room, Ray’s
business acumen – specifically his lowering of prices and his raising of
the quality of the product – made business boom. The Game Room easily
outcompeted the low-quality powder cocaine sold out of a grocery store
four doors down as well as the budget-rate crack hawked by teenage crews
in the project stairwells across the street. An immediate crisis for
control of the site erupted, however, when a police offensive against
drug dealing in public school playgrounds pushed several Dominican-run
heroin companies onto the block. All of a sudden our sidewalk was
swarmed by half a dozen four-man teams, each with two lookouts, one
pitcher, and a runner. After some tense face-offs, Ray pressured the
Dominican managers to respect his space and move across the avenue.

Within a few months, Ray had invested his Game Room profits into opening
two new franchises: one – which was relatively short-lived – in the
second-floor apartment of a condemned building being renovated by New
York City funds to become subsidized public housing; and the other, the
Social Club on La Farmacia’s corner by the Hell Gate post office. During
this initial period of expansion Primo basked in a distinctly privileged
position within Ray’s budding network of crackhouses:

I was the first one of the regular crew to start working with this guy
[Ray]. I was saving money; I wasn’t getting high – only a few beers
occasionally. And I used to hang out with Ray. At that time, he didn’t
have no cars yet. He use to be on foot. And I use to stay with him,
hanging around every night.

Both of us used to go home with a knot [wad of bills] and save a coupla’
hundreds. The next day, I used to come down with change – you know,
thirty or forty dollars – money in my pocket to spend while I was
working.

As a formal, founding member of Ray’s growing organization, Primo was
eligible for the benefits that are part of a crack dealer’s pay – such
as bail money and lawyer’s fees, bonus payments during special holidays
(Christmas, Easter, and Father’s Day), periodic gifts for his son, and
an occasional lobster dinner at Orchard Beach, Coney Island, or Far
Rockaway. Primo’s lookouts, on the other hand, were a step lower in the
hierarchy. There is probably no work site in the legal economy where
Primo could ever aspire realistically to becoming a manager, or even a
privileged employee within his first year of being hired. Toward the end
of my residence on the block, I frequently asked Primo to give me
retrospective accounts of the half-dozen workers he had hired over the
five years I knew him at the Game Room.

Primo: [sitting on a car hood in front of the Game Room] The first one
that worked for me was Willie. I used to feed him and give him a coupla’
dollars at the end of the day.

After him came Little Pete – I used to give him a hundred and fifty
dollars a week. Strictly one fifty – plus beers – things like that.
After Little Pete came Benzie because Little Pete got promoted fast by
Ray to the Club [on La Farmacia’s corner].

I used to pay Benzie daily. I used to give him thirty-five or forty
dollars, sometimes fifty on a good night – which is not a lot – but I
was treating Benzie better than the others. So after a while I let
Benzie keep half and half. Me and him, we used to split everything.

I hired Caesar permanently because of problems between Benzie and Ray.
Before that Caesar was only part time because he was always acting too
stupid. He used to get jealous because of Benzie. But I told Caesar,
“You can’t sell, ’Cause you’re a crackhead and you fuck up.”

There’s always a problem paying Caesar. I don’t know what to do with
that nigga’ [waving dismissively at Caesar, who was standing in the
doorway]. He’s been acting stupid. I gotta talk to him.

Philippe: You sound like a fuckin’ hard-ass boss, complaining about your
workers’ attitude problems.

Primo: Nah Felipe. I don’t act like no boss. I don’t bitch. I have never
succeeded with power in here. Even when I had little thirteen-year-old
Junior helping me out – you know, Felix’s son – he would say “Okay,
okay, shut up already” to me when I would tell him to do something.

The only time I have full authority is when I’m really pissed off, but I
don’t really want to boss you around just to boss you around.

I have to keep things from getting too fucked up here because I’m
responsible. If anything is missing, I’m gonna hear it from Ray.

All of them [waving disdainfully at Caesar again] used to like to take
over the whole show.

[loud gunshots]. Yo! Chill out Felipe. Why you so petro?

So . . . after I put Benzie to work, he used to act like he owned the
whole show. It’s like he feels power just because he’s dealing, so he
feels like he could diss [disrespect] all the customers. He used to dish
[mispronunciation of diss] some good people, especially all the men.

He dissed them, like . . . like they were kids – like shit. And these
guys, they do what they do, but they’re human beings and they’re cool,
you know. I used to tell him lots of times to “cool the fuck out.” I’d
have to tell him “I know this guy; talk to him nicely. Respétalo, bro!”
[respect him]. But he wouldn’t play by the rules. He was treating people
like shit. So I brought Caesar back, but también [also] he thinks he’s
running the whole show.

Philippe: Isn’t Caesar worse than Benzie?

Primo: Bohf [both] are bad. But Caesar is worser because he don’t give a
fuck about anybody. I don’t even trust him anymore.

Indeed, I vividly remember Benzie chanting triumphantly to oncoming
customers, “That’s right, mah’ man! Come on! Keep on killing yourself;
bring me that money; smoke yourself to death; make me rich.” Of course,
Primo ultimately was not much more courteous to his clients. He
sometimes joined his colleagues in ridiculing the walking human
carcasses that so many street-level crack addicts become after several
months of smoking. In the Game Room, this was often conjugated by an
explicitly racist and sexist dynamic:

Caesar: Felipe, you shoulda seen these two dirty moyo motherfuckers who
came by here earlier. It was a moreno [African-American]⁴ and his girl.

Primo: [laughing] She slipped on her ass walking out the door.

Caesar: And she musta broke that ass, ’Cause she tripped and fell face
first.

Primo: I saw her limping . . .

Caesar: She got damaged, man, because she hit that iron thing that we
got there stuck in the cement.

She limped off. She limped away real fucked up. But homeboy didn’t give
a fuck that his woman fell down; he just walked away.

[perhaps noticing my silence, he shook his head righteously] It was
wrong, boy.

Primo: [ignoring me and laughing at Caesar’s righteousness] No man, he
was thirsty!

Caesar: Yeah! Yeah! He was like, “Fuck her. Ah’m‘a’ smoke.” [inhaling
deeply with a blissful grin, and then spinning around to face me] I
don’t care what you think Felipe, morenos be more fucked up and eviler
than Puerto Ricans. Because when she fell I said, “Oh, shit, you all
right there?”

But her man, he was like . . . he jumped over her and walked out in
front of her.

Curbing Addiction and Channeling Violence

Primo’s close friendship with Caesar was a complicated one. Caesar’s
drinking often unleashed uncontrollable outbursts of aggression and when
he binged on crack – which was almost every time he got paid – he ended
up borrowing or stealing from everyone around him. Nevertheless, for the
last three years of my residence on the block Caesar and Primo were
inseparable. Caesar lasted the longest of all the lookouts and other
crackhouse assistants whom Primo hired.

Sometimes I thought Primo tolerated Caesar’s poor work discipline
because he sympathized with Caesar’s crack addiction. He seemed to be
providing Caesar with the same kind of supportive environment for
quitting that he had been afforded by Felix when he was first hired to
sell at the Game Room. At other times I suspected that the reason all of
Primo’s subcontracted employees – Willie, Benzie, Little Pete, and
Caesar – were crack addicts was because this enabled Primo to pay them
lower wages and to impose more dependent working conditions. Often he
substituted payments-in-kind (vials of crack) for cash remuneration at
the end of the shift. Of course, Primo did not have much choice since
most of the people in his world were crack users. On a few occasions,
Primo acknowledged his manipulation of the addiction of his workers as
well as his own dependence on Ray for steady cash to buy powder cocaine
and alcohol for himself.

Primo: It was stupid slow tonight. The shit we’re selling is whack. I’ve
only got thirty dollars for me, and I gotta give half to Caesar.

But since it’s so slow we just don’t give each other money, we just
spend it together.

Plus, you see, we had already borrowed money from Ray from before so we
have to pay him back little by little.

As if to illustrate his words, almost without breaking stride, Primo
handed a ten-dollar bill to an emaciated coke seller who happened to be
standing in our path, and pocketed a half-inch-long vial of white
powder. Caesar had walked ahead of us and did not hear Primo whisper to
me:

Primo: Caesar doesn’t really keep track of it. I can jerk him. It’s not
no fifty-fifty thing.

Despite regularly drinking liquor and sniffing cocaine with Caesar,
Primo genuinely tried to wean his friend and worker away from his more
destructive and uncontrollable crack binging. Over the years, he
experimented with half a dozen different schemes to rehabilitate Caesar
and convert him into a more disciplined worker.

Caesar was always fucking up. He always wanted me to pay him each night,
but then he’d take the money and break out to smoke. He’d come find me
later, begging me for more money.

I’d say, “You stupid? I paid you already. Don’t do that shit to me. You
crazy, boy? Don’t ask me for no money. I gave you your fucking pay.”

Then the next day, he wouldn’t show up for work or he’d come late. So
then I didn’t use to pay him daily. I used to pay him at the end of the
week when Ray pays me.

Even that didn’t work. [pausing to sniff out of a folded dollar bill
full of powder cocaine] I was tired of him doing that to me. So one day,
when I paid him, I said, “If you go and fuck this up and don’t come in
tomorrow. I’m not going to keep on working with you no more, because I’m
getting tired of you.”

Shortly after that is when I hired Benzie, who was still one of my
customers at the time.

A year or so earlier, Primo had fired his friend Willie – nicknamed
“O.D.” because of his overdose-style of binging – for exactly the same
reason. According to Primo, O.D.’s addiction was even more unacceptable
since he smoked during work hours. Under pressure from his father,
Willie joined the army. He was the only person in Ray’s network able to
enter the military because he was the only one to have a high school
degree – which he had obtained on a fluke affirmative action program in
a downtown elite private high school that has since declared bankruptcy.
Trained as a tank driver, he miraculously escaped the Gulf War in
January 1991 when he happened to be on furlough in East Harlem binging
on crack. He simply prolonged his binge and went AWOL.

Despite Primo’s perennial complaints – compared to an addict like OD or
a street culture prima donna like Benzie – Caesar did an excellent job
as lookout. He personified the personal logic of violence in the
street’s overarching culture of terror by intimidating everyone around
him with his reputation for unpredictable outbursts of rage. The only
person who ever disrespected the Game Room premises while Caesar was on
duty was a jealous young man high on angel dust. He was subsequently
carried away from the premises with a fractured skull. I cannot forget
hearing the nauseating thump of the baseball bat that caught the
offending man squarely on the forehead just as the Game Room door behind
me shut as I was fleeing the scene. Primo later confided in me that he
had to restrain Caesar after three blows to keep him from killing the
man while he lay unconscious on the floor. Caesar loved to remind me and
anyone else within earshot of the event. It was good public relations
for ensuring the security of the premises.⁵

Caesar: That nigga’ was talking shit for a long time, about how we
pussy. How he fuckin’ control the block and how: [putting his hands on
his hips and waving his head back and forth, imitating a spoiled child’s
taunts] “I can do whatever I want.”

And we were trying to take it calm like until he starts talkin’
this’n’that, about how he gonna drop a dime on us [report us to the
police].

That’s when I grabbed the bat – I looked at the ax that Primo keeps
behind the Pac-Man but then I said, “No; I want something that’s going
to be short and compact. I only gotta swing a short distance to clock
the shit out of this motherfucker.”

[shouting out the Game Room door] You don’t control shit, because we
rocked your fuckin’ ass. Ha! Ha! Ha!

[turning back to me] That was right when you ran out the door Felipe.
But the bottom line, Felipe, is survival of the fittest – or survival
with a helmet, because I had got wild.

Now I gotta try to get Ray to lend me his Lincoln.

Another benefit Caesar derived from his inability to control his
underlying rage was a lifelong monthly social security insurance check
for being – as he put it – “a certified nut case,” which he periodically
reconfirmed by occasionally attempting to commit suicide.

In Ray’s judgment, Caesar was too out of control to be trusted, and he
was never formally hired into the network. Ray was much more cautious
than Primo about whom he hired. Only in exceptional cases did he give
breaks to full-blown addicts or excessively violent individuals. Caesar
was acutely aware of Ray’s rejection of him, but nevertheless
continually aspired to formal inclusion in his organization.

Caesar: Ray don’t pay me directly, I’m subcontracted by Primo.

If I go to jail, I’m Primo’s responsibility but Ray will look out for
me, ’Cause he likes to keep me around too, for security reasons. He
wants to slide me into the organization.

Plus I don’t got no felony arrests. I got the cleanest [criminal] record
out of anybody working for Ray. If I got busted, he knows I wouldn’t
jerk him for the bail money like Benzie did. I’d keep going to court and
I wouldn’t drop a dime.

Benzie, the lookout who replaced Caesar, was also a crack addict, but
unlike Caesar he followed Primo’s example and used his position as drug
dealer as a trampoline for overcoming his crack addiction by
substituting it for a less virulent powder cocaine habit occasionally
supplemented by heroin. This allowed for a less hierarchical
relationship and Primo promptly promoted him to partner. Particularly
interesting in Benzie’s case is that he had originally been holding a
permanent legal job as a janitor’s assistant at an exclusive men’s club
in midtown Manhattan at the time that Primo offered him the position of
lookout. It was only once he fully immersed himself in street culture’s
underground economy as a powerful figure – a dealer – that he was able
to stop using crack. In other words, Benzie started using crack while
working legally, and not until he quit his legitimate job to work full
time as a crack dealer was he able to kick his crack habit. The
responsibilities of his new position as a street seller forced him to
straighten out.

Primo: After I fired Caesar I started working by myself again until,
somehow, some way, this guy [pointing to Benzie] started giving me hints
that he wanted to work, and I liked’ed him. [pausing to sniff again]

So I started asking him, “You wanna work here?” ’Cause I wanted to take
it easy. [sniffing from the tip of a key dipped into a ten-dollar
glassine packet of heroin and passing it to Benzie]

Benzie: [sniffing] At the time I was working legit with my Pops at the
Yacht Club as a maintenance engineer. I used to come over here [to the
Game Room] after work.

When Primo hired me that gave me two jobs.

You know at what time I used to get up to get to the Yacht Club? Five
o’clock in the mornin’ because I used to have to be there at seven – and
right on the dot! From seven until three-thirty I be at the Yacht Club.
Then at four I had to be at the Game Room [sniffing heroin].

Primo: So I told him, “Thirty dollars a day, six days a week. ’Cause I
don’t work Sundays.”

He said, “Yeah, yeah, that’s good.” So he hung out.

And after that, time went by. I saw he was cool – that he wasn’t smoking
so much. I used to take him to the [Social] Club and buy a bottle of
Bacardi and feed him food, and we’d be sniffing. [pausing to crush a
fresh vial’s worth of cocaine in a dollar bill]

So one time, I told him, “Go ahead, serve.” Then after a while [sniffing
cocaine], I told him, “Whatever we sell, we gonna divide equally each
day. That way, you could make some money.”

Because I was gettin’ paid back in them days. [throwing his head back
and sniffing heavily] I used to get like two hundred, two-fifty, three
hundred, even four hundred dollars a night for eight hours work. The
least I would get is two hundred – two-fifty dollars a night.

Benzie: Yeah, we was making money then, boy! Bohf making two-something a
night.

Primo: We used to clock, man. This shit [pointing to the back of the
Pac-Man machine, where the crack vials were stashed] used to sell like
hotcakes.

I’m a fuckin’ idiot man. I should have bought something so that my money
would have been still here.

But as soon as Benzie started working with me it was all party. And my
money is history. That money just flew, boy. I spent it [spitting the
words] on hotels, coke, liquor. It was easy come, easy go. I used to
treat for everything with everybody – Benzie, Caesar, O.D. – everybody.
I just wanted friends. Everyday we was hoteling it. Hotels cost money,
man.

It’s too bad I didn’t see you a lot in those days Felipe. We could’ve
really enjoyed you. [grabbing my arm with the instant affection that a
sudden rush of cocaine can generate in the roller-coaster ebbs and flows
of a speedball – heroin-cum-cocaine – high] And we probably would have
been more cool if you would’ve been there. ’Cause you can’t get into no
trouble. Instead we used to break everything in the room.

I was hanging out so roughly trying to be a Mr. Big Star. [sniffing and
catching Benzie’s eye] ’Cause we had cash and we used to enjoy it.
[slapping five with Benzie and erupting into loud mutual laughter]

Minimum Wage Crack Dealers

I finally solved the mystery of why most street-level crack dealers
remain penniless during their careers, when I realized that their
generous binge-behavior is ultimately no different from the more
individualistic, and circumscribed, conspicuous consumption that rapidly
upwardly mobile persons in the legal economy also usually engage in. The
tendency to overspend income windfalls conspicuously is universal in an
economy that fetishizes material goods and services. Crack dealers are
merely a caricaturally visible version of this otherwise very North
American phenomenon of rapidly overconsuming easily earned money. Their
limited options for spending money constructively in the legal economy
exacerbate their profligacy.

A more complex dimension of the crack dealers’ relationship to the
mainstream economy is their interaction with the legal labor market. A
systematic discussion of this complex, antagonistic relationship is the
basis for Chapter 4. I shall explore briefly here, however, how this
tension with the legal economy affected day-to-day operations at the
Game Room, because the appeal of the crack economy is not limited to a
simple dollars-and-cents logic.

Street dealers tend to brag to outsiders and to themselves about how
much money they make each night. In fact, their income is almost never
as consistently high as they report it to be. Most street sellers, like
Primo, are paid on a piece-rate commission basis. In other words, their
take-home pay is a function of how much they sell. When converted into
an hourly wage, this is often a relatively paltry sum. According to my
calculations, Ray’s workers, for example, averaged slightly less than
double the legal minimum wage – between seven and eight dollars an hour.
There were plenty of exceptional nights, however, when they made up to
ten times minimum wage – and these are the nights they remember when
they reminisce. They forget all the other shifts when they were unable
to work because of police raids, and they certainly do not count the
nights they spent in jail as forfeited working hours.

[images]

Caesar displaying cash and three bundles of crack inside the Game Room.
Photo by Susan Meiselas.

It took me several years to realize how inconsistent and meager crack
income can be. This was brought home to me symbolically one night as
Primo and Caesar were shutting down the Game Room. Caesar unscrewed the
fuses in the electrical box to disconnect the video games. Primo had
finished stashing the leftover bundles of crack vials inside a
hollowed-out live electrical socket and was counting the night’s thick
wad of receipts. I was struck by how thin the handful of bills were that
he separated out and folded neatly into his personal billfold. Primo and
Caesar then eagerly lowered the iron riot gates over the Game Room’s
windows, and snapped shut the heavy Yale padlocks. They were moving with
the smooth, hurried gestures of workers preparing to go home after an
honest day’s hard labor. Marveling at the universality in the body
language of workers rushing at closing time, I felt an urge to compare
the wages paid by this alternative economy. I grabbed Primo’s wallet out
of his back pocket, carefully giving a wide berth to the fatter wad in
his front pocket that represented Ray’s share of the night’s income –
and that could cost Primo his life if it were waylaid. Unexpectedly, I
pulled out fifteen dollars’ worth of food stamps along with two
twenty-dollar bills. After an embarrassed giggle, Primo stammered
something to the effect that his mother had added him to her monthly
food stamp allotment, and now gave him his thirty-dollar share each
month to spend on his own.

Primo: I gave, my girl, Maria, half of it. I said, “Here, take it, use
it if you need it for whatever.” And then the other half I still got it
in my wallet for emergencies.

Like that, we always got a couple of dollars here and there, to survive
with. Because tonight, straight cash, I only got garbage. Forty dollars!
Do you believe that?

At the same time that wages can be relatively low in the crack economy,
working conditions are also often inferior to those found in the legal
economy. Aside from the obvious dangers of being shot, or of going to
prison, the physical work space of most crackhouses is usually
unpleasant. The infrastructure of the Game Room, for example, was much
worse than that of any legal retail outfits in East Harlem: There was no
bathroom, no running water, no telephone, no heat in the winter, and no
air-conditioning in the summer. Primo occasionally complained.

Primo: Everything that you see here [sweeping his arm at the scratched
and dented video games, the walls with peeling paint, the floor slippery
with litter, the filthy windows pasted over with ripped movie posters]
is fucked-up. It sucks, man [pointing at the red forty-watt bare bulb
hanging from an exposed fixture in the middle of the room and exuding a
sickly twilight].

Indeed, the only furnishings besides the video games were a few grimy
milk crates and bent aluminum stools. Worse yet, a smell of urine and
vomit usually permeated the locale. For a few months Primo was able to
maintain a rudimentary sound system, but it was eventually beaten to a
pulp during one of Caesar’s drunken rages. The same thing happened to a
scratchy black-and-white television set that Primo had bought from a
customer for the price of a five-dollar vial. Of course, the deficient
infrastructure was only one part of the depressing working conditions.

Primo: Plus I don’t like to see people fucked up [handing over three
vials to a nervously pacing customer]. This is fucked-up shit. I don’t
like this crack dealing. Word up.

[gunshots in the distance] Hear that?

Why then did Benzie ecstatically forfeit his steady job as maintenance
engineer to work with Primo under these conditions?

Benzie: I lost my job for hanging out with you [pointing to Primo and
sniffing more cocaine].

At first even if we broke night [stayed awake partying all night], the
next day I went to my job. I was chilling and I just walked in like
nothing. Nobody – my boss, my supervisor – said nothing to me, because I
was a maintenance engineer and I did everything.

Everything! No matter what it is, you do it. You got to fix everything
in the hotel. They call and complain, you gotta go and fix it, no matter
what it is.

You know, like when the john leaks – whatever it is. Pipes – all that
shit – you gotta go up and fix it.

And I had union and everything man, because when you’re in the New York
Yacht Club Union, you get union shit – I mean, you know, all the
benefits.

That’s a high-class place over there! I saw Mayor Koch eating there!
Yeah I saw what’s his name . . . you know, that guy from the news! Man,
I seen a lot of people eating there.

It’s like a membership shit. You gotta be a member of a yacht ship or
some yacht shit! Those are people who got yatch’es. They rich! They got
like little models of yatch’es all over the place. It’s only whites
eating there, like I seen alot’a’ whites there.

I never had no problem with white people. It was always: [bowing and
imitating an upper-class accent] “How you doing?” [bowing again deeply,
but then pausing to sniff] “Good morning.” They’re nice people though.

I lasted there. A long time. Like a year and a few months. I was making
four bills [$400] man! For five days work.

[continuing soberly] Now, the way I lost my job: I never forget that
day: it was me, you [pointing to Primo], Candy, and Flora and we stood
at Candy’s house and we broke night.

In a way, it was my own fault. I started messing around with Flora. And
I was still with her in the morning.

I didn’t go to work. I fucked up. I was sniffed up and I didn’t call or
anything the next day. I stayed with Flora.

Ultimately, Benzie pushed his macho street culture identity to its
logical conclusion. He could not tolerate Ray’s authority and ended up
stealing money from him and forfeiting a court date for an arrest in a
stolen car that was unrelated to crack dealing, but for which Ray had
posted $2,500 worth of bail. After a brief stint in prison, “on
Riker’s,” Benzie came full circle and found just above minimum wage
employment in “food prep” at a health food cafeteria in a fitness gym –
once again, surrounded as a subordinate by powerful whites. He managed
to limit his alcohol and cocaine-cum-heroin binging to weekends. He
enjoyed coming to the Game Room for visits to lecture Primo on the
glories of legal employment. On cold nights after the Game Room was
closed, we would often take refuge in a housing project stairwell where
Primo and Benzie would sniff speedballs and we would all drink malt
liquor until well past daybreak, tape-recording our conversations.⁶

Benzie: The best way to be, is legal. Survive. Make your money and make
everybody love you [opening a ten-dollar packet of heroin and handing me
a quart of malt liquor to open].

I want you to be like that, Primo. I’ve been doing it a year, Primo.
Look at this, box, [holding out a small plastic object] look what it
says here. One year, this is a tie tack, this is a tack that goes on a
tie. But it’s because I’ve made a year. That’s what it says there.

Do you know why I’ve made a year at this place? [sniffing heroin]
Because I’ve been through fuckin’ coke; [pointing to the cocaine Primo
was crushing into sniffable powder in a folded dollar bill] I’ve been
through fuckin’ crack; I’ve been through marijuana; I’ve been through
fuckin’ every drug. I always was troubulated. But now I’m finally
getting mines – my capacidad [self-worth] – I’ve finally got to that
stage that I won’t do something. [pointing again to the cocaine] I’m
tired of fuckin’ crack living. [waving his arm at the vials littering
the stairway] Serious, man.

Like right now [pausing to sniff cocaine] I do not do drugs. Fuck! Look
at my face. [moving it aggressively to within an inch of mine and taking
the malt liquor bottle] I got a round face. When you do drugs you could
tell by someone’s face. [sniffing delicately from the packet of heroin,
using Primo’s key as a dipper].

All of a sudden as if a cocaine rush in his speedball high had triggered
some particularly aggressive pathways in his brain, Benzie defensively
addressed the difficulty of maintaining respect in the entry-level legal
economy.

Benzie: But don’t you ever disrespect me or dish me.

Primo: [soothingly] You’re a working nigga’ and I respect you the way
you are right now. [turning to me] I respect him.

Benzie: [unmollified] I don’t want someone to respect me. I want to
respect myself.

I respect myself, man. [jabbing both forefingers into his chest] I
changed. I’m a different person. I love myself. I’m not trying to brag
or anything, you know. [swigging from the quart of malt liquor]

Primo: [to me reassuringly] It’s like an outburst, Felipe. ’Cause Benzie
feels so great, he feels so wonderful.

Benzie: [calmer, passing me the bottle] Man, I’m making eight dollars a
fuckin’ hour. I’m a prep. I’m an assistant chef. I make eight dollars an
hour. I make close to three hundred dollars a week. Okay, they take
almost a hundred dollars, you know, in taxes and . . . I get, like, two
seventy-five – shit like that.

If you was to go home later on, you could see that I’m telling you the
truth. And after taxes – they take like ninety, eighty dollars out of my
shit. Like I would come home with my two seventy-five.

Primo: [proud of being privy to legal working-class hustles] That’s
because you only have one dependent. I always used to put three
dependents.

Benzie: But yo, I love myself. I’m proud of myself. You know, who’s
really fuckin’ proud of me and who loves me, bro? My father, bro. He
loves the shit out of me now.

My father’s been a working man all his life. He came from PR when he was
twenty-one. Right now, he’s fifty-three years old. He’s been a waiter
all his life.

Primo: [in a low voice] Man! I don’t want a job that’s supposed to last
you for your whole life. Man! I don’t want to work for tips. I wanna
work the way I wanna work.

[abruptly changing the subject] Let’s go get another beer.

In private, especially in the last few years of my residence, Primo
admitted that he wanted to go back to the legal economy.

Primo: I just fuck up the money here. I rather be legal.

Philippe: But you wouldn’t be the head man on the block with so many
girlfriends.

Primo: I might have women on my dick right now, but I would be much
cooler if I was working legal. I wouldn’t be drinking and the coke
wouldn’t be there every night.

Plus if I was working legally I would have women on my dick too, because
I would have money.

Philippe: But you make more money here than you could ever make working
legit.

Primo: Okay. So you want the money but you really don’t want to do the
job.

I really hate it, man. Hate it! I hate the people! I hate the
environment! I hate the whole shit, man! But it’s like you get caught up
with it. You do it, and you say, “Ay, fuck it today!” Another day,
another dollar. [pointing at an emaciated customer who was just
entering]

But I don’t really, really think that I would have hoped that I can say
I’m gonna be richer one day. I can’t say that. I think about it, but I’m
just living day to day.

If I was working legal, I wouldn’t be hanging out so much. I wouldn’t be
treating you. [pointing to the 16-ounce can of Colt 45 in my hand] In a
job, you know, my environment would change . . . totally. ’Cause I’d
have different friends. Right after work I’d go out with a co-worker,
for lunch, for dinner. After work I may go home; I’m too tired for
hanging out – I know I gotta work tomorrow.

After working a legal job, I’m pretty sure I’d be good.

The problem – as discussed in detail in Chapter 4 on the relationship of
the crack dealers to the legal market – is that Primo’s good intentions
do not lead anywhere when the only legal jobs he can compete for fail to
provide him with a livable wage. None of the crack dealers were
explicitly conscious of the linkages between their limited options in
the legal economy, their addiction to drugs, and their dependence on the
crack economy for economic survival and personal dignity. Nevertheless,
all of Primo’s colleagues and employees told stories of rejecting what
they considered to be intolerable working conditions at entry-level
legal jobs. Benzie’s case, for example, illustrates the complex role
that subjective notions of dignity play in the process of rejecting
legal employment and becoming a crack addict and then a dealer. Another
one of Primo’s lookouts, Willie, also had a legal-labor trajectory
before being hired by Primo that illustrates the forces propelling a
young man to seek refuge in the world of crack. Contradictorily, while
Willie rejects the brutality of the working conditions he encountered in
the legal labor market, he embraces an even more violent alternative
that has him wreaking destruction on his neighbors and community.

In my whole life, I never got paid over six dollars an hour. The most I
ever got was my last job when I worked at the ASPCA [American Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals]. It was like two hundred and
thirty dollars a week straight – then there was the taxes.

I remember my first day on the job. I had went there pretty well dressed
and I’m working with this good-looking girl, so I’m like, I’m gonna rap
with this chick. And then they pull out the carts full of gassed
animals.

So I’m standing there with these rubber gloves, right? But I’m trying to
stand back, you know, because I can’t deal. I love animals . . . you
know, I got three chihuahuas upstairs.

But the boss knew there was going to be trouble so they had overhired –
that’s how they always do it. They get rid of one person. So when the
boss said, “You and her, do this,” I did it.

But then I looked at this dead animal, and I got sick. And I’ve got on a
button-down shirt, slacks, and I’m at this job in this big garage-type
room with rubber gloves on, putting these laundry carts full of dead
dogs, cats, baby dogs, baby cats that have all been gassed into a
garbage truck.

I couldn’t do it for long.

So one day they call me into the office and tell me, “You’re not right
for this job.” So I got fired.

Management—Labor Conflict at the Game Room

Primo’s options in the legal job market were no better than those of any
of his employees, but on the stoop of the Game Room his vulnerability
was not visible – especially when contrasted with that of his
crack-addicted customers and workers. He looked and behaved like an
effective boss. Ultimately, however, Primo’s relative autonomy and
importance within Ray’s network was eroded when Ray expanded his
franchises. The Social Club’s prime retail location on La Farmacia’s
corner made it far more profitable than the Game Room. Ray instituted a
double shift at the Social Club, keeping it open for sixteen hours every
day except Sunday. Perhaps also because of his own personal fondness for
the spot – having grown up in the building – he invested in renovating
the physical infrastructure. Soon the Social Club had a pool table, a
powerful sound system, a flush toilet that worked some of the time, an
air conditioner, and a heater. Ray also established an after-hours bar
at the site, serving beer and Bacardi. For the upscale customers and for
hard-core intravenous cocaine users, in addition to the nickels of
crack, he offered half-grams of relatively unadulterated cocaine for
twenty dollars.

The expansion and diversification of Ray’s network allowed him to be
more manipulative in his management of labor relations. He began
leveraging increased levels of discipline and higher profit margins from
Primo at the Game Room. This initiated a protracted juggle for power
between Primo and Ray. Ray’s first action was to supersede Primo’s right
to hire assistants. He imposed his own choice of secondary employees to
work as lookouts and sellers side by side with Primo. Primo rebelled
against Ray’s encroachment on his operational autonomy. He did not want
to be demoted from manager to senior salesperson.

Ultimately, Primo lost out in this struggle for workplace autonomy, and
his position as “manager” became increasingly ambiguous, until by the
last two years of my residence on the block, Primo had lost all fiction
of control over Game Room operations. Ray even managed to lower his
piece-rate commissions from $1.00 to 75 cents per vial sold, although he
did maintain an extra incentive by increasing the commission to $1.75
per vial on nights when seven bundles [175 vials] were sold. Ray claimed
that Primo had precipitated the changes because of his tardiness,
absenteeism, and ineffectiveness in curbing violence and noise at the
Game Room. For one ten-month period, Primo became so marginal that
another three-quarters-time senior salesperson, Tony, was hired and Ray
limited Primo to only working two night shifts per week.

Primo responded to his lowered wages, reduced work hours, and lost
managerial autonomy by escalating his alcohol and substance abuse. He
became an even less punctual and more undisciplined worker, provoking
Ray on several occasions to lay him off in retaliation for probationary
two-week stretches. Part of the problem was rooted in the laws of supply
and demand. The competition across the block in the project stairwells
had permanently dropped the prices of their vials from three dollars to
two dollars, and a conglomerate of companies located on another crack
corner two blocks away had cut its prices from five dollars to three
dollars, while simultaneously increasing the quality of its product.

Ray made a last-ditch effort to retain market share by upgrading the
Game Room’s locale. He moved operations upstairs to the newly vacated
premises where three licensed doctors had formerly operated an illegal
Medicaid-funded pill mill. This temporarily raised morale among his
workers but did not affect sales significantly. We critiqued and debated
the boss’s management strategies in much the same mundane way that
anxious employees in a retail enterprise in the legal sector who are in
danger of being laid off, will speculate on the reasons for declining
business. Relaxing after the end of the night shift in my apartment
living room with Primo and Caesar, I tape-recorded one particularly
anxious conversation. For the preceding two weeks, the Game Room had
been shut down because of intensified police sweeps, and upon reopening
that night, Ray had introduced a lower-quality product. (The Dominican
wholesaler who formerly supplied him with cocaine at the kilo level had
been arrested and his new connection had provided him with inferior
cocaine.)

[images]

Primo feeding cocaine to Caesar on the benches of a housing project
courtyard, after closing the Game Room. Photo by Susan Meiselas.

Before speaking morosely, Caesar opened a glassine envelope of heroin,
sniffed from it, and then tossed the packet onto my coffee table. He
then immediately reached for the folded dollar bill containing cocaine
that Primo had just crushed. Primo pulled the cocaine away from him,
saying, “Chill man, let me feed you!” and turned to me for emphasis: “I
hate it when this nigga’ gets thirsty.” Primo then scooped a folded
matchbook corner into the pile of cocaine and held it up to Caesar’s
nose for him to sniff with a grimace that effectively closed off one
nostril while opening the other one wide. He repeated the motions three
more times until Caesar finally sat back calmly on my couch, nodding a
thanks to Primo.

Caesar: [speaking slowly] Tonight was slow, we only made twenty-two
dollars and fuckin’ fifty cents. And I be risking getting snatched and
dirtyin’ my [police] record for chump change from that fat-assed nigga’.

Ray’s gonna lose a lotta business with no light up there. And no one
wants to walk up those stairs.

Primo: No, it’s not the place of the business. It’s just that we’re
selling two-dollar bottles for five bucks [sniffing].

Caesar: Yeah, the bottles are too small. [gravely] Lately Ray’s been
fucking up with the product, man. He’s like switching product. It’ll be
good; then it’ll be fucked up; then it’ll be good; then it’ll be fucked
up.

Primo: The real problem is that they be small bottles.

Caesar: Plus it was a major mistake to be closed all that time and then
the first time we open we be selling shit.

How you gonna open up and sell fire? ’Cause that’s what the customers
said it is. The cracks taste like fire. That shit is nasty!

He’s fucking us up because a lot of people don’t come back, man. And
people be complaining that we are selling fire.

[picking up his tempo, feeling a rush of energy from the cocaine] I done
told Ray, “What’s up? This shit is garbage.” But he’s like, “Fuck you! I
sell it like that.”

Primo: [sniffing] I never tell him shit, especially tonight. I think he
had a roach up his ass, ’Cause it’s slow. He was pissed off ’Cause the
electrician from Con Ed [New York City’s electrical utility company]
didn’t show up today.

When I pushed the conversation into a discussion of how they could
tolerate being minimum wage crack dealers, they responded with
self-congratulatory, glorifying reminiscences of nights of record sales.
Perhaps the same types of dialogue could be tape-recorded after-hours
among heavy-drinking used-car salesmen during a recession in the local
economy.

Caesar: [sniffing more cocaine from Primo’s upheld matchbook] Nah,
Felipe, it’s not so bad. It’s slow tonight because it’s Monday, and the
end of the month, and nobody ain’t got no money.

[excited] Primo left out of here the other day with almost three hundred
bucks all by himself.

Primo: [smiling] It was the first of the month and everybody had got
paid.

Caesar: [taking more cocaine] It was a huge day for selling. Everything
comes on the first of the month: all the checks.

Primo: Yeah! Everybody got paid [grinning]. Because the first of the
month is like when welfare checks, rent checks, social security checks,
all come. The first of the month is definitely monneeey [licking his
lips].

Caesar: For everybody! Veterans’ checks, pensions, social security,
welfare, Jew checks . . . [noting my raised eyebrows] You know, Jews be
into crazy scams, making money with papers . . . you know, insurance,
real estate, shit like that. The Jews be picking up checks. [wiggling
his forefingers greedily with a devious grin]

On the first of the month, money flows.

Primo: Everyone was coming. Welfare recipients and workers. I sold
twelve bundles.

Ray’s sales remained slow for the next several months and morale among
his workers continued to plummet, while tensions mounted. Ray ordered
Primo to fire Caesar following a series of loud drunken arguments, but
Primo refused. Ray retaliated by switching Primo’s schedule to working
on Monday and Tuesday nights instead of Thursday and Friday nights.
Thursday is an especially coveted night to sell on because it is payday
for municipal employees.

In a classic example of the internalization of labor—management
antagonisms, Primo and Caesar redoubled their hatred for Tony, the
replacement employee whom Ray had hired a few months earlier to
discipline Primo and Caesar. Tony reciprocated their antagonism. This
escalated into a potentially lethal confrontation when three bundles of
crack disappeared from the stash inside the Pac-Man video machine during
the interval between Primo’s Tuesday night shift and Tony’s Wednesday
shift. Everyone professed innocence, but there was no sign of forced
entry and Tony and Primo were the only two people besides Ray to have
keys to the locale. Ray wanted to kill – or at least break the legs – of
the culprit, but he could not decide whom to punish.

The following Thursday, another three bundles were stolen from the
overnight stash, which had been rotated to a live electrical socket for
protection. Ray was not only furious but also helpless – a condition
that made him even more dangerous than he normally is. To save face he
began deducting the value of the stolen bundles from both Primo’s and
Tony’s wages on a fifty-fifty basis. Sales on Primo’s Monday and Tuesday
night shifts, however, were so low that Ray had to set up an installment
plan for his reimbursement. Primo and Caesar were allowed to keep their
full Monday night commission in return for surrendering all of Tuesday
night’s receipts until their share of the $450 worth of missing
merchandise was accounted for.

Sensing that he was the prime suspect, Caesar was especially vocal in
denouncing Tony as the thief. He repeatedly advocated “wasting the
motherfucker.” Those of us who frequented the Game Room regularly were
convinced that Caesar had stolen the crack. Primo could not help but
share this suspicion. It depressed him that his best friend and employee
– his “main nigga’” – could have disrespected him so profoundly. It was
during these tense weeks that I tape-recorded many of Primo’s most
insightful denunciations of how he was trapped in the crack economy.

The mysterious disappearance of the six bundles was finally resolved
with the anticipated life-threatening beating, but neither Tony nor
Primo nor even Caesar were the victims. The thief was Gato, Ray’s
jack-of-all-trades maintenance worker who had renovated the new locale
upstairs from the Game Room. In the process he had hollowed out fake
paneling under the floor, to which he had access after hours via the
abandoned building behind the Game Room. He knew the kinds of places
where Ray kept his stashes because he repaired all his video games and
maintained his electrical systems. In fact, he was the one who had
pirated the electricity to the new crackhouse out of a neighboring
bodega. We could not help but feel sorry for Gato when Ray brought him
back to the Game Room three days later to start working off the debt he
owed by fixing some newly acquired broken machines. Gato climbed
awkwardly out of Ray’s Lincoln Continental limping heavily from the
beating he had received three days earlier. He avoided eye contact with
all of us. We all left the premises hurriedly when he started unscrewing
the back of a broken video game because he reeked from the acrid smell
specific to homeless crack bingers who have no access to showers or
clean clothes. That he was still alive with no bones broken was a
testimony to his childhood friendship with Ray, whom he had faithfully
followed as a teenage member of “The Cheeba Crew” (TCC) some dozen years
earlier.

Ray took advantage of the tensions generated by this incident to
renegotiate Tony’s salary from a piece-rate commission to a set wage of
$100 per shift, regardless of how many bundles were sold. This was
especially profitable for Ray because Tony worked on the nights when
sales were at their highest volume, Wednesday through Saturday.
Relations were too strained between Tony and Primo for them to
coordinate their demands for a higher proportion of Ray’s profits. In
fact, in a classic divide-and-conquer scenario, neither worker even knew
what kind of payment arrangement his nemesis had negotiated with their
mutual boss.

The Crackhouse Clique: Dealing with Security

Primo’s subordination to Ray was not immediately visible to the clique
of parasitical friends, acquaintances, and wanna-be employees who
congregated in front of the Game Room on most nights. When Primo was on
duty, he appeared to his hang-out crowd to be well in control. He was
exceptionally generous, and he regularly treated his friends to beer,
liquor, and occasional sniffs of cocaine. I had assumed originally that
Primo cultivated a large hang-out crowd to fulfill a psychological need
for power and domination, especially vis-à-vis the teenage women
competing for his sexual attention.

It took me several months to realize that the people reclining on car
hoods, squatting on neighboring stoops, or tapping their feet to the
ubiquitous rap or salsa playing on someone’s radio, served several
different useful roles for the crackhouse. They provided strategic
business information on competing drug spots and on the changing trends
in tastes and market shifts in the underground economy. As long as they
did not become too rowdy, they also served to camouflage the comings and
goings of the emaciated addicts, making the crackhouse look more like a
youth center than a place of business. A subtle touch of “normalcy” was
added by the presence of Primo’s adopted grandfather, Abraham, who was
responsible for collecting the quarters from the video machines.
Whenever potential undercover narcotic detectives entered the Game Room,
this hopelessly alcoholic seventy-two-year-old man pretended to be
senile. He exuded an aura of helplessness and gentleness that was
accentuated by the homemade black patch covering his left eye, which he
had lost when a mugger stabbed him while he was home from his job at the
cafeteria of Lenox Hill Hospital in the early 1980s.⁷

[images]

Hanging out in the Game Room. Photo by Oscar Vargas.

Most importantly, the hang-out crowd complemented the lookout’s job by
protecting the Game Room from excessive violence and aggression. Primo’s
best and cheapest insurance against physical assault was to surround
himself with a network of people who genuinely respected and liked him.
His crowd of friends became an effective army of detectives for
investigating foul play; for warning him of potential stickup artists
who might be casing the premises; or for shielding and witnessing when
an attack actually occurred. Indeed, assault by thieves represented
Primo’s greatest physical danger. Whenever two people walked into the
Game Room at the same time or at a fast pace, he always tensed up. He
also usually suspected new people who joined his hang-out crowd of being
emissaries gathering intelligence for a future holdup crew.

Primo’s fears were well founded. During the five and a half years that I
documented the Game Room’s operations, it was robbed twice by masked men
bearing sawed-off shotguns. Primo confided to me that during the first
robbery he had urinated in his pants with his attacker’s shotgun pressed
against his temple while he lied about not having a stash of cash.
Nevertheless, when he reported the theft to his boss later that night,
Primo had exaggerated how much money and crack was stolen in order to
keep the difference.

Primo considered somewhat insulting my functionalist interpretation of
why he treated his friends and acquaintances so generously.
Nevertheless, in his counterexplanations he reaffirmed the sense of
tension and imminent danger he was forced to endure every night. More
subtly, he made me realize that the hang-out crew was more than physical
protection, it provided a stabilizing social atmosphere for him to
counterbalance the anxiety that constantly threatens to disable a
lonesome seller. His peers distracted and relaxed him from the dangerous
reality of his work site:

Primo: I don’t need anyone to protect me, Felipe. Naah. I can handle
myself alone. It’s just like I want my people to be there for me.

It don’t have to be O.D. here. [pointing to Willie, who was working
lookout that night] It could be anybody that’s keeping me company. It
could even be Jackie [his girlfriend at the time].

See, just so long as there’s someone I could talk to, to keep me
company. It could even be just Maria [his former girlfriend, whom he had
temporarily broken up with]. But Ray don’t like Maria hanging out; he
don’t know her all that well. She’s not from the block.

You understand? I just want someone to accompany me . . . just for the
company. You know, it’s hard to just be in this dump by yourself.

Because if you’re by yourself you know you feel . . . you be more edgy.
It’s boring and I need to be more relaxed.

And if anything, you always want a witness or somebody to be there . . .
you know.

Ironically, it took me several years to realize that Primo’s
enthusiastic friendship with me was part of the unconscious logic for
why he maintained a hang-out crew in front of the Game Room. The
disconcerting presence of a white face at night in an El Barrio
crackhouse was probably an even better deterrent to potential stickup
artists than Willie’s large frame, Caesar’s reputation for irrational
violence, or any one of the teenage girls flirting with Primo. Stickup
artists are simply not willing to take the risk of assaulting anyone who
could possibly be confused as an undercover police officer. There are
too many other easy targets around.

Another crucial service fulfilled by Primo’s hang-out network as well as
his lookouts was to screen for narcotics agents. Crack dealers have to
have organic ties to the street scene in order to be able to recognize
the bona fide addict or user from the undercover impostor. The best
lookouts and street sellers are those who have hung out in the streets
all their lives and know everyone in the neighborhood. When Primo did
not recognize someone or sensed something suspicious about a customer,
he checked first with his lookout, or with one of his friends outside on
the stoop, before serving them. The most frequent confusion arose over
men who had just been released from prison and had not yet destroyed
their bodies on crack.

Primo: Yo Caesar, who were those two morenos? I didn’t even know the
motherfuckers. They could be la jara [the police].

Caesar: Yeah, it’s okay. They were good-looking and dressed well, but I
know that big black Alabama. He’s cool. I know him. He’s walked in the
Game Room before, it’s just that you don’t remember,

He musta just came outta jail because that nigga’ looked fresh union.
That nigga’ was healthy. He was like a Buster Douglas size.

In the five years that I knew Primo he must have made tens of thousands
of hand-to-hand crack sales; more than a million dollars probably passed
through his fingers. Despite this intense activity, however, he was only
arrested twice, and only two other sellers at the Game Room were
arrested during this same period. No dealer was ever caught at Ray’s
other crackhouses, not even at the Social Club on La Farmacia’s corner,
even though its business was brisker. Ironically, the Social Club was
raided half a dozen times, because it doubled as a pool hall and bootleg
bar. The large clientele of omnipresent regulars confused the police;
they never knew whom to arrest. They could not expropriate the landlord,
because the City of New York was the owner. The original proprietor had
long since defaulted on his taxes. Instead, on two occasions the police
smashed the pool tables into kindling wood, ripped out the electrical
fixtures, and boarded over the entrance. On one raid, they ticketed
Candy for serving unlicensed liquor to an undercover officer, but they
were never able to apprehend the primary seller-manager in the act of a
hand-to-hand narcotics sale. The biggest threat to the Social Club came
from the New York City fire marshals, who sealed the place on several
occasions for violating fire codes following the much publicized arson
of a social club in the South Bronx that took the lives of eighty-four
people.⁸

The invulnerability of Ray’s crackhouses to police control was largely
owing to the generalized public sector breakdown of the neighborhood.
Inner-city police forces are so demoralized and incompetent that for the
most part they do not have to be systematically corrupt – although they
often are – in order for street-level drug dealing to flourish in their
precincts.⁹ The attitude of honest officers is too hostile toward the
local community for them to be able to build the networks that would
allow them to document the operations of the numerous drug-dealing spots
in the neighborhoods they patrol. For example, after five and a half
years of being practically the only white person out on the street after
dark on a regular basis on my block, which hosted almost a half-dozen
drug-selling spots, the police never learned to recognize me. Even after
I began attending their community outreach meetings for combating drugs,
they continued to fail to recognize me on the street.¹⁰

Ray and his workers took certain basic precautions to minimize their
risk of arrest. They never made sales outside the door on the street,
and they usually asked customers to step behind a strategically placed
PacMan machine at the back of the establishment before touching their
money and handing them the vials of crack, in case the police were
watching with binoculars from a neighboring apartment building. Most
importantly, at no point was there more than twenty-five vials – one
bundle – visibly accessible. Depending on the night and the season,
additional bundles might be strategically hidden in rotated stashes,
such as the live overhead electrical socket, the linoleum wall paneling,
or the entrails of one of the video games. Depending on supply and
demand, runners periodically delivered extra bundles and picked up cash
receipts.

Sellers have to develop the crucial skill of judging when it is
necessary to stash their vials in the event of a raid. This was what
saved Primo, for example, from four years of incarceration on his last
arrest. As the police were battering down the Game Room door with their
portable ram he flicked thirteen vials from his current bundle into the
back of a Mario Brothers video machine. The police found nothing in
their search of the premises. At the same time, if a seller becomes
overly paranoid – petro – of every suspicious siren and revving car
motor, the smooth operations of the crackhouse become excessively
disrupted. Dealers have to juggle between relaxation and acute
premonition. In Primo’s case, strategically dispensing beer and cocaine
to his friendly hang-out clique was crucial to maintaining this delicate
balance of calm alertness.

Primo, Caesar, and other dealers provided me with dozens of accounts of
close calls with the police. They had developed complex,
risk-minimization strategies.

Caesar: [drinking from a 16-ounce can of malt liquor] I’m not gonna get
caught with the stash on me. I’ll pitch it or hide it fast. I got a
clean slate. So I don’t even think I would even get bail. They’ll call
it being in the wrong place at the wrong time.

I don’t sell to people I don’t know, never. Pops only made that mistake
a coupla’ times in the Game Room, but that was when it was wild man.

Primo: [also drinking from a separate 16-ounce can of malt liquor] Yeah,
I only got caught once like that, in a buy-and-bust. But there’s been
times when cops came to buy but I knew it and I was cool.

Way back when my grandfather Abraham was still hanging out here. I was
reading in the newspapers about that guy, Larry Davis, who killed those
cops. I was chilling, reading.

Caesar: My cousin’s in jail with Larry Davis in Louisiana on some wild
federal charge.

Primo: Shut up Caesar, let me finish.

So I was reading that Larry Davis thing out loud to Abraham, because he
can’t read English, when this guy in an army jacket came in – but he was
white.

I don’t even know why they sent him. He looked like an obvious cop. I
pretended I didn’t see him, when he walked in. I kept reading like that
[peering deeply into an imaginary newspaper]. So he walked past me, to
the back and asked Abraham for the shit. But Abraham realized quick what
was up and he just went, “Wahhhh?” [imitating a senile old man
slobbering at the mouth]. And I was in the front, reading the paper like
this [crossing his legs awkwardly perched on a milk crate] and there
were kids playing, and it was cool.

Then he said to me, “They still sell crack here?” but I just went, “I
don’t know,” and kept reading my paper.

He was a cop because I seen the man in the day, with the regular blue
suit on.

Primo attributed to carelessness the one time he was successfully
arrested and convicted.

Primo: I got my [criminal] record back when O.D. was hanging with me. Oh
man, I got jerked! I was outside with a mirror, trimming my hair like
that. It was early in the day; it was like four o’clock. I used to open
earlier in them days. Like one or two, because Felix was like, “Gotta be
there, boy!” I used to hate that.

So Abraham calls me, because I didn’t notice the guy go in because I was
talking with O.D., trimming my shit.

So I went in and he was pretending he was playing Pac-Man. So then I
didn’t even bother to look at him, it was like he had a gold chain,
short pants, and everything.

So I took the shit from where we kept it right there in a little thin
box [pointing in the direction of the current stash]. He tells me he
wants five. And when I was serving him, was when I looked at his face; I
said to myself, “Shit, I don’t know this motherfucker!” He looked like
so clean-cut, y gordito [and chubby]; I was like [waving his arms in
confusion].

So I tell him, “How do you smoke this? Put it in the pipe; or do you
smoke woolas [a crack and marijuana mixture]?” He said, “You got that
too?” and I said, “No, I’m just asking.” So he left.

And when he left, I told O.D., “Yo, wait a minute. Let me stash the
shit.” Because I didn’t trust that dude. But O.D. followed me. He was
talking to me so much shit about his problems that I got distracted
[drinking].

And when I turned to put the vials away, like that [going through the
motions], right there they pushed me [coming over to me and throwing me
against a video machine in a half-nelson]. I thought it was Eddie just
fucking around so I continued; but when I finished I looked and the cop
was already ready to blow me away like that [holding an imaginary gun up
to my temple] – or whatever. He was taking precautions. Them niggas just
rushed us, boy [drinking]. He pulled the shit out and said “This is what
we’re looking for” [holding out a handful of crack vials and grinning
cruelly].

I got jerked for selling five vials – two-to-four years probation
[shaking his head sadly, drinking, and handing me the bottle].

A year later, as the New York state penal system spiraled into a crisis
owing to overcrowding following the precipitous increase in drug arrests
and the toughening of drug-sentencing rules, an exasperated judge
declared Primo’s suspended sentence to be completed a year early, in
order to clear his overburdened docket. Primo had been arrested for
failing to report to his probation officer, a violation that under
normal conditions might have resulted in his incarceration for the full
term of his probation sentence.

Following his second arrest for a hand-to-hand sale of ten dollars’
worth of crack to an undercover officer, once again the mayhem of New
York’s drug enforcement strategy in the early 1990s saved Primo from
becoming a predicate felon and having to serve four to six years in
jail.¹¹ In their disorganized haste to boost arrest statistics, the
Tactical Narcotics Team officers who engineered the buy-and-bust
operation on the Game Room confused the identities of Primo and Caesar
in the courtroom. The jury was forced to free Primo when Caesar derailed
the prosecution’s case by insinuating under oath – but with the
protection of the Fifth Amendment – that he had actually been the one
who had sold the crack to the undercover officers. Ray and several of
the crackhouse habitués had the pleasure of watching the judge rebuke
the district attorney for having wasted the court’s time with a sloppy
case. Primo was fully vindicated, and the Game Room stayed in business
for another year with no police raids.

4 “GOIN’ LEGIT”: DISRESPECT AND RESISTANCE AT WORK

I really wanna work legal.

Primo

Everyone in Ray’s network – including Ray himself – has had extensive
experience working honestly. Most entered the legal labor market at
exceptionally young ages. By the time they were twelve, they were
bagging and delivering groceries at the supermarket for tips, stocking
beer off the books in local bodegas, or running errands. Before reaching
twenty-one years of age, however, virtually none had fulfilled their
early childhood dreams of finding stable, well-paid legal work.

The problem is structural, as outlined briefly in Chapter 2: From the
1950s through the 1980s second-generation inner-city Puerto Ricans were
trapped in the most vulnerable niche of a factory-based economy that was
rapidly being replaced by service industries. Between 1950 and 1990, the
proportion of factory jobs in New York City decreased approximately
threefold at the same time that service sector jobs doubled. The
Department of City Planning calculates that over 800,000 industrial jobs
were lost from the 1960s through the early 1990s, while the total number
of jobs of all categories remained more or less constant at 3.5
million.¹

Economists and sociologists have documented statistically that the
restructuring of the U.S. economy around service jobs has resulted in
unemployment, income reduction, weaker unions, and dramatic erosions in
worker’s benefits at the entry level. Few scholars, however, have noted
the cultural dislocations of the new service economy. These cultural
clashes have been most pronounced in the office-work service jobs that
have multiplied because of the dramatic expansion of the finance, real
estate, and insurance (FIRE) sector in New York City. Service work in
professional offices is the most dynamic place for ambitious inner-city
youths to find entry-level jobs if they aspire to upward mobility.
Employment as mail room clerks, photocopiers, and messengers in the
high-rise office corridors of the financial district propels many
inner-city youths into a wrenching cultural confrontation with the
upper-middle-class white world. Obedience to the norms of high-rise,
office-corridor culture is in direct contradiction to street culture’s
definitions of personal dignity – especially for males who are
socialized not to accept public subordination.

Resistance, Laziness, and Self-Destruction

Contrary to my expectations, most of the dealers had not completely
withdrawn from the legal economy. On the contrary – as I have shown in
Chapter 3, in discussing the jobs that Willie and Benzie left to become
crack dealers and addicts – they are precariously perched on the edge of
the legal economy. Their poverty remains their only constant as they
alternate between street-level crack dealing and just-above-minimum-wage
legal employment. The working-class jobs they manage to find are
objectively recognized to be among the least desirable in U.S. society;
hence the following list of just a few of the jobs held by some of the
Game Room regulars during the years I knew them: unlicensed asbestos
remover, home attendant, street-corner flyer distributor, deep-fat fry
cook, and night-shift security guard on the violent ward at the
municipal hospital for the criminally insane.

They were usually fired from these jobs, but they treated their return
to the world of street dealing as a triumph of free will and resistance
on their part. A straightforward refusal to be exploited in the legal
labor market pushes them into the crack economy and into substance
abuse. At the same time, however, becoming a crack seller is by no means
the voluntarily triumphalist decision that many street dealers claim it
to be. Primo repeatedly confided to me his frustration over not being
able to find steady legal employment. He initially admitted this to me
when his probation officer ordered him to go to an employment agency
following his first felony conviction for selling crack. Beneath his
outrage over the bad working conditions he was offered, lay a deep fear
that his biggest problem is incompetence and laziness.

Primo: [while crushing cocaine in a dollar bill in the back of the Game
Room] That fuckin’ lady counselor I got; she’s a stupid bitch. She
wanted me to be like a security guard, you know. I don’t wanta be no
guard. I don’t wanta deal with some crazy son of a bitch outside. I let
them rob anything. Word! All I got is a stick in my hand. And I’m only
getting paid once a week. I let them rob anything, man.

That fucking counselor she tells me [imitating a bureaucratic whine],
“The better your qualifications, the better the work.” Well fuck her,
I’ll just keep searching on my own.

I had an appointment yesterday, a company that I was supposed to check
out that takes care of like sheets and stuff, like from hotels – rooming
service. So I went to see, just to take a look at it; but there’s a lot
of Mexicans in there, and I’m not a fucking Mexican.

My cousin’s got a job where he’s been working for like three years. He
told me last week, “Come with me tomorrow morning to talk to the boss.”
But it didn’t work out. I overslept. I had even set up the clock, but I
didn’t hear the alarm [sniffing cocaine].

Philippe: Why don’t you just take any old bullshit job just for right
now? Like what your sister’s got at McDonald’s.

Primo: You know why I don’t fly to work real quick? I am twenty-six
years old, and if I was to fly out of my way and get a McDonald’s job
and not no union job, it just shows that you’re flying to get a
McDonald’s to cover your ass.

Twenty-six-year-old guy at McDonald’s! Every time you go to McDonald’s,
you don’t see anybody twenty-six years old.

Every time that you see someone that’s older, it’s probably because they
don’t have no education; no high school; no nothing. They don’t speak
English. I mean my English is very bad, but I can go further than at
Burger King.

Philippe: Man! You’re just making up excuses.

Caesar: [interrupting, almost angry at me] You know what I call working
at a Burger King or a McDonald’s? That’s what I call slavery-ing.

I know, because I worked there, and working at McDonald’s is overworked
and underpaid. You could work full time – a week, five days a week –
full time, and you only come home with like a hundred forty, one thirty.

And you know why it’s fucked up? It’s not only because it’s overworked
and underpaid; it’s that you have to – I mean when I talk about
overworked and underpaid! – you have to fuckin’ fry burgers; scrub the
floors; because you have to do so much work for bullshit money

[suddenly reaching for the dollar bill with cocaine and changing his
serious tone to a smirk] The only reason why I don’t get a decent job is
because I’m lazy. I don’t want to go through the processes.

I don’t want to go looking for no bullshit job and be all frustrated and
be getting paid weak and shit like that, until something else comes
along.

’Cause think about it; if you got a bullshit job; how you gonna go look
for another one? ’Cause you gonna be there at the job all the time. And
why you wanna be missing a day of your work to go see an interview so
they could tell you, “We’ll call you.”

[motioning to Primo to dip his key in the pile of cocaine] Yo! Feed me
Primo!

And then you lose a day’s pay which makes you move more to the brink of
hell ’Cause then you don’t got money for drugs. [grinning wildly before
sniffing from the key tip full of cocaine that Primo was holding up to
his left nostril] And if I can’t get high the way I want to be on the
weekends . . . [sniffing again, loud mutual laughter]

Philippe: Okay! Okay! C-Zone, I hear you. But seriously Primo, you got a
court case coming up.

Primo: [sniffing and recomposing himself] Yes, I am making excuses, but
I’ll go to the job center on Monday and follow up. I think I had just
got used to the street scene, because it’s been a while since I’ve held
a legal job that’s been there.

I didn’t like the tuxedo place they sent me to last week. I didn’t want
to be measuring men. It’s not for me to be touching men all over the
place like that. That’s wack!

At the same time I shoulda stayed for more than two weeks. That was just
not the whole excuse. My problem was that I was hanging out late at the
Game Room and I’ve got to wake up in the morning to get to work.

Caesar: [reassuringly] Naah. I visited the store, it wasn’t no place to
make a career.

Primo: [morosely] I was just fucking up. I made a choice from there to
here and I’m still here.

Caesar: Yeah, I’m lazy right now, ’Cause I just want to get up at any
fucking chosen time of the day. Wash my balls and go outside with a fat
belly from all the grub in my house and go hang out and write [rap]
rhymes and bug out upstairs and make my little bullshit money.

See, I stay out of trouble in a way by selling crack, ’Cause I chill
with Primo. [motioning to Primo to serve him more cocaine] See, what
fucked me up before when I was working legal was, I was using the crack.
That was the only thing that fucked me up.

’Cause really, I’m happy with my life. [sniffing] Like no one is
bothering me. I got my respect back.

Buela [grandma] likes me. I got a woman. I got a kid. I feel complete
now. I don’t really need nothing. I got money to get wrecked. [sniffing
again] I just go downstairs and work for Pops, and I ain’t taking none
of it home because tomorrow I don’t need no money. So I’ll go get
wrecked, but then tomorrow I don’t need no money, ’Cause I go back to
the Game Room: I work; I get the money; and then I can go get wrecked
again. [pointing to Primo, who was dipping his key back into the
cocaine]

Philippe: [laughing] That’s why your sneakers are so dirty?

Caesar: Only reason I ain’t got nice new sneakers is ’Cause I have a
decision: I could either save the money to buy the sneakers, or I could
get wrecked. And right now, I’m going to get wrecked. [sniffing again]

The money I make in the Game Room is for my personal madness; for my
personal drug-addiction and self-destruction. It’s something only I
could control. No one could tell me what to do with it.

[breaking into a tirade] So I could hurt myself on the inside; so I
could wake up every morning with my stomach twisted all in knots and
throwing up and sick; and I can’t eat; and I can’t breathe and I’m
fulla’ diarrhea; and I’m shitting all over the place; and I’m fucked up;
and my one eye is pink; and one eye is white; and my hair stinks; and
I’m dirty; and I don’t bathe; and I’m fucked up; and I stink; and I hate
my woman; and I hate everybody in the morning. That’s what happens to me
after I get wrecked. [sniffing again]

But then I’ll chill; and I’ll be sick; and I’ll puke; and then I’ll be
cool by the time I get to the Game Room. Then we’re having a good time;
we’re breaking shit [pointing to where the television used to be, then
opening the door of the Game Room for a customer who had knocked]. We’re
hassling customers; we’re cursing customers. Cursing customers in
Spanish in front of them; fucking with their minds; selling them garbage
drugs so we can make our money [collecting ten dollars and handing over
two crack vials]; and so we can go out and buy garbage drugs [pointing
to the folded dollar bill full of cocaine balanced on Primo’s knee]; and
get ripped ourselves; and talk immense amount of shit [pointing to my
tape recorder].

Philippe: What about all the money you could be making steadily if you
was legal?

Caesar: My woman takes care of me with her food, ’Cause she got, she got
welfare and food stamps. In a few months I start getting my social
security again – three hundred dollars every month, and that’s enough
for all my gear.

My problem started because they found out that I had worked legal and
they had to tax me a thousand five hundred dollars. So they been jerking
me now for a couple of months until my SSI pays it all back.

First Fired – Last Hired

None of those in Ray’s network considered themselves to be victims.
Their niche in the underground economy shielded them from having to face
the fact that they were socially and economically superfluous to
mainstream society. I watched Primo struggle with the glimmering
realization of his profound economic vulnerability when one of his
episodic attempts to reenter the legal economy coincided with the
deepening of the recession that afflicted the U.S. economy from late
1989 through 1991. At first Primo was totally confident. “I’ve had like
ten jobs before in my life. I dropped out of school at sixteen and I’ve
been working ever since. Any asshole can find a job out there.” He
almost enjoyed taking the subway downtown during daylight hours,
marveling at the “full cheeks” and “cut hair” of the healthy-looking
legally employed commuters.

When a half-dozen employers abruptly refused to hire him, Primo was able
to blame his inability to find a job on his employment counselor, even
though the newspapers were running euphemistically worded articles about
the “temporary interruption in America’s growth” and “the softening in
the labor market.”² He defiantly “fired” his counselor:

Primo: I got a feeling this son of a bitch guy at the job center, my job
counselor, was high. His eyes were always red. He lost my whole files.
He was helping me without even knowing who the fuck I was. He sent me to
so many fucking places, and nothing.

That nigga’ must have been on drugs. He was looking for my file all over
his office. He’s an idiot because that file was thick. It had all of the
test’es I took.

I told him, “Maybe you’re not supposed to be my supervisor. Why don’t
you look around to some other counselor?”

He said, “No, I had your file. I don’t know where it’s at.”

He had a whole bunch of files, and I was hoping he would like look
through the files and find mine, but mine wasn’t there at all. It was
like I never existed.

A month later, after another half-dozen employment rejections, Primo’s
self-confidence plummeted and his substance abuse escalated. He was
living in flesh and blood the sense of personal powerlessness that
impersonal market forces of supply and demand impose on vulnerable
laborers during recessions:

Primo: It’s become hard to get a job now, I guess. It used to be easy to
get a job, or maybe this TAP [Testing Assessment and Placement] Center
I’m going to is sending me to the wrong places.

I keep telling my job counselor, “Why don’t you send me to a place you
haven’t sent someone the day before, so that when they see me, it’s
definitely that they’ll take me? Because when you send them a few
people, then they’re just not going to take me.”

But I think my counselor agreed with the bosses to send them a few
people, and “whoever you like better you can keep.” Which is bad!

I told him, “Why don’t you just tell them, just say, ‘We can only send
you one person because we lack more people. We lack clients.’”

Instead this guy was sending me and everyone else. That makes your
chances fucked up. Its like you got to battle it out to get a job.

In the old days the TAP centers were better. Everytime they sent me to
some company, boom! I’m hired, because they’re not sending a whole bunch
of people. Word!

The dramatic deterioration in 1990 of the number of jobs available in
the entry-level legal labor market caught Primo by surprise. Not only
did the recession make it hard to find a job, but Primo also had to
confront his life-cycle developmental constraints: He was rapidly
becoming too old to compete for the kinds of jobs that had been
available to him when he had been an eager, teenage high school dropout
just entering the legal labor force. Now that Primo was in his
mid-twenties he had a several-year-long hiatus of unemployment that he
was unable to justify to prospective employers. Primo internalized his
structural marginalization. He panicked and spiraled into a
psychological depression.

Primo: I guess I was wrong, Felipe, about how easy it is to get a job.

I was hearing on the news that there’s a depression . . . an economic
recession – or something like that. And I was thinking to myself, “Damn!
That’s going to fuck up not only city, state, or federal workers, but it
also fucks up someone like me . . . I guess – people that don’t have
skills, like me. This is fucked up.”

It makes me feel fucked up, not being able to get a job. Because
sometimes it seems like I like to be lazy.

But you get tired of sitting around and not doing shit. I like to make
myself useful, really – like I’m worth something. Not having a job makes
me feel really fucked up, man.

Perhaps realizing that jobs are often found through personal
connections, Primo began inviting his only legally employed ex-Game Room
associate, Benzie, to hang out with him more often. Sure enough, Benzie
began telling Primo about a possible opening in the kitchen of the
downtown health club where he worked. The night before Christmas Eve he
even motivated Primo to come to the office Christmas party to meet his
supervisor. Primo arrived late, however, long after the upper-echelon
administrators had left. He managed to meet only a few of the custodial
workers, who were finishing off the leftover punch. Later that night, in
his mother’s housing project stairwell surrounded by beer, cocaine, and
heroin, Benzie berated Primo for having ruined his chances of getting a
job. During the conversation, however, Primo discovered the limitations
of the job he had been so eagerly pursuing, and also whom he was
competing with:

Benzie: You remember El Gordo – that fat guy – at the party? Well, he’s
the one that I’m trying to get my supervisor to fire so that you can get
the job.

Primo: But all he be doing is washing dishes.

Benzie: [a little flustered] I know . . . I’m in the back with him. I’m
in charge of him. He’s always fucking up. I keep trying to get him on
point, but he doesn’t take the job seriously.

I keep telling my supervisor I know someone who really wants to work.
But she’s not hard on him. She feels sorry for him. And I feel sorry for
him too, ’Cause I know how he is.

Primo: [suspiciously] What do you mean “how he is”?

Benzie: [ignoring the question] So Pops, your responsibility would be to
wash dishes; but it’s at six dollars an hour; and there’s no place you
could go to wash dishes that they’ll start you off at six dollars an
hours. They’ll start you off at four or five.

And after you work for a year you get a week vacation . . .

Primo: [interrupting] Answer me. What’s with El Gordo? Why everyone feel
sorry for him?

Benzie: [embarrassed] I mean he’s slow, so he takes the job in a funny
way.

Primo: [worried] What do you mean he’s slow?

Benzie: I mean he’s slow in the mind. He’s got like a handicap.
[defensively] Listen man, I’m only trying to help you out.

Benzie’s mentally retarded colleague outcompeted Primo for the
dishwashing job. Meanwhile, the logistics of Primo’s personal life began
falling apart. He had been squatting with his girlfriend, Maria, in her
sister’s project apartment opposite the Game Room. Maria’s sister had
fled to Connecticut with her husband and three children when her
husband’s drug-selling partner was found shot to death in their car.
Primo and Maria were supposed to take charge of the continuing rent
payments, but this was the same period when Ray had limited Primo to
working two nights a week at the Game Room, and sales were slow. Maria
found a job at a fast-food franchise, but this still did not provide
them with enough money to meet their bare necessities. Primo was reduced
to begging from his mother and sisters.

Primo: Maria just started this week at Wendy’s but she makes – net pay –
about eighty something, ninety something bucks a week. Her welfare is a
fucking piece of shit. She gets like not even forty dollars every other
week. It’s thirty-seven and some change because the cashiers keep
something. Jesus that’s bullshit money.

But me and Maria never starve, because if I don’t have anything to eat
at Maria’s, I go to my mother’s, or my other sister’s, who just lives
down the block.

Sometimes my mother looks me out. Twenty dollars, here and there.
Sometimes she gives me food stamps, like once a month.

Within a few weeks of this conversation, failing to meet the Housing
Authority rent payments, Primo and Maria were evicted. They were forced
to separate, each returning to their own mother’s high-rise Housing
Authority apartment located in different projects in the neighborhood.

Internalizing Unemployment

Over the next few months Primo’s main strategy was to keep from facing
the fact that he was locked out of the legal labor market. He escalated
his alcohol and narcotics use, and lashed out at the one person he still
had power over: his girlfriend Maria. He lectured her righteously, for
example, when she lost her job at Wendy’s. Somehow, he managed to invert
the traditional gender roles of who should be gainfully employed in a
household, even while retaining the patriarch’s prerogative of imposing
family discipline.

Primo: I have to abuse that bitch verbally, because she doesn’t do
nothing for herself – like with school or nothing like that. She’d
always rather be hugging me and kissing me, and not doing nothing.

But I handle it well. I talk to her. I’ll get her sick with my lectures.

I think Maria should work at a McDonald’s. Just to get that good work
experience. But she doesn’t want to do it. I’ve threatened that if she
doesn’t start working, I’m going to leave her.

I tell her “Go to a job center. Make a call.” But instead she just
misses her call; she just forgets about it.

Primo’s longer-term defense mechanism was to take refuge in the ranks of
what the economists euphemistically call “discouraged workers,” the ones
who are no longer registered as unemployed in the national statistics.
He became just one more person contributing to what the statisticians
described in the mid-1980s as “the spiralling decline” in the labor
force participation rates of Puerto Ricans in New York City. Although
the labor force participation rates of Puerto Rican men stabilized by
the 1990 Census, New York—based Puerto Ricans continued to have some of
the lowest rates of any ethnic group in the United States, with the
exception of certain Native American peoples.³

Primo: My job searches have been fucked up. I didn’t get hired nowhere.
Not even as a porter at Woolworth’s for four-forty an hour. Four dollars
is wack and that’s a union job.

So I don’t think I’ll find a job in a while, because I don’t want to
work for minimum wage. And I really won’t honestly take a five
dollars-an-hour job either, and they won’t give me one anyhow.

I don’t want to talk about it, Felipe.

I didn’t see the point of me wasting a lot of money on train fare going
to interviews, and then not getting a place. I went to a lot of places,
Felipe, and I got sick and tired of it. So that’s how I ended up back
here in the Game Room.

In fact, Primo did want to talk about it, except that he was only able
to do so when he had drunk enough alcohol and sniffed enough cocaine and
heroin to admit his deepest problems and anxieties. Primo’s former
lookout, Willie, happened to come home on furlough from the army during
this difficult period, and at dusk we used to go to a nearby public
school playground to share our problems with one another. We would
crouch by one of the jungle gyms sheltered from gusts of wind and
occasional police floodlights in order to lay out ten-dollar packets of
cocaine and heroin side by side on the fat logs originally built for
elementary school children to play on. As a friend of Primo’s, I was
worried about his escalating alcohol and narcotics consumption and I
wanted him to confront his problems. Ironically, my tape recordings of
Primo and Willie’s depressed, almost stream-of-consciousness
confessional dialogues, are punctuated by the background sounds of
steerers calling out the brand names of the heroin they sold in the
elementary playground: “Terminator,” “Black Power,” “DOA” [Dead on
Arrival], “Rambo,” “Poison.” Not only was this particular schoolyard one
of Manhattan’s most active retail heroin markets, but it is also the
site for the headquarters of the East Harlem School District.⁴

Primo: Okay, Okay, Felipe, I hear what you’re saying. And so I drink and
I sniff, and everything.

You say I’m depressed. But when I’m under the influence it’s like “fuck
that.” Maybe I spill my guts out. But I know that there’s always
tomorrow. Tomorrow is the next day. I’m gonna be sober, so I got time to
think [sniffing from the pile of heroin and passing me a quart of
Bacardi].

Willie: You know what it is Primo. [sniffing] You don’t have nothing to
look forward to. No job. You gotta have something to look for.

Primo: [continuing] Tomorrow man . . . tomorrow is another day . . .
[pointing to the cocaine and heroin]

Philippe: Tomorrow you’re gonna have a hangover.

Primo: You know, I think I’m gonna be an alcoholic. Yeah, you know, I
gotta stop drinking, man. I gotta stop drinking. I’m gonna kill myself.
I’m not getting anywhere. Yeah. Not getting anywhere.

Philippe: What does your mother think of your situation? Does it bother
her? [passing the quart of Bacardi]

Primo: Hell yeah! [swigging] But this bothers me too Felipe! Mainly
because I’m not getting any . . . any younger; I’m getting old and it
would be like, “What if mommy ain’t there?” And if mommy ain’t there, my
sisters definitely ain’t with it. And if they don’t want to look me out,
then you know, I’ll be like . . . like a bum . . . un bón todo
aborchornado [a down-and-out bum].

If I was to live in the City, I would have to be homeless. And if I
don’t find any work, how would I provide for myself to pay for an
apartment to live in. You know they’re so expensive now. I would have to
sell drugs . . . or . . . or do something to be able to live.

Because if I wouldn’t do that, I would be on welfare. I don’t like to
ask nobody for money, you know. I don’t wanna ask anybody for nothing. I
want to earn my money.

Willie: [interrupting] Yeah! Before it used to be everybody works, and
welfare is like the lowest thing. But now it’s like the style. Now
practically everybody is on it, you know. But my family works. We never
be on welfare.

Primo: Besides, welfare would put me into something. I would have to go
to school, you know, or take some kind of training in order to keep
getting the check.

So how would I be able to live by myself, support myself, and go to
school, with the little bit of money I’m gonna get from welfare? I would
have to do something to get the extra money to be able to live.

Willie: No Pops. [sniffing, then swigging] You know what your problem
is? Your problem is that fast money. You got used to it . . . to being a
lazy person and having somewhere to live; somewhere to eat; and
somewhere to go at night.

Primo: You know why I didn’t get a job? ’Cause I really got used to
being a lazy person. I really got used to just . . .

Willie: Sleeping.

Primo: I really got used to getting fed at home . . . and not doing
nothing to enhance my life. [sniffing and drinking]

Philippe: So how do you feel about that? How about helping your mother
with some of the money you make at the Game Room? [swigging from the
bottle]

Primo: That’s it. My mother feeds me and gives me a room. I just take
advantages of those things, [sniffing]

But I realize it. It makes me think, and I get upset, and I say, maybe
if I don’t hang out – like right now – I could just deal with the things
I have to do.

Philippe: So why did you spend the money tonight on this shit? [pointing
to the cocaine and heroin and then drinking from the quart of Bacardi
and waving it]

Primo: And my mother be dishing me hard. Not for eating her food,
because she don’t want me to starve, but nobody likes to see somebody
just living for free, [in Spanish] “You don’t go to school. You don’t do
nothing. Why don’t you go look for a job. You’re not a little baby man.
[throwing up his arms to imitate his mother’s exasperation in an
imaginary conversation with a friend] El es un hombre ya [He’s a man
already].”

Philippe: And how does that make you feel?

Primo: It makes me feel like she’s right; and I have to get my act
together; and make some money; and then be clean, and work.

To tell the truth, if I was to be working, man, my mother would even
iron my clothing. I’d be walking around in ironed clothes. My mother
wouldn’t even bitch if Maria was to come over and maybe even spend the
night.

Instead my mother makes it hard on me. ”Para que yo aprenda [So that I
learn].”

She works; my sisters work; everybody works! They been leading a nice
quiet life. She wants to see me working and being somebody.

That’s the way my mother is. She hates it when she gets up in the
morning, and I’m sleeping. And then when she comes from work all tired
and she sees me sitting like a king in a rocking chair in front of the
television like a fucking turista. [splaying out his body like someone
lounging in a hammock] She gets mad bro! [drinking]

And she’s right. I have to make something of myself. I got to start,
even if I don’t have a job. I just gotta get my life back into the
working world . . . and look for what I want.

Right now, to tell you the truth, I’ve just been a vago [lazy bum] –
drunk and naked.

Willie: I’m just like you Primo, [drinking] I grew up with you at the
same time. My mom’s always worked too. She worked hard; she busted ass.
She was a nurse’s aide. You know she didn’t make a lot of money; but we
never be on welfare. And I feel like you.

But damn, man! It’s hard. It is hard. I mean the fucking shit that I
done been through. [sniffing from the heroin]

Primo: [sniffing from the cocaine] Okay, it’s hard, but it’s not
impossible.

Willie: [reaching for the cocaine] But it’s hard Pops. I been through
such fuckin’ dilemmas in my life.

Primo: Forget the past. Think about today; and then get to tomorrow.

I mean, if I’m living wrong I wanna be corrected. You and I are fucking
up today, right? But tomorrow, you wake up. Even if it’s with a
hangover, you eat breakfast, or whatever, and you recover. ’Cause you
have to do something to enhance your life for that day, and continue
with tomorrow – if it has to be continued.

Willie: But, Primo, Primo, I’m so god damn lost in my life.

This particular night ended disastrously for Willie. Somehow he managed
to beg ten dollars from both Primo and me, which set him off on an
all-night crack binge.

During these particular months at the height of the recession in 1990, I
was just cementing my friendship with Primo’s mother. We spoke over the
telephone and I could hear a tremendous frustration in her voice as she
helplessly watched her son degenerate into open alcoholism and
depression. To make matters worse, the water main in their project
apartment had burst, and she and her daughters had to run back and forth
to their neighbors’ with buckets to fetch water. This plumbing crisis
lasted for two weeks because they were always out at work when the
building maintenance crews came to fix the pipes during the day. Primo
was supposed to open the door for them, but he kept sleeping through
their knocks.

Primo’s mother: [in Spanish] He’s always passed out on the couch like a
drunk dog, coming home from the street at seven in the morning.

What a shame that at twenty-six he is still living with his mother. He
should go find a woman and move out with her. I threw my husband out
twenty-three years ago and Primo is just like him. He comes drunk from
the street every morning.

He’s always had bad friends. His teachers in school told me that; and he
stopped going to school at fifteen because of bad friends.

He never really held a job for a long time. Just last month he only
lasted two weeks at a job [the tuxedo rental store]. I lost money giving
him money for car fare and food for lunch. He never even went back to
pick up his paycheck.

I can’t even leave beers in the refrigerator, he takes them for his
friends.

And what would happen to me if I got sick and couldn’t work? We’d lose
the apartment!

To make matters worse, Primo and his mother fell victim to a $2,400
job-training racket that preys on the false hopes of the unemployed. In
a bogus mail-promotion scam, she “won” a half-price coupon to a
so-called maintenance engineering training program that normally cost
$4,800. She immediately made the remaining down payment and forced Primo
to go to classes. It turned out that the half-price deal depended on the
client’s qualifying for a federally guaranteed student loan grant for
the “discounted” amount. Completely unaware of the implications and
responsibilities involved, Primo signed himself up for a $2,400 student
loan. He enthusiastically threw himself into the program, bragging to
Caesar and me about the “nineties and eighties” he was “making” on the
weekly “test’es.” He began fantasizing about finding a stable job as a
janitor, adding a classic rural Puerto Rican refrain, “Si Dios quiere”
[God willing] – the Latino version of the Anglo expression “knock on
wood” – every time he mentioned graduating from the training program or
finding a job.

Primo’s dream was dashed when his school declared bankruptcy before he
had a chance to graduate from the program. Not only did his mother lose
her $2,400 cash-down payment, but he suddenly found himself responsible
for the $2,400 matching federal loan the job training program had
processed for him. To make matters worse, Primo was in the midst of his
second year-and-a-half-long trial, for a hand-to-hand sale of two vials
of crack to an undercover narcotics officer. I remember vividly watching
with surprise as Primo lowered his eyes submissively while his legal aid
lawyer screamed at him on the courthouse steps.

What kinda fucking asshole are you? Just get a job! Any kind of bullshit
job! So I can tell the judge you’re a good man. Jesus Christ! Can’t you
understand what I’m telling you?

The fact was, of course, that in the midst of the national recession,
Primo was unable to find “any kind of bullshit job.” Caesar became his
only source of solidarity and understanding. He empathized with Primo’s
depression and attempted to cheer his friend up with tirades embracing
the ecstasy of substance abuse and celebrating the street-defined
dignity of refusing to work honestly for low wages.

The most persuasive dimension to Caesar’s oppositional celebration of
street marginality was his cultural redefinition of crack dealing and
unemployment as a badge of pride – even if ultimately self-destructive.
For example, one Tuesday night right after the end of a busy shift at
the Game Room, I accompanied Primo and Caesar on their way to buy a
twenty-dollar bag of El Sapo Verde [the green toad], a new brand of
cocaine with a growing reputation for quality that was sold a few blocks
downtown from the Game Room. This was their first time purchasing from
this outfit, so Caesar and I waited around the corner to avoid
”petrolyzing” [rendering paranoid] the sellers while Primo made the
actual purchase. I struck up a conversation in Spanish with three
undocumented Mexican immigrants from Piaxtla, a rural municipality in
the state of Puebla. They were drinking beer on the stoop of their
tenement watching with disdain as El Sapo Verde’s customers passed by.

One of the immigrants had arrived two years ago and was earning $500 a
week fixing deep-fat fry machines. I put my arm around Caesar and asked
the successful immigrant how it was possible that he was doing “so good”
when my friend Caesar, an articulate, native-born, fluent-English
speaker, could not even find a $200-a-week position. His response was
straightforwardly racist:

Okay, Okay I’ll explain it to you in one word: Because the Puerto Ricans
are stupid! Stupid! Do you understand? They’re stupid because look at
that guy [pointing to Caesar] he knows English. And look at his body.
He’s got a body that at least should get him a job as good as mine. And
he doesn’t have it because he’s a brute. That’s all.

They like to make easy money. They like to leech off of other people.
But not us Mexicans! No way! We like to work for our money. We don’t
steal. We came here to work and that’s all.

A wave of fear swept over me as I looked at the expression on Caesar’s
face, convinced I had irresponsibly provoked a bloody confrontation.
Instead, Caesar waited for Primo to return and then responded loudly in
English, turning the Mexican’s racist humiliation into a generationally
based assertion of street culture pride.

Caesar: That’s right my man! We is real vermin lunatics that sell drugs.
We don’t wanna be a part of society. It’s like that record: “Fight the
Power!”⁵

What do we wanna be working for? We came here to this country, and we
abused the freedom, because Puerto Ricans don’t like to work. We rather
live off the system; gain weight; lay women.

Okay, maybe not all of us, ’Cause there’s still a lot of strict folks
from the old school that still be working. But the new generation, no
way!

We have no regard for nothing. The new generation has no regard for the
public bullshit. We wanna make easy money, and that’s it. Easy now mind
you. We don’t wanna work hard. That’s the new generation for you.

Now the old school was for when we was younger, and we used to break our
asses. I had all kinds of stupid jobs . . . scrap metal sorting, dry
cleaning, advertising agencies.

But not no more, [putting his arm around Primo] Now we’re in a
rebellious stage. We rather evade taxes; make quick money; and just
survive. But we’re not satisfied with that either, ha!

Crossover Dreams

Despite his public assertiveness, Caesar was ridden with self-doubt over
his exclusion from mainstream society. At times, he too shared Primo’s
fantasies of being a “normal working nigga’.” His tolerance of
exploitation, however, was lower than Primo’s, and his sensitivity
toward personal disrespect at work was much more acute. Furthermore, his
social skills – or his cultural capital – that might have enabled him to
interact credibly with middle-class society were even more limited than
Primo’s. Nevertheless, he too allowed himself to fantasize about “goin’
legit” when opportunities presented themselves in contexts that were not
completely anathema to the norms of street culture. For example, when
Ray made his first concerted attempt to launder his crack profits by
purchasing the lease on a bodega, Caesar jumped at the opportunity to
work there. Ray had hired Primo to clean and renovate the premises, and
Primo, once again, subcontracted Caesar to be his assistant. It was a
perfect opportunity for the two crack dealers to ease a transition to
stable, legal employment. Not only would they maintain the same boss,
but they would remain in the same immediate neighborhood vicinity. The
bodega was located only half a block away from Ray’s Social Club
crackhouse next to the Hell Gate post office. In other words, they
merely had to substitute lard, cigarettes, potato chips, sandwiches,
beer, ice cream, and so forth for the crack they formerly purveyed to
their neighbors.

[images]

A neighborhood bodega. Photo by Philippe Bourgois.

Ray himself was also excited about his attempt to open a “legit place”
for much the same reasons. In the early phase he proved to be an astute
businessman, negotiating a discounted price for the storefront lease
from the previous owner, who had been forced to flee the neighborhood
after the “numbers” [gambling] racketeers who used the site as their
bank torched the place following a dispute over profit shares. Primo’s
first tasks were to kill the rats, throw out the charred and decaying
waterlogged merchandise, and eventually repaint the premises. Caesar was
especially effective at killing the gigantic rats that had multiplied
exponentially (as only rats can multiply in a New York City grocery
store abandoned for more than a month following a fire). He relished
crushing them with well-aimed bricks, broomsticks, and work boot kicks.

Despite the filth and the Hitchcockesque size and quantity of the rats
infesting their new work space, both Caesar and Primo were thrilled at
the prospects of “workin’ clean” under Ray’s auspices. During these
weeks after finishing work, they would come over to my living room in
their stinking clothes, with their wet sneakers caked in powdered rat
poison and rotten grocery grime, in order to sniff speedballs, drink
beer, and tape-record fantasies of their future stable careers at Ray’s
soon-to-be-opened bodega. Their enthusiasm over their imminent
metamorphosis to legality once again expressed itself semantically in
their internalization of the polite superstitions of their parents’
jíbaro past.

Caesar: I haven’t told ‘Buela [grandma] yet. I ain’t tellin’ no one
nothing until I be coming home paid every week. [slamming his fist into
his palm and then bending over to sniff from the key-tip laden with
heroin that Primo was serving him]

I’m not going to salal⁶ [jinx] but I think – si Diós quiere – this is
the one thing that’s going to work for me. I’m going to get off
hard-core drugs. [grinning and sniffing heroin again] Well, except maybe
dope and coke.

And my career in here is going to escalate, because the more money the
store makes, the more money I make, ’Cause I’m the sandwich man. That
means I’ll probably have to be pulling a double shift.

This is good for us; this is good for Primo; we’re close. No more of
this bumming around. [waving his arm at my living room]

On this particular night, Caesar and Primo had also taken purple
microdot capsules of synthetic mescaline. If, as some psychotherapists
claim, hallucinogenic drugs unleash the anxieties, obsessions, and
fantasies of one’s unconscious, then Caesar’s babbling reveals how
profoundly excited he was over the possibility of finding legal
employment.

I’m the sandwich- , the clean-up- , and the hurt-the-customer-man. And
[flashing his eyes deviously] the scam-some-money-on-the-side-man.

Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! I’m also The Man – the bouncer. Because if I catch a
shoplifter, when the cops come they’re not going to have to handcuff
him. They’re going to have to bring a stretcher, because me and Primo
are going to stretch someone right open.

[Grabbing my tape recorder and speaking into the microphone as if it
inspired a brilliant idea] We make it a social club for informants, for
Felipe. A club!

Dropping the tape recorder, Caesar began imitating the sounds of a
cashier barking orders, and of change dropping in a cash register drawer
while, at the same time, he made the deft motions of handing out
imaginary sandwiches.

Caesar: Sandwich man! Here! Yo! Take yours! Ring! Clink! Next!

[sitting back on my living room couch wide-eyed] Wow, this is a weird .
. . Primo, check this out. [waving his hands to admire the
mescaline-induced visual tracers] It’s like wavy blue. [spinning around
and pointing in the opposite direction at the ceiling] These are like
purple.

[turning abruptly again to face me as if I were a customer at the deli]
Got money? [raising his arms like He-Man] I work! [waving his hands,
once again, to admire the color tracings, but then switching back and
forth between the personas of a customer and a deli clerk] I want light
blue. Sandwich! Sandwich man, how you doin?

[sitting back again relaxed with a happy smile] All right! We’re gonna
open a deli! [reaching out to hug Primo]

Caesar’s ecstatic legal dream never materialized. Ray was unable to
negotiate the complicated New York City paperwork for health inspections
and outstanding tax forfeitures. He never even managed to open his
enterprise legally for a single day. He began selling without official
permits for about ten days and soon realized there was not enough of a
local demand for his grocery products. The final insult occurred when
the man he hired to do inventory stole from him and escaped to Puerto
Rico. Ray gave up and returned Primo and Caesar to their part-time
positions at the Game Room selling crack on Monday and Tuesday nights.

The contrast between Ray’s consistent failures at establishing viable,
legal business ventures – that is, his deli, his legal social club, and
his Laundromat – versus his notable success at running a complex
franchise of retail crack outlets, highlight the different “cultural
capitals” needed to operate as a private entrepreneur in the legal
economy versus the underground economy. As the preceding chapter on
crackhouse management demonstrates, Ray’s mastery of street culture
enabled him to administer his businesses effectively in the drug
economy. He skillfully disciplined his workers and gauged the needs of
his customers. He mobilized violence, coercion, and friendship in a
delicate balance that earned him consistent profits and guaranteed him a
badge of respect on the street. In contrast, in his forays into the
legal economy, Ray’s same street skills made him appear to be an
incompetent, gruff, illiterate, urban jíbaro to the inspectors, clerks,
and petty officials who allocate permits and inventory product, and who
supervise licensing in New York City.

Similarly, when Primo attempted to establish a legitimate enterprise by
pasting photocopied flyers at bus stops advertising his “Mr. Fix-It
Services” for repairing domestic electronic appliances, he too failed
miserably despite his own obvious entrepreneurial skills as a crackhouse
manager. When potential customers with broken appliances managed to
reach him on the telephone at the project apartment of his girlfriend,
Maria, they balked at the address he gave them and then usually declined
his offer to come to their homes. Those who did not hang up on him were
suspicious of his precapitalist, jíbaro way of setting prices. It
ultimately became a forum for racist humiliation for Primo who was
already feeling especially vulnerable in his attempt to “go legit.”

Primo: It’s like they hear my voice, and they stop. . . . There’s a
silence on the other end of the line.

Everyone keeps asking me what race I am. Yeah, they say, like, “Where’re
you from with that name?” Because they hear that Puerto Rican accent.
And I just tell them that I’m Nuyorican. I hate that.

Plus I tell them they can pay me whatever they feel is right once I fix
their shit. But they don’t even want me to come over.

I hate that shit, Felipe.

Primo encountered further stereotyped barriers when he did manage to
meet his legal customers face to face. For example, after arranging for
him to fix three broken Dictaphone machines and a cable television box
at a foundation where I had an affiliation, I received an apologetic
computer E-mail from one of the administrators advising me not to bring
Primo onto the premises anymore for fear patrons “might think we’re
turning the place into an electronic repair shop.”

Not all of Primo’s failures as a private entrepreneur were imposed by
distrustful or racist customers. Some of his inability to run a
profitable private enterprise was caused by his own jíbaro definitions
of proper decorum and reciprocal obligation to friends and relatives.
For example, when my mother asked him to examine her broken stereo
system, he mysteriously missed several appointments to meet her at her
apartment. He finally accompanied me to her apartment one evening at my
insistence. He later admitted that it had not seemed proper to him to go
alone to the apartment of a woman he did not know well. Finally, after
successfully fixing her stereo, he did not know how much to charge her
since she was my mother, and besides, she had prepared dinner for us in
the process.

Pursuing the Immigrant’s Dream

Mainstream society easily evokes racial stereotypes to dismiss Primo,
Caesar, and even Ray as pathetic losers, or as lazy, pathological,
self-destructive drug addicts. My examples framed by cultural production
theory have emphasized the disjuncture in cultural styles of
communication and the allocation of power around symbolic markers. A
more political-economy understanding of the crack dealers’ failures in
the legal world would point to how they and their parents had been
channeled into the most marginal economic sector almost since birth. I
pursued this structural economic argument by asking them to talk
extensively about their first “real” jobs. It became clear to me that in
their early teenage years they had been energetically pursuing the
immigrant’s working-class dream of finding a tough, macho factory job
and working hard for steady wages. One standard scenario emerges from
the dozens of accounts I collected: With their mothers’ permission they
dropped out of high school – or even junior high school – to work in
local factories. Usually within a year or two, their factories had
closed down to seek cheaper labor elsewhere. They then began the
treadmill of rotating from one poorly paid job to the next, with little
education or social skills to allow them mobility outside of the
marginal factory enclaves that trapped their entire social network.

Once again, Primo’s and Caesar’s cases are particularly illustrative of
these dynamics. Primo was so highly motivated and energetic in pursuit
of his mother’s immigrant working-class dream that in his early teenage
years he actually dropped out of junior high school to find a job
through family connections.

Primo: I was playing hooky and pressing, like, dresses, and whatever
they were making on the steamer. They was cheap, cheap clothes.

I was just a kid, and it used to be stupid hot behind the steamer, but I
liked’ed that job. The best job I had was in that factory. Wish I
would’ve lasted there, but they moved out of the neighborhood.

My mother’s sister was working there first, and then her son, Luis’
brother – the one who’s in jail now – he was the one they hired first,
because his mother agreed, “If you don’t want to go to school, you gotta
work.”

He was young, he was . . . like sixteen or fifteen, I guess, and I was
younger. So I started hanging out with him. Just hanging out, but then
at the factory, sometimes he needed help with some rush work, and I used
to go out and help him. And the boss used to look me out at the end of
the week. I wasn’t planning on working in the factory; I was supposed to
be in school; but it just sort of happened.

I wanted to get paid and I hated school. I rather just work.

Predictably, Primo was working for a garment subcontractor – one of the
most vulnerable niches in the manufacturing sector.

Primo: The boss was Spanish, and shit, but I don’t know if she was the
main man. She just ran the whole factory.

Her husband was a dope fiend, but he was the one that picked the payroll
money up. We used to go downtown to do that shit, and it used to be
white people who used to have a huge amount of money.

Primo and his cousin became the agents who physically moved their jobs
out of the inner city. In the process they became merely two more
individuals out of the 445,900 manufacturing workers in New York City
who lost their jobs as factory employment dropped 50 percent from 1963
to 1983.⁷ Of course, instead of seeing themselves as the victims of a
structural transformation, Primo remembers with pleasure, and even
pride, the extra income he earned for clearing the machines out of the
factory space:

Primo: Them people had money, man. Because we helped them move out of
the neighborhood.

It took us two days – only me and my cousin. Wow! It was work. They gave
us seventy bucks each, and back in them days that was money, boy! Plus,
we were stupid little niggas.

Not coincidentally, Caesar interrupted this particular reminiscence of
Primo’s that I was tape-recording in the Game Room to give me an almost
identical story. Like Primo, Caesar had obtained his first job through
his family connections and their social network. Instead of the garment
industry he was channeled into metallurgy, another one of the least
desirable and most unstable niches within New York City’s manufacturing
sector:

Caesar: I worked in a factory before too. That was my first job. My
uncle got me the job when I dropped out of school. My moms told me I
either get a job or go back to school.

I liked’ed it at that time, but I lost a lot of weight, because it used
to be stupid hot in there. They used to give us these salt pills and
shit.

They used to plate metal, like paint fake jewelry. But the company moved
too.

Like Primo’s aunt, Caesar’s uncle subscribed to the same working-class
ideologies about the dignity of hard work versus education. These are
working-class rather than lumpen childhood memories. They are not yet
imbued with the hopeless nihilism of the unemployable crack dealer.
Objective conditions, however, prevented Primo and Caesar from achieving
working-class stability. In Caesar’s case, the limitations of tough,
hard factory labor were driven home by the subsequent experience of his
role-model uncle.

Caesar: Damn, man, that was my uncle’s trade, metal salvaging and metal
plating. That nigga’ worked in there for about forty-five years, man. On
one job. For forty-five years. Can you imagine that shit? Forty-five
years and he’s only a foreman.

And he fell in the acid one time and it was crazy, boy – the acid that
they dip the metal in. I saw it. Yeah, it was fucked up. I saw it when
he slipped.

That nigga’ was out of work for at least like about seven, eight months,
man. He burned his skin tissue off, man. I saw him all red, with, like,
his muscles exposed. It was bugged.

He can’t even sue, man. It was his own negligence, because he was the
one that slipped in. You see, it was like an assembly line, and they
have to be cleaning out these big tanks where they be dunking the metal
pieces. So the nigga’ was going in over the tanks one day, and he
slipped. He fell in it, and jumped out real quick, less than five
seconds, but his fuckin’ clothes turned into rags, HHIISSS, HHIISSS. He
got dogged man. That nigga’ screamed real loud.

After that he lost weight. He got like, REAL THIN, and he was all muscle
before.

Significantly, in Caesar’s uncle’s case, the ultimate outcome of a
lifetime of assembly line employment was sexual impotence and sterility,
a theme the crack dealers often elaborated on when they talked of the
powerlessness they experienced in their legal jobs.

Caesar: That’s my uncle Joe, he’s still fucked up. His whole, like, legs
is all like, like, a burn victim whose skin is all burned.

He can’t have no babies, man. Just dogs. Because he burnt his joint and
everything, man.

He lives in Cincinnati now, ’Cause the company moved, and they got him
another position as a foreman at a factory that makes bathroom fixtures,
and shit like that.

[snapping to attention and motioning for Primo to hide the purse with
crack vials as a roving police car slowed down in front of the Game
Room] Yo-yo-yo-yo! Static-static-static!

Retrospectively, Caesar’s decision to drop out early from school with
his family’s blessing to find employment in a dead-end niche of New
York’s shrinking manufacturing sector appears tragically
self-destructive. At the time it was taking place, however,
fifteen-year-old Caesar looked and felt like a king within the confines
of his second-generation immigrant’s working-class universe. For a poor
adolescent the decision to drop out of school to become a marginal
factory worker was attractive. In separate conversations, Willie, the
only member of Ray’s network to have graduated from high school,
confirmed how powerful and macho Caesar had appeared to him in his early
teenage, hardworking glory:

Willie: I was fourteen and Caesar’s like fifteen and the motherfucker
dropped out of school and during this whole year he was working with his
uncle chroming.

Mah’ man was making himself some money, and I was going to school. I was
so jealous. I was so jealous.

Caesar was always working. By eighth, ninth, ... no by my tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth grades, Caesar was working. He was a nice dresser
’Cause he had money, and he used to get pussy, and everything.

After school I’d come home, and I’d say, “Yeah, Caesar’s getting fucked,
’Cause he ain’t going to school, and he’s got money.”

Caesar was so bold. He didn’t have like no fear. This was before we met
you.

He was the first one who came out with fly clothes. Primo, you remember
how C was in those days?

He always had a big box. And he used to hook me up outta sight, because
I was always with Caesar out on the streets after school. Me and Caesar
were so dope ... so dope, that I never had to run the same coat each
year.

Caesar used to wear a burgundy leather jacket and a burgundy Kangol. And
we used to have these crowns, these gold crowns – right – that you put
on a jacket – like those little things that you pin on your shirt and
all that.

And we would be “king of the crew.” That was the best time of my life.

Shattered Working-class Fantasies in the Service Sector

It almost appears as if Caesar, Primo, and Willie were caught in a time
warp during their teenage years. Their macho-proletarian dream of
working an eight-hour shift plus overtime throughout their adult lives
at a rugged slot in a unionized shop has been replaced by the nightmare
of poorly paid, highly feminized, office-support service work. The
stable factory-worker incomes that might have allowed Caesar and Primo
to support families have largely disappeared from the inner city.
Perhaps if their social network had not been confined to the weakest
sector of manufacturing in a period of rapid job loss, their teenage
working-class dreams might have stabilized them for long enough to
enable them to adapt to the restructuring of the local economy. Instead,
they find themselves propelled headlong into an explosive confrontation
between their sense of cultural dignity versus the humiliating
interpersonal subordination of service work.

Formerly, when most entry-level jobs were found in factories, the
contradiction between an oppositional street culture and traditional
working-class, shop-floor culture – especially when it was protected by
a union – was less pronounced. I do not wish to romanticize factory
work. It is usually tedious, tiring, and often dangerous. Furthermore,
it is inevitably rife with confrontational hierarchies. On the shop
floor, however, surrounded by older union workers, high school dropouts
who are well versed in the latest and toughest street culture styles
function effectively. In the factory, being tough and violently macho
has high cultural value; a certain degree of opposition to the foreman
and the “bossman” is expected and is considered masculine.

In contrast, this same oppositional street-identity is dysfunctional in
the service sector, especially among the office-support workers who
serve the executives of the FIRE sector, where most of the new
entry-level jobs with a potentially stable future are located. Street
culture is in direct contradiction to the humble, obedient modes of
subservient social interaction that are essential for upward mobility in
high-rise office jobs. Workers in a mail room or behind a photocopy
machine cannot publicly maintain their cultural autonomy. Most
concretely, they have no union; more subtly, there are few fellow
workers surrounding them to insulate them and to provide them with a
culturally based sense of class solidarity. Instead they are besieged by
supervisors and bosses from an alien, hostile, and obviously dominant
culture. When these office managers are not intimidated by street
culture, they ridicule it. Workers like Caesar and Primo appear
inarticulate to their professional supervisors when they try to imitate
the language of power in the workplace, and instead stumble pathetically
over the enunciation of unfamiliar words. They cannot decipher the
hastily scribbled instructions – rife with mysterious abbreviations –
that are left for them by harried office managers on diminutive
Post-its. The “common sense” of white-collar work is foreign to them;
they do not, for example, understand the logic in filing triplicate
copies of memos or for postdating invoices. When they attempt to
improvise or show initiative, they fail miserably and instead appear
inefficient – or even hostile – for failing to follow “clearly
specified” instructions.

Their interpersonal social skills are even more inadequate than their
limited professional capacities. They do not know how to look at their
fellow service workers – let alone their supervisors – without
intimidating them. They cannot walk down the hallway to the water
fountain without unconsciously swaying their shoulders aggressively as
if patrolling their home turf. Gender barriers are an even more
culturally charged realm. They are repeatedly reprimanded for offending
co-workers with sexually aggressive behavior.

The cultural clash between white “yuppie” power and inner-city
“scrambling jive” in the service sector is much more than superficial
style. Service workers who are incapable of obeying the rules of
interpersonal interaction dictated by professional office culture will
never be upwardly mobile. In the high-rise office buildings of midtown
Manhattan or Wall Street, newly employed inner-city high school dropouts
suddenly realize they look like idiotic buffoons to the men and women
for whom they work. This book’s argument – as conveyed in its title – is
that people like Primo and Caesar have not passively accepted their
structural victimization. On the contrary, by embroiling themselves in
the underground economy and proudly embracing street culture, they are
seeking an alternative to their social marginalization. In the process,
on a daily level, they become the actual agents administering their own
destruction and their community’s suffering.

Getting “Dissed” in the Office

Both Primo and Caesar experienced deep humiliation and insecurity in
their attempts to penetrate the foreign, hostile world of high-rise
office corridors. Primo had bitter memories of being the mail room clerk
and errand boy at a now defunct professional trade magazine.
Significantly, the only time he explicitly admitted to having
experienced racism was when he described how he was treated at that
particular work setting. The level of racially charged cultural
miscommunication at his work site is nicely illustrated by his inability
to identify the name and ethnicity of his boss, just as she might have
been unsure of what Latin American country he was from, and how to spell
or pronounce his first name:

Primo: I had a prejudiced boss. She was a fucking “ho’,” Gloria. She was
white. Her name was Christian. No, not Christian, Kirsch-man. I don’t
know if she was Jewish or not.

She would like to talk about me to whoever was over visiting in the
office – you know, like her associates who would come over for a coffee
break.

When she was talking to people she would say, “He’s illiterate,” as if I
was really that stupid that I couldn’t understand what she was talking
about.

So what I did one day – you see they had this big dictionary right there
on the desk, a big heavy motherfucker – so what I just did was open up
the dictionary, and I just looked up the word, “illiterate.” And that’s
when I saw what she was calling me.

So she’s saying that I’m stupid or something. I’m stupid! [pointing to
himself with both thumbs and making a hulking face] “He doesn’t know
shit.”

The most profound dimension of Primo’s humiliation was not being called
illiterate but, rather, having to look up in the dictionary the words
used to insult him. In contrast, in the underground economy Primo never
had to risk this kind of threat to his self-worth.

Primo: Ray would never disrespect me that way, because he wouldn’t tell
me that because he’s illiterate too, plus I’ve got more education than
him. I almost got a GED.

Worse yet, Primo genuinely attempted to show initiative at Gloria
Kirschman’s magazine-publishing company, but the harder he tried, the
stupider he felt when he inevitably failed. As he explains, “It only
gets worse when they get to know you.”

Primo: So you, you know, you try to do good, but then people treat you
like shit.

Man, you be cool at first, and then all of a sudden, when they get to
know you, they try to diss you.

When I first got to my jobs, I was busting my ass and everything, but
after a while, it’s like, you get to hate your supervisor.

I was disrespected a few times at that job when I didn’t follow, like,
the orders. When my supervisor told me to do a job one way, but I
thought it was best to do it another way. She dissed the shit out of me
a coupla’ times. That lady was a bitch.

Quite simply, Primo was being exposed to the fact that he did not have
the cultural or symbolic capital that would have allowed him to step out
from behind the photocopy machine or the mail meter. He was
claustrophobically surrounded by overseers from an alien but powerful
culture:

Primo: I had to be cool. Even when we used to get our lunch breaks, when
we were supposed to be able to just hang, even then, the supervisors
were right there.

Primo was both unwilling and unable to compromise his street identity
and imitate the professional modes of interaction that might have earned
him the approval and respect of his boss. It is precisely in moments
like this that one can see institutionalized racism at work in how the
professional service sector unconsciously imposes the requisites of
Anglo, middle-class cultural capital. His boss forbade him to answer the
telephone, because objectively a Puerto Rican street accent will
discourage prospective clients and cause her to lose money. Ironically,
the confrontation over Primo using the telephone occurred because he had
been attempting to show initiative and good faith by answering calls
when he saw that his supervisors were busy or out of the office.

Primo: I wouldn’t have mind that she said I was illiterate. What
bothered me was that when she called on the telephone, she wouldn’t want
me to answer even if my supervisor – who was the receptionist – was not
there and the phone be ringing for a long time.

So when I answered it, my boss sounds like she’s going to get a heart
attack when she hears my voice. She’d go, “Where’s Renee?” – Renee
Silverman – that’s the receptionist, my supervisor.

I’d say, “She’s out to lunch” – or whatever.

And she would go, “Is Fran there?”

I’d say, “Yes she is.”

But, you see, it wasn’t Fran’s job to answer the phones. She was taking
care of the bills and always busy doing some work. So I just said,
“She’s probably out to lunch too.”

That boss was just a bitch, because I answered the phone correct. There
are so many different kinds of people out there in New York City that’ve
got a crazy accent. They could be into real estate; they could be into
anything. They just got their own accent. But that bitch didn’t like my
Puerto Rican accent.

I don’t know what was her problem; she’s a fucking bitch.

Okay, maybe I don’t have the education to type; so I will not type. But
don’t diss me for answering the phones instead of letting it ring
forever. Maybe it’s important! Bitch!

I used to answer it pretty well, man. But then after that – after she
dished me – when I did pick up the phone, I used to just sound
Porta’rrrrican on purpose. Fuck it.

The Gender Diss

The contemporary street sensitivity to being dissed immediately emerges
in these memories of office humiliation. The machismo of street culture
exacerbates the sense of insult experienced by men because the majority
of office supervisors at the entry level are women. Hence the constant
references to bosses and supervisors being “bitches” or “ho’s” [whores],
and the frequent judgmental descriptions of their bodies. On numerous
occasions in the Game Room, or after hours in my living room, or on the
street, Caesar interrupted Primo’s accounts of legal employment with his
own memories of workplace humiliation. For example, in the middle of
Primo’s “telephone diss” story he launched into a tirade of male outrage
at having been forced, in the legal labor market, to break the street
taboo against public male subordination to a woman:

Caesar: I had a few jobs like that where you gotta take a lot of shit
from fat, ugly bitches and be a wimp.

My worst was at Sudler & Hennessey – the advertising agency that works
with pharmaceutical shit. I didn’t like it but I kept on working,
because “Fuck it!” you don’t want to fuck up the relationship. So you
just be a punk.

Oh my God! I hated that head supervisor. She was a bitch, Peggy
MacNamara. She was an Irishwoman. She was beautiful, but that bitch was
really nasty.

She used to make me do fucked-up errands for her – wack shit. One time I
had to go all the way to Staten Island and find this fuckin’ place, and
go collect two paintings for her. And shit like that. That bitch just
didn’t like me.

She got her rocks off on firing people, man. You can see that on her
face, boy. She made this fucking guy cry – he was Eye-talian – and beg
for his job, and shit. And then she gave him his job back and put him on
probation, like that. [snapping his fingers and shaking his head in
disgust]

And then I heard her, like, laughing about it with the other
supervisors, like, joking about it.

Ultimately the gender disses respond to economic inequality and power
hierarchies. The crack dealers’ experience of powerlessness is usually
expressed in a racist and sexist idiom. For example, even though Caesar,
like Primo, is incapable of reading the white ethnic markers of his
supervisors, he is clearly aware of the economic and racial facts of his
marginal niche in the labor hierarchy:

Primo: I lasted in that mail room for like eight months. They used to
trust me. I used to go to the bank, get the checks, the payroll, and
hand out the payroll to all the executives.

Damn, there was this one bitch, her name was Inga . . . Hoffman . . .
no, it was Hawthorne, ’Cause she was Jewish. Well, that bitch used to
get paid well, boy! I used to put the fuckin’ check up to the light to
see.

That bitch was making about five thousand dollars a week, man! You could
see [squinting at an imaginary envelope] like, five thousand three
hundred and forty three dollars and change.

I was like, “Oh, my God!” Yeah, Hoffman, that bitch, was well paid, man.

Mine’s was the lowest paid job there. Shit, that was what drove me out
of it. I was just scum-a’-the-earth Porta’ Rican nigga’.

In the lowest recesses of New York City’s FIRE sector, tens of thousands
of messengers, photocopy machine operators, and security guards serving
the Fortune 500 companies are brusquely ordered about by young white
executives – often female – who sometimes make bimonthly salaries
superior to their underlings’ yearly wages. The extraordinary wealth of
Manhattan’s financial district exacerbates the sense of sexist—racist
insult associated with performing just-above-minimum-wage labor.

Work Site Wars

The remarkable profitability of New York’s financial service companies
allows management to pay arbitrary bonuses to even the most lowly
employees. This co-opts whatever solidarity and resistance might have
been fomented in the mail room or behind the photocopy machines as the
low-wage workers involute their energies, backbiting one another in a
jealous scramble for tips and extra perks.

Caesar: My supervisor was a greedy nigga’. He’s always wanting to know
how much I get paid ’Cause they give you bonuses on holidays – like at
Christmas – and the bonuses go up by the years. My bonus was three
hundred dollars.

Primo: [gasping] That’s a lot of money. I never got more than
twenty-five, fifty dollars.

Caesar: So when my supervisor found out how much I got, the nigga’ got
on the phone, and started complaining hard:

“Ah, why, uhum” [clumsily imitating an office telephone voice] – that’s
the way they spoke there – “Why did the mail room clerk get a three
hundred dollar bonus, and he only been here eight months, and I’ve been
here nine years, and I only got four hundred dollars. I think you made a
mistake.”

You see he was telling them he should get more, and I should get less. I
never shoulda told him how much I got.

This son of a bitch was pissed off. I don’t know if they gave him more,
but after a while he started complaining to me about everything. He was
on my case.

In the less-well-established FIRE service sector industries the
infighting among the entry-level workers and their immediate supervisors
results in job loss. This had been Primo’s experience in the highly
specialized and vulnerable desktop-publishing industry. Despite learning
some computer skills, he still lacked the cultural capital to be able to
compete effectively according to professional workplace rules. When a
fluctuation in the demand for annual reports or for merger and
acquisition agreements occurred, he was the first fired. Once again, his
anger over losing his job fixates misogynously on the humiliation of
having been the victim of a more powerful female supervisor. He
redundantly punctuates his sentences with the term “bitch” and makes
repeated references to his nemesis’ body. In fact, he even concludes
with the classic, violent fantasy of following his supervisor after work
to dominate her physically in the most traditional patriarchal setting
of all – her home. His repeated sniffs from a ten-dollar bag of cocaine
while he was talking seemed to fuel his ire and frustration at the
unpleasant memories.

Primo: My problem was that my supervisor was just a bitch who liked to
make sure I’m doing my job all the time, even when it used to be slow,
and she didn’t need to be hawking me that way.

I was responsible there. The worst thing I did was fall asleep, ’Cause
they switched me onto the night shift. That’s what got me fired.
[sniffing cocaine]

That bitch – I hate her. She was a big, fat woman, and they hired her
after me. She was just working there months too, man – that bitch –
before she got me fired.

I used to do telecommunications too. [enthusiastically] On this other
Kaypro computer I’d be sending files over to Boston [pointing
officiously into the distance]. I took care of all those things, the
computer, cleaning the machines – even bringing up the system when it
locks down. Crazy shit! I used to have my own file, too.

But I was falling asleep, man, sometimes I used to fall asleep, like on
the chair, with a terminal right there, and running.

And when I used to wake up, there’s people doing my work, and I’d just
get up real quick, and send them back, like, “No, no, it’s okay – okay,
shit! I could lose my job. I have to do my job.” [sniffing again]

But the supervisor of the night shift – the fat bitch – was already
writing me down.

I used to find her letters about me in the terminal. ’Cause I know, when
you have a file on the terminal in the system, you have a password. So I
used to just figure out their password.

I would go [squinting with feigned concentration], “They probably used
their last name, their first name, their nickname.” I used to keep
trying all those names until I get into their files. So I knew the file
of the main supervisor from that section. I used to find all her letters
she used to write about me. [sniffing again]

I used to look at her and want to kill her; wanted to burn her. She used
to live in a little trailer thing, I used to want to catch her and – I
used to think of all the most miserable shit to do to her.

I could tell she didn’t like me.

I told the company that she falls asleep on the job too. Sometimes she
goes to the back and falls asleep on the floor.

But they told me, “Yeah, but she signs out for that time. She signs out,
and signs back in when there’s work.”

They should have told me to sign out when they see me asleep, then sign
back in. But I guess she’s a supervisor and I’m just a nobody.

Primo’s white-collar enemy was obviously invulnerable to his attempts at
revenge. Ultimately, he realized that his fundamental vulnerability at
the work site was structural rather than merely the result of his
negative personal relationship with his immediate supervisor.

Primo: I had been there a long time. The problem was that they were
really coming down on a lot of the employees. I was one of the lucky
ones. They were waiting for any little mixup that we might do. They were
looking for reasons to let people go, just like that. [snapping his
fingers]

They weren’t hiring nobody. The only ones that stayed were the ones that
were working there first, which was John, and Art Schwartz, and this
other tall white guy.

Philippe: And how did that make you feel?

Primo: [sniffing cocaine in each nostril pensively] When I found out I
wanted to cry, man. My throat got dry, I was like . . . [gasping and
waving his arms as if suffocating, then sniffing more cocaine]

You see, I had went to pick up my check, but before getting my check,
there was a little hassle, and they called me to the office.

I was like, “Oh shit!“ [sniffing again]

But I couldn’t get through to them. I even told them, “I’ll let you put
me back to messenger, I will take less pay, just keep me employed. I
need the money; I need to work; I got a family.

They said [feigning dismissive authority], “Nope, nope, nope.”

So I said, “Okay.” I left.

My friends were waiting for me outside. I was fucked man. All choked up.

Relationships with supervisors and bosses do not have to be malicious to
be humiliating or otherwise intolerable by street culture standards. In
Primo’s previous job at the trade magazine publishing house, for
example, his boss, Gloria Kirschman, had probably been a well-meaning
liberal. Reading between the lines of Primo’s vilifying account, one
suspects that she cared about the future of the bright, energetic high
school dropout working for her. At one point, she took him aside to
advise him to “go back to school.” This is how her well-intentioned –
and objectively accurate – advice sounded to Primo, however:

Primo: If you’re young, you’re a fucking idiot if you’re working.

My boss, she wanted me to go to school too. Well fuck her, man! I’m here
and I’m working. I want my money.

And they talk about that school shit ’Cause they’re pampered, they lead
pampered lives. Everybody can’t go to school a lot. Some people have to
live, man. They got to eat – you know what I’m saying? People got to
eat, man. Especially if you got a son, you got to . . . people got to do
things.

I was eighteen then and Papito, my son, was already born. I mean, you
want things in the world. You can’t wait for some fuckin’ degree.

She had no business worrying about my schooling.

Caesar: I don’t see how learning about George Washington crossing the
fucking Delaware is going to help you in this fucking world.

Primo: Like, teach me how to write the letters to other companies.
English – [turning to Caesar] that’s what they call English – and
reading and writing.

Primo had no frame of reference to interpret and understand the office
work tasks that Gloria Kirschman insisted he perform.

I didn’t like working there at all, anyway. I didn’t want to be doing no
collating, or no mail shit.

Plus, she used to have me look in this closet and put everything
together ... I forgot the names of those things ... oh yeah, she would
call it, “Make an inventory.”

I didn’t even know what the hell those things were – an inventory?
Anyway, the closet was a mess. So I just like thought, “I should throw
some of this shit away. Just to make it look neater.”

So I just threw it all out, ’Cause I knew she was never gonna use any of
that stuff again.

In his confusion over the ostensibly irrational mysteries of office
work, Primo worried about a repeat of the illiteracy insult. He was
constantly on guard lest Gloria Kirschman disrespect him without his
being immediately aware of what was happening. Consequently, when she
ordered him to perform mysteriously specific tasks, such as direct
mailings of promotional materials that required particular conjugations
of folding, stuffing, or clipping, he activated his defense mechanisms.
His mother’s inner-city apartment project mailbox address is only rarely
targeted by direct-mail campaigns, and consequently Primo had no frame
of reference for understanding the urgency of the precision with which
Gloria oversaw the logistics of her direct mailings. Instead, she
appeared overbearingly oppressive and insulting to him. In fact, he even
suspected Gloria was superstitious and arbitrary in the rigor and
anxiety with which she supervised every detail of the direct-mailing
packets he was preparing.

Weapons of the Weak

Primo refused to accept the “flexibility” that these delicate, targeted
mailing campaigns required – that is, late-night binges of collating and
recollating to make bulk-rate postage deadlines coincide with the
magazine’s printing and sales deadlines. It was offensive and sexually
inappropriate to Primo to have to bring over the assembled promotional
packets to Gloria’s home for last-minute, late-night inspections.

Primo: It would be late, and I would be at the office to do these rush
jobs: collate them, staple them, fold them in the correct way . . .
whatever way she said. It was always different.

And it had to be just the way she wanted it. I’d stuff them just the
right way [making frantic shuffling motions with his hands] and then
seal the shit.

I used to hate that. I would box it and take it to the Thirty-eight
Street post office at ten-thirty at night.

But then sometimes she would call me from home, and I would have to
bring papers up to her house on Seventy-ninth Street and Third Avenue
[Manhattan’s Silk Stocking district] just to double-check my work. She
had to check every single envelope. And she always used to find a paper
that I had folded just wrong.

And she would try to offer me something to eat and I would say firmly,
“No, thank you.” Because she would try to pay me with that shit; ’Cause
she’s a cheap bitch.

She’d say, “You want pizza, tea, or cookies.” She had those Pepperidge
Farm cookies.

But I wouldn’t accept anything from her. I wasn’t going to donate my
time man.

She thought I was illiterate. She thought I was stupid. Not me boy!
Charge every penny. [grinning] From the moment I leave the office,
that’s overtime, all the way to her house. That’s time and a half.

I used to exaggerate the hours. If I worked sixteen, I would put
eighteen or twenty to see if I could get away with it – and I would get
away with it. I’m not going to do that kind of shit for free.

And that bitch was crazy. She used to eat baby food. I know, ’Cause I
saw her eating it with a spoon right out of the jar.

If Primo appeared to be a scowling, ungrateful, dishonest worker to
Gloria, then Gloria herself looked almost perverted to Primo. What
normal middle-aged woman would invite her nineteen-year-old employee
into her kitchen late at night and eat baby food in front of him?
Ironically, it was precisely by showing eager flexibility during these
emergency late-night binges to complete direct-mailing campaigns that
Primo might have earned a promotion – or at least job stability – at
Gloria’s magazine. She probably saw herself as bending over backward to
be trusting and friendly to her shy, moderately hostile employee by
inviting him into her kitchen and offering him a friendly snack.

In any case, Primo’s working-class victories over his employer proved to
be Pyrrhic. His definition of worker rights was still based on the
conceptions that emerged out of generations of factory floor
confrontations where self-respecting hourly wage earners always demand
time and a half once they have completed their eight-hour shifts. In the
cross-cultural confrontation taking place in the corridors of high-rise
office buildings, one never gets promoted if one requests overtime. The
“paper trail” rather than collective-bargaining contracts predicates
survival.

Entry-level inner-city workers are also hindered by the fact that the
vocabulary used in office work performance evaluations has no
counterpart in street culture. When someone like Primo or Caesar is
“terminated,” the personnel report might contain a series of notations:
“lack of initiative,” “inarticulate,” or “no understanding of the
purpose of the company.” Primo realizes that in street English these
evaluations mean “she’s saying to her associates that I’m stupid.” He
cannot improve his performance at work, however, without jeopardizing
the basic foundations of his definition of personal dignity.
Consequently, at Gloria’s trade magazine Primo was the first person to
fall victim to one of the periodic economic retrenchments characteristic
of this highly specialized subsector, which fluctuates with the changing
whims and fashions of upper-class culture.

Primo: I had to leave that job because my hours were cut down. I think
it was four and a half hours a day, and then some days she would cut me
out the whole full day. There was like less work to do.

I already had my son, Papito, and expenses. Sandra, my son’s mother, was
on public assistance. But that’s not enough. She worked off the books;
but she was just surviving. Her cousin . . . or somebody . . . the
next-door neighbor used to baby-sit while she worked.

Sandra would look them out, but it was hard because she was giving them
half of her . . . whatever-she-makes-a-day, to whoever was baby-sitting.
It was like minimum wage.

She was working hard for bullshit.

So that’s why I had to find a new job. My boss had me on restricted
hours, and I can’t even work overtime.

Although Primo and Caesar were at the very bottom of the office
service-work hierarchies of the FIRE sector, they were not completely
powerless. Nonunion service workers in high-rise office buildings can
draw on much the same repertoires of work site resistance that masses of
dominated people from agricultural serfs to apprentice artisans to
modern-day housekeepers have always engaged in: foot dragging,
attitudinal opposition, and petty theft.⁸ This kind of purposeful
disgruntlement, however, is particularly unacceptable in the new office
service sector, where “attitude” – enthusiasm, initiative, and
flexibility – often determines who is fired and who is promoted.
Oppositionally defined cultural identities that were legitimate on the
factory shop floor – and even served to ritualize and stabilize
management—worker confrontations – are completely unacceptable in the
FIRE sector, where upper middle-class Anglo modes of interaction prevail
with a vengeance.

In contrast to the unionized factory worker, low-echelon service sector
employees in the FIRE sector have no formal institutional channels to
legitimize or to render productive their dissatisfaction with their
working conditions. The result is an alienated “working-class culture”
isolated within the extremely limited autonomous confines that
entry-level office employees are able to carve out for themselves.
Caesar noticed this right away in the mail room of his pharmaceutical
advertising agency:

Caesar: I used to get there late, but the other workers wasn’t never
doing shit. They was lazy motherfuckers – even the supervisor.

They all be sitting, asking each other questions over the phone, and
fooling with video games on the computer. And that’s all you do at a
place like that.

My boss, Bill, be drinking on the sneak cue, and eating this bad-ass
sausage.

Both Primo and Caesar, however, preferred to engage in a more
instrumental and personally satisfying form of powerless revenge:
stealing on the job.

Primo: I used to do all the Express Mail. Yeah, it was nine dollars and
thirty-five cents and they would give me ten dollars to take it to the
post office. But instead, I would just slide the envelope through the
Pitney-Bowes [postage-meter machine] and drop it in the nearest mailbox.

Primo was particularly proud of how effectively he pilfered from his
employer, Gloria Kirschman, who had called him illiterate. Indeed,
within a few months of being hired, Primo excelled at concocting scams
that manipulated double invoicing and interchanging receipts – skills
not usually associated with illiteracy:

Primo: One time, I just took eighty dollars from this petty-cash money
box that they kept with the receptionist in the front office. [sniffing
heartily from a packet of heroin that he had placed on my living room
coffee table]

I didn’t just steal the eighty dollars. I knew the ropes to the place. I
was doing everything ahead of time.

You see, when I first started working there, I used to bring all the
receipts from everything. And, I used to borrow money sometimes from
petty cash, and I would have to pay it back when I get paid. Gloria was
so fucking cheap, always bitching because the receipts’ not in the right
place, and then complaining, ’Cause I’m answering the phones, and I’m
illiterate.

Well, she didn’t keep good inventory. Nothing was accurate there. So she
would send me to get Xeroxes, but I would already know the price,
because I had already called the Xerox place to see how much they going
to charge me for how much she was going to give me. Like, how much
copies, whatever size, eight and a half by eleven.

And then I told the lady at the front office, the receptionist, to give
me eighty bucks so I’ll be able to pay for the stuff.

So I asked Gloria [sniffing more heroin], the bitch, my boss, “Do you
want this paid by cash or check?”

She told me, “By check.” [giggling] So I got a check for eighty bucks
and kept the cash and put the receipt from the Xerox place into the
petty-cash box. Nobody figured it out. [chuckling]

That bitch was stupid. She bitches so much, and she wasn’t even doing
anything correct. [laughing hard]

Primo’s laughter was cut short in this particular conversation when he
suddenly lurched in the direction of my apartment’s bathroom, vomiting
on my living room rug, prompting Caesar to call with protective concern:

[images]

Self-portrait of a crack dealer wearing his gold chain and medallion.
This particular dealer competed directly with the Game Room, and he
marked his sales site with his graffiti art. Photo by Philippe Bourgois.

Caesar: Oh man! You all right, Primo? I keep telling you, man, you’re a
light nigga’. You can’t be sniffing so much dope all at once. [dipping
his house key into the packet of heroin and sniffing dryly into each
nostril]

“Fly Clothes” and Symbolic Power

Not all forms of resistance to marginal legal employment are so
instrumental and practical. On a deeper level, the entire foundation of
street culture and the unwillingness of people like Primo and Caesar to
compromise their street identity is a refusal to accept marginalization
in the mainstream professional world. The oppositional identities of
street culture are both a triumphant rejection of social marginalization
and a defensive – in some cases terrorized – denial of vulnerability.
The ways office dress codes become polarized provide insight into this
complex dynamic because clothing is a concretely visible arena
encapsulating symbolic, or cultural, conflict. To my surprise, many of
the crack dealers cited their inappropriate wardrobes and the imposition
of demeaning dress codes as primary reasons for shunning legal
employment. At first I dismissed the issue as trivial. It took me
several months to realize how centrally this symbolic expression of
identity articulates with power relations in the labor market.

The oppositional meaning of “subcultural style” among youths and
marginalized sectors of society has long fascinated sociologists.⁹ Much
of that material romanticizes and exoticizes the real pain of social
marginalization. In contrast, of course, seen through the eyes of
mainstream America, an inner-city youth’s preoccupation with “fly
clothes” only confirms a stereotype of immaturity, petty irrationality,
or even personal pathology.

When young inner-city men and women are forced to submit to powerful
white women in the entry levels of the office-worker labor force,
physical appearance becomes a fierce arena for enforcing or contesting
power. Of course, on a more general level, this occurs whenever the
crack dealers or anyone engrossed in street culture venture into the
middle-class white world that dominates most public space beyond
inner-city confines. Caesar, for example, highlights his experience of
this tension in his angry reminiscences of office workplace
confrontations. He had no idea when his clothes would elicit ridicule or
anger. His vulnerability and powerlessness outside the street context is
clearly expressed in his anger over the “flexible” job description of
his FIRE service-sector position. He mediates his objective
powerlessness at work, through his preoccupation with the confusing
office dress code.

Caesar: When I worked at Sudler & Hennessey, the pharmaceutical
advertising agency, they had a dress code and shit like that. I wore the
tie for about three weeks, but, uhum . . . Bob – I mean Bill – he was my
supervisor, an Irish son of a bitch, an old white guy – he told me I
didn’t really have to wear a tie if I didn’t want to. So I didn’t.

Because for some reason, since I was new, like the new mail clerk there,
and they was remodeling and shit, they wanted me to do like, all this
wild work. I’d be taking down shelves, clearing dust, sweeping – dirty
work.

I mean I didn’t wanna really do construction work in my good clothes.
But I couldn’t come in bummy, because my supervisor would tell me, “Why
you coming in like that?” Or “Why you dressed like that for?” He meant,
“Like a hoodlum.” But I dressed good, like in nice baggies, and fancy
shoes, and nice paisley shirts.

But what I didn’t like was that construction wasn’t in my job
description. I got hired to be a mail room clerk right. They never told
me that they were going to be remodeling shit.

But then they had that dress code right. I hated that shit. You see I
didn’t have no clothes back then because I was still goin’ on mission
[crack binges]. So really, like my first paycheck went for clothes, but
then I had to replace the clothes I had fucked up at work.

In much the same way that Primo was humiliated by having to look up the
word “illiterate” in the dictionary, Caesar was hurt when his supervisor
accused him of “looking like a hoodlum” on the days when he thought he
was actually dressing well. His problem was not merely that he did not
have enough money to buy clothes but, rather, that he had no idea of
which clothes to choose when he went to buy them. Losing this particular
struggle over cultural capital has to be profoundly disorienting to the
kind of person whose fly clothes on the street have always made him
“king of the crew,” as Caesar’s teenage friend Willie had assured me in
a conversation cited earlier in this chapter.

In the same vein, several months earlier, I had watched Primo drop out
of a “motivational training” employment program in the basement of his
mother’s housing project, run by former heroin addicts who had just
received a multimillion-dollar private sector grant for their innovative
approach to training the “unemployable.” Primo felt profoundly
disrespected by the program, and he focused his discontent on the
humiliation he faced because of his inappropriate wardrobe. The
fundamental philosophy of such motivational job-training programs is
that “these people have an attitude problem.” They take a boot camp
approach to their unemployed clients, ripping their self-esteem apart
during the first week in order to build them back up with an epiphanic
realization that they want to find jobs as security guards, messengers,
and data-input clerks in just-above-minimum-wage service sector
positions. The program’s highest success rate has been with middle-aged
African-American women who want to terminate their relationship to
welfare once their children leave home.

I originally had a “bad attitude” toward the premise of psychologically
motivating and manipulating people to accept boring, poorly paid jobs.
At the same time, however, the violence and self-destruction I was
witnessing at the Game Room was convincing me that it is better to be
exploited at work than to be outside the legal labor market. In any
case, I persuaded Primo and a half-dozen of his Game Room associates –
including Candy and Little Pete, who was then managing the Social Club
crackhouse on La Farmacia’s corner – to sign up for the program. Even
Caesar was tempted to join.

None of the crack dealers lasted for more than three sessions of the job
training program. Primo was the first to drop out after the first day’s
registration and pep talk. For several weeks he avoided talking about
the experience. I repeatedly pressed him to explain why he “just didn’t
show up” to the free job-training sessions. Only after repeated
badgering on my part did he finally express the deep sense of shame and
vulnerability he experienced whenever he attempted to venture into the
legal labor market. In the particular case of the motivational
employment program, clothes and appearance – style, once again – were
the specific medium for resisting the humiliation of submission to a
menial position in the service sector labor market.

Philippe: Yo Primo, listen to me. I worry that there’s something taking
place that you’re not aware of, in terms of yourself. Like the coke that
you be sniffing all the time; it’s like every night.

Primo: What do you mean?

Philippe: Like not showing up at the job training. You say it’s just
procrastination, but I’m scared it’s something deeper that you’re not
dealing with. Like wanting to be partying all night, and sniffing. Maybe
that’s why you never went back.

Primo: The truth though – listen Felipe – my biggest worry was the dress
code, ’Cause my gear is limited. I don’t even got a dress shirt, I only
got one pair of shoes, and you can’t wear sneakers at that program. They
wear ties too – don’t they? Well, I ain’t even got ties – I only got the
one you lent me.

I would’ve been there three weeks in the same gear: T-shirt and jeans.
Estoy jodido como un bón! [I’m all fucked up like a bum!]

Philippe: What the fuck kinda bullshit excuse are you talking about?
Don’t tell me you were thinking that shit. No one notices how people are
dressed.

Primo: Yo, Felipe, this is for real! Listen to me! I was thinking about
that shit hard. Hell yeah!

Hell yes they would notice, because I would notice if somebody’s wearing
a fucked-up tie and shirt.

I don’t want to be in a program all abochornado [embarrassed]. I
probably won’t even concentrate, getting dished, like . . . and being
looked at like a sucker. Dirty jeans ... or like old jeans, because I
would have to wear jeans, ’Cause I only got one slack. Word though! I
only got two dress shirts and one of them is missing buttons.

I didn’t want to tell you about that because it’s like a poor excuse,
but that was the only shit I was really thinking about. At the time I
just said, “Well, I just don’t show up.”

And Felipe, I’m a stupid [very] skinny nigga’. So I have to be careful
how I dress, otherwise people will think I be on the stem [a crack
addict who smokes out of a glass-stem pipe].

Philippe: [nervously] Oh shit. I’m even skinnier than you. People must
think I’m a total drug addict.

Primo: Don’t worry. You’re white.

Obviously, the problem is deeper than not having enough money to buy
straight-world clothes. Racism and the other subtle badges of symbolic
power are expressed through wardrobes and body language. Ultimately,
Primo’s biggest problem was that he had no idea of what clothes might be
appropriate in the professional, service sector context. Like Caesar, he
feared he might appear to be a buffoon on parade on the days when he was
trying to dress up. He admitted that the precipitating factor in his
decision not to go back to the job training program was when he
overheard someone accusing Candy of “looking tacky” after she proudly
inaugurated her new fancy clothes at the first class. As a matter of
fact, Primo had thought she had looked elegant in her skintight, yellow
jumpsuit when she came over to his apartment to display her new outfit
proudly to him and his mother before going to class.

Unionized Travesties: Racism and Racketeering

Isolating oneself in inner-city street culture removes any danger of
having to face the humiliations Candy, Caesar, or Primo inevitably
confront when they venture out of their social circle to try to find
legal employment. At the same time, there is a persistent awareness held
by even the bitterest, most alienated of the crack dealers that a
unionized job represents a positive, legal alternative to the drug
economy. This was especially true for construction work, the single most
accessible and relatively abundant, unionized entry-level job in New
York City. A job in construction coincides even better than factory work
with street culture’s definitions of masculinity.¹⁰ Even Caesar rebuked
me when I accused him of being too lazy to work in construction. Framed
by the Game Room door where he was standing at his lookout position, he
puffed out his chest and raised his fists, reminding me of a television
advertisement for Captain Planet.

Caesar: Naah man. Fuck you! Construction is good.

Look at my body. I got a body that’s good for construction.

Mines’ isn’t like Primo’s. [pointing to Primo, who was serving a
customer] He’s got a body that’s more for shipping and receiving.
[distant gunshots]

To my surprise, Caesar admitted to failing in his attempt to become a
construction worker before being hired by Primo at the Game Room. The
experience had been less humiliating to him than his failure at the
advertising agency, Sudler & Hennessey, because it is common knowledge
in New York City that the construction industry is a racist preserve for
well-paid white workers ensconced in Mafia-controlled unions.¹¹ Since
the 1970s, inner-city-based affirmative action organizations have
attempted to force local construction sites to hire laborers from their
communities. Ironically, they utilize the same strong-arm techniques
pioneered by the old-fashioned Italian Mafia. Men with Caesar’s muscular
stature and rage-filled disposition are recruited systematically by
these affirmative action employment organizations in order to act as
violent pickets to intimidate the construction companies and force them
to integrate Latinos and African-Americans onto their work sites. The
most effective picketers are rewarded with positions as full-time,
unionized day laborers at the same construction sites where their
strong-arm tactics were successful.

With his hulking bravado and affinity for public displays of violence,
Caesar earned one of these rare union jobs after only a week of
picketing for one of the more legitimate and famous of these
race-busting employment organizations, known as “Harlem Fight-Back.”
Although brilliantly successful on the picket line, Caesar fell apart
when he left the protective cocoon of Harlem Fight-Back’s street culture
tactics. He found himself all of a sudden confronting the racist
stonewalling of his new, exclusively white, union colleagues.

It was good pay. They was paying me fourteen dollars an hour. But I was
the only Puerto Rican; they were all like Eye-talians and shit like
that. And I never got paid.

What happened was they started jerking me around. I was working in
demolition, but everytime I would go to the site the foreman wouldn’t
know nothing about their hiring me, and they be sending me from one job
site to another.

And these big Eye-talian dudes – like forty years old – be asking me
[gruffly], “Who send you here?”

And I was like [shrugs his shoulders helplessly].

And they would be [gruffly again], “Who hired you?”

I would tell them who hired me. But my problem was that the main union
office didn’t send me no papers. And I didn’t get no time card or
nothing like that. So I was just working wildly.

I would go to the job site and everybody would be there waiting for the
bosses to go, “All right now, everybody start working.” Then they’d be
working, and I just join in the work.

But nobody knew who I was. It was like “Who hired you?” and “Where’s
your time card?”

So they kept jerking me around. I was stupid. I just never went back.
’Cause at that time I was smoking, so I said “Fuck this man, they giving
me a hard time.” And I went off on a mission.

In other words, crack colluded with a racist labor market and with
Caesar’s personal vulnerabilities to keep him from having to face his
structural exclusion from even the most traditional, macho niche of the
working-class labor force.

Two subsectors within the unionized construction industry were
relatively more open to El Barrio’s African-American and Puerto Rican
population: building demolition and high-rise window replacement. These
particularly dangerous enclaves of the industry abound in New York
City’s poorest neighborhoods, where they thrive on landlord
gentrification schemes and rampant public sector corruption. Most
blatantly, in demolition, tough El Barrio high school dropouts, proud of
working legally, clear away the hulks of arsoned and abandoned
working-class tenements to make room for the construction of new, luxury
structures that they, and their families, will never be able to afford.
Economists and real estate agents call this gentrification. On the
street, I heard it referred to as “bleachification.”

The abundant supply of window-replacement jobs is only slightly more
subtly the result of the competition over affordable housing in
Manhattan. According to New York City’s housing regulations, window
replacement counts as a capital improvement that landlords are allowed
to pass on to their unsuspecting tenants at several times the real cost
through strategic – but perfectly legal – bookkeeping. It represents one
of the only ways for landlords to bypass New York’s strict rent
stabilization and family eviction laws, and force poor tenants out of
their buildings by raising their rents rapidly. Fringe areas between
very wealthy and very poor neighborhoods, like East Harlem’s southern
border with New York’s Silk Stocking Upper East Side around East 96th
Street, are precisely the kinds of interstitial zones most vulnerable to
these gentrification schemes. Ironically, in El Barrio young men
experience as positive their long-term residential displacement from
their natal neighborhoods because they are provided in the short term
with well-paid construction jobs renovating buildings that will no
longer be affordable to the working poor.

The periodic “renovations” of Housing Authority project buildings that
are sponsored by organized crime provide another abundant source of
high-altitude window-replacement jobs. Several of the crackhouse
habitués, including Little Pete, the manager of the Social Club,
participated proudly and unknowingly in these Mafia-controlled window
scams. Little Pete’s tenure replacing the several thousand windows on
the housing project buildings opposite the Game Room was cut short when
a pane fell on his head, lodging glass splinters in his left eye. He was
forced to apply for indigent medical aid at Metropolitan Hospital, East
Harlem’s public municipal facility, because his subcontractor had never
paid any medical insurance or workers’ compensation policies. Worse yet,
the hospital social worker’s investigation revealed that Little Pete’s
subcontractor had hired him illegally through an arrangement with a
corrupt union official that allowed them to collect the full union wage
of $18 for each hour worked by Little Pete at $10. Little Pete had been
so proud of earning $10 an hour, it had never occurred to him that his
labor could be valued at $18 according to union regulation.¹²

The New-Immigrant Alternative

Despite these consistently negative experiences on the fringes of the
unionized labor market, everyone acknowledged that union employment was
the ideal. “I gotta find a union job” was one of Primo’s most common
refrains during his intermittent periods of concerted job search. In
fact, for a brief two-month period he fell prey to the illusion that he
had found a unionized position with a nighttime janitorial services
company that cleaned hotel conference rooms and theaters in Times
Square. At first, despite his $6.50-an-hour starting wage, Primo was
thrilled. He confided to me that he felt terrific, “like a normal
working nigga’"; although he did note, “You know the weird thing?
They’re all fuckin’ immigrants there except for the bosses.” He also
complained that the company refused to pay them overtime; nevertheless,
he accepted their explanation that hotel management insisted the workers
leave the premises before the guests awoke: “I guess they don’t want to
be seeing scum like us around. So we try to bust out a lotta work from
eleven [p.m.] to six-thirty [a.m.].” He disliked the “bald, white Jewish
boss” for berating them everytime he inspected their work, but he was
impressed by the unionized workers on his shift who militantly cursed
the “bald white guy” back. After his second biweekly paycheck he noticed
that several nights’ worth of work were missing and that none of the
native-born Americans were lasting through the two-and-a-half-month
probation period that all workers had to pass before being allowed to
join the union.

Sure enough, when Primo was two weeks short of qualifying for union
tenure, he was laid off.

Primo: I figured it was gonna happen ’Cause I was just working there for
two or three months. So I’m the one at the most risk to get laid off,
because of that wack union business. Besides you don’t get no Blue
Cross/Blue Shield at that job, and they mess up your money.

The older guys working there for years, they told me, “You don’t get no
union on this job. By the time you’re three months here, they’ll lay you
off. Watch it.”

They still owe me hours. That job is wack. Its gonna be all wetbacks,
Jamaicans and Central Americans, soon.

Caesar was particularly enraged by Primo’s accounts of management’s
union-busting. Nevertheless, both he and Primo succumbed to a classic
racist, divide-and-conquer logic. They channeled their anger over their
structural vulnerability within management—labor confrontations into
scapegoating the new immigrants entering New York City’s low-wage labor
market, and in this process, further crushed their own dreams of ever
having access to well-paid unionized jobs.

Caesar: Mexicans get jerked in these places man. They not getting paid
well, and they takin’ all the jobs. You know what I’m saying? They cheap
labor.

People will hire Mexicans before they hire a white man, or a Puerto
Rican, because they know they could jerk them more.

Primo: They getting paid like, two or three dollars an hour in a job
that I coulda had.

Caesar: That gets me mad too man!

Primo: They take up jobs that other people could have that are citizens
of the United States.

Caesar: ’Cause we belong to America.

Primo: And then I could probably get paid the right amount – five, six,
or eight dollars.

Caesar: And Mexicans be bringing a lotta partners with them. They be
having buildings full of Mexicans now.

Primo: The building on 116th is packed with Mexicans boy.

Caesar: This whole block is getting to be fuckin’ full of a lotta
different types of races. And they be like a whole bunch of them living
all crazy-like in one crib.

Especially the Africans – those people look dirty to me.

Primo: They treat you like shit, and they live better than us.

Caesar: They look like unclean people for some reason.

Philippe: Aw, come on!

Caesar: They really black. Like real dark black. They look dirty to me.
They not the same kind of blacks as the Americans that be around here.
They’re like a real hard-core suntan black.

Primo: And then there’s the Dominicans.

Philippe: Man! You guys should read my book¹³ about how stupid it is for
poor people to be racist against each other. Let me go get it and read
out loud – It’s about a plantation in Costa Rica where blacks and
Latinos be riffin’ at each other. The companies love it; they just laugh
all the way to the bank.

Caesar: [ignoring my comment] It’s like Dominicans who are most fucked
up. They come in and they either sell drugs or buy a store.

I hate Dominicans the most, man.

In a classic replay of the historical process that brought their parents
and grandparents to El Barrio – but with the roles reversed – Primo,
Caesar, and virtually everyone in the Game Room entourage detested the
new immigrants moving into their neighborhood. During the last years of
my fieldwork this expressed itself in random predatory violence against
the rural Mexicans who were arriving in increasing numbers and moving
into the most decrepit tenements on the worst drug-copping corners
surrounding us. Several of the Game Room habitués – including Nestor, a
seller directly employed by Ray to occasionally replace Primo and Caesar
– were arrested for mugging, stabbing, and, in one fatal case, shooting
their new Mexican neighbors.

Three or four decades earlier, it was Italian-Americans who were lashing
out at Puerto Ricans whom they accused of “stealing” their factory jobs
and “invading” their neighborhood. The same third world desperate
poverty faced by Mexicans in the 1990s was the driving force rendering
new-immigrant Puerto Ricans more “exploitable” in the 1940s and 1950s
than the progeny of the previous immigrant group, New York—born
Italians. This is clearly expressed, for example, in Primo’s mother’s
childhood memories of her rural youth.

Primo’s mother: [in Spanish] I loved my life in Puerto Rico. We always
ate, because my father always had work, and in those days the custom was
to have a garden in your patio to grow food and everything that you ate.

We only ate meat on Sundays, because everything was cultivated on the
same little parcel of land. From there we got our eggplant, our beans,
our cilantro, our . . . [lists several more traditional Puerto Rican
subsistence vegetables and herbs] That way we saved our money.

We didn’t have a refrigerator, so we ate bacalao [salted codfish], which
can stay outside, and a meat that they call carne de vieja [shredded
beef], and sardines from a can.

But thanks to God, we never felt hunger. My mother made a lot of
cornflour. And to save money, whenever there were beans left over, she
would strain them; mash them; make a little soup; and add a little
cornflour. So we were never hungry.

In the 1950s, Leonard Covello, the Italian-American principal of El
Barrio’s public high school, was dismayed over the racism that his
neighbors directed against people like Primo’s mother. In his
autobiography he reports an argument he had with a group of
Italian-American men on an El Barrio street corner:

[Man on street corner] They’re not like us. We’re American. We eat meat
at least three times a week. What do they eat? Beans!

[High school principal] What do you think your parents ate when they
came to America? . . . Pasta e fasul . . . Beans and macaroni – and
don’t forget it. Don’t forget that other people used to say the same
things about your mothers and fathers that you now say about the Puerto
Ricans.¹⁴

The violence and racist tensions of the 1990s between young, unemployed
New York—born Puerto Ricans and the new immigrants “invading” their
neighborhoods and labor markets is the human underside to the latest
phase in the restructuring of New York’s economy. The real value of the
minimum wage declined by one-third during the 1980s at the same time
that the federal government decreased by more than 50 percent its
proportional contribution to New York City’s budget. Under normal
conditions this would precipitate a crisis in the reproduction of the
entry-level labor force.¹⁵ Instead, new immigrants provide a fresh
source of below-subsistence-cost workers tolerant of exploitative labor
conditions. Specifically, in East Harlem the majority of the new
immigrants are Mexicans from the rural states of Puebla and Guerrero.
The poverty of their natal villages makes them a highly disciplined,
inexpensive workforce capable of fulfilling the enormous needs that
well-paid FIRE sector executives have for personal services:
housekeepers, office cleaners, delivery personnel, boutique attendants,
restaurant workers.¹⁶ Furthermore, their impoverished rural backgrounds
where running water and electricity are considered a luxury make them
tolerant of the crushing public sector breakdown endemic to U.S. inner
cities. Native-born New Yorkers of any ethnicity are simply not
exploitable enough to compete with rural new immigrants for low-wage
menial jobs.

In addition to the material fact of tolerating lower standards of living
and of accepting more exploitative working conditions, new-immigrant
Mexicans experience racism and subordination at work in a very different
manner from Puerto Ricans or African-Americans. Their sense of
self-respect does not articulate as closely with the ethnic hierarchies
and definitions of self-worth constructed by native-born North
Americans. Many of the subtler expressions of racism and disrespect that
are routinely directed against Latinos in New York are simply irrelevant
to them. Of course, this partial insulation from “gettin’ dissed” by
other ethnic groups will decrease with time as new-immigrant Mexicans
develop greater personal and emotional stakes in local society, and as a
second generation of New York—born Mexicans comes of age. Presumably,
similar dynamics mediated by different cultural and economic parameters
occur among undocumented new-immigrant Asians in lower Manhattan,
Dominicans on the Upper West Side, and West Indians in Brooklyn.¹⁷

The Bicultural Alternative: Upward Mobility or Betrayal

Given the structural dynamic of ethnic succession by new immigrants at
the lowest echelons of New York’s labor force, the primary hope for
upward mobility among New York—born Puerto Ricans lies in the expanding
FIRE sector’s need for office support workers – mail room clerks,
photocopiers, and receptionists. Not only is this one of the
fastest-growing subsectors of the city’s economy, it also has the
greatest potential for upward mobility as messengers get promoted to
clerks, who get promoted to administrative assistants, and so on. Of
course, these are also precisely the kinds of jobs that require
subservient behavior anathema to street culture.

As noted earlier, success in the FIRE service sector requires an
inner-city office worker to be bicultural: in other words, to play
politely by “the white woman’s rules” downtown only to come home and
revert to street culture within the safety of a tenement or housing
project at night. Thousands of East Harlem residents manage to balance
their identities on this precarious tightrope. Often, when they are
successful, their more marginally employed or unemployed neighbors and
childhood friends accuse them of ethnic betrayal and internalized
racism.

I collected several righteous condemnations by Game Room habitués of
their successfully employed neighbors who work downtown and adapt to
high-rise office culture. Leroy, another cousin of Caesar’s, who ran his
own private crack operation, was especially adamant on the subject.

Leroy: When you see someone go downtown and get a good job, if they be
Puerto Rican, you see them fix up their hair and put some contact lens
in their eyes. Then they fit in. And they do it! I seen it.

They turnovers. They people who wanna be white. Man, if you call them in
Spanish, it wind up a problem.

I mean like, take the name Pedro – I’m just telling you this as an
example – Pedro be saying, [imitating a white nasal accent] “My name is
Peter.”

Where do you get Peter from Pedro?

Just watch how Spanish people fix up their hair. When they get nice jobs
like that, all of a sudden, you know, they start talking proper.

The bicultural alternative is not an option for Leroy, whose black skin
and tough street demeanor disqualify him from credibility in a high-rise
office corridor. I learned later that part of his articulate anger on
the night I tape-recorded his denunciation of “turnovers” was the result
of his most recent foray into office work. He had just quit a
“nickel-and-dime messenger job downtown” (in order to return to crack
dealing full time in his project stairway) shortly after a white woman
fled from him shrieking down the hallway of a high-rise office building.
Leroy and the terrified woman had ridden the elevator together and
coincidentally Leroy had stepped off on the same floor as she did, to
make a delivery. Worse yet, Leroy had been trying to act like a debonair
male when the woman fled from him. He suspected the contradiction
between his inadequate appearance and his chivalric intentions was
responsible for the woman’s terror:

Leroy: You know how you let a woman go off the elevator first? Well
that’s what I did to her, but I may have looked a little shabby on the
ends. Sometime my hair not combed, you know; so I could look a little
sloppy to her, maybe, when I let her off first.

What Leroy did not quite admit until I probed further is that he too had
been intimidated by the lone white woman. He had been so disoriented by
her taboo, unsupervised proximity that he had forgotten to press the
elevator button when he originally stepped into the elevator with her:

Leroy: She went in the elevator first, but then she just waits there to
see what floor I press.

She’s playing like she don’t know what floor she wants to go to, because
she wants to wait for me to press my floor. And I’m standing there, and
I forgot to press the button.

I’m thinking about something else – I don’t know what was the matter
with me. And she’s thinking like, “He’s not pressing the button; I guess
he’s following me!”

Leroy struggles to understand the terror his mere presence inspires in
whites:

Leroy: It’s happened before. I mean after a while you become immune to
it.

Well, when it first happens, it like bugs you, “That’s messed up. How
they just judge you?” You know, they be thinking, “Guys like that,
they’re a lot of dark guys running around.” It’s like crazy.

But I understand a lot of them. How should I say it? A lot of white
people . . . [looking nervously at me] I mean Caucasian people –
[flustered, putting his hand gently on my shoulder] If I say white,
don’t get offended because there are some white people who live in this
neighborhood.

But those other white people they never even experienced black people.
They come from wealthy neighborhoods, and the schools they go to . . .
no black kids there. The college they go to . . . no black kids there.
And then they come to office buildings, and they just start seeing us.

And you know, we don’t have the best jobs. You know, how it is. I call
them nickel-and-dime jobs. You know, we are not always as well adjusted
or as well dressed.

Sometime I come in a little sloppy. So automatically they think
something wrong with you. Or you know, they think you out to rob them or
something. So I like, ... I don’t pay it no mind. Sometime it irks me.
Like, you know, it clicks my mind. Makes me want to write. I always
write it down.

Sometime I write down the incident, what happened. I try to make a rhyme
[rap lyrics] out of it.

Of course, as a crack dealer Leroy no longer has to confront this kind
of confusing class and racial humiliation.

I pursued this issue with another, older cousin of Caesar’s – one who
had actually “made it” in the legal economy. He maintained a stable
white-collar job in an insurance agency and had moved his family to the
suburbs. His experience was particularly interesting as he had grown up
in the neighborhood and had passed through a phase of heroin addiction.
He still maintained acquaintanceships with some of his old street
friends. At first he assured me that his escape from street culture had
not necessitated any ethnic compromise. He saw it as part of a religious
conversion. He and his family were devout Jehovah’s Witnesses. At the
same time, he did admit he had to hide the extent of his economic
success when he returned to visit friends and family in El Barrio.

Caesar’s cousin: Half of my friends died: killings, overdose. But I stay
in touch with the ones who are still alive. As a matter of fact, I just
seen one tonight. He’s still on methadone.

My friends though, they don’t see me as looking down on them, because I
don’t ever do that. They really don’t know how I really live. They know
I “peddle insurance,” but I don’t get heavy about it with them. It might
make them feel uncomfortable. I never do that to them. So they don’t see
me as someone who’s betrayed.

The tightrope of class and ethnicity is not quite as easy to balance in
his new upwardly mobile world governed by a deeply institutionalized
racism. The solution in his case has been to internalize the legitimacy
of apartheid in the United States.

Caesar’s cousin: My kids’ future is much brighter than mines’ ever was.
We live in a suburban situation. As a matter of fact, we may be one of
the three Hispanic families in that general area.

When I jog down the neighborhood, people get scared; people get nervous
about me. It’s not a problem for me, because I have self-confidence. I
don’t worry about it. It doesn’t faze me at all.

Every once in a while, I used to get a crank call in the house, saying,
you know, “Hey spic,” you know, “spic” and other stuff, but I don’t
worry about that. [he giggles]

In a sense, I’ve learned to be in their shoes. You see what I mean?
Because I’ve seen what minorities as a group can do to a neighborhood.
I’ve seen great neighborhoods go down. So I step into their shoes and I
understand; I’ve learned how to be sympathetic. I understand their
thinking.

Caesar and Primo are not capable of such sympathy and understanding;
instead, they take refuge in the underground economy and celebrate
street culture.

5 SCHOOL DAYS: LEARNING TO BE A BETTER CRIMINAL

I was chillin’ out most of the time in junior high. But they had like a
wild war out there – blacks against Puerto Ricans – and the Puerto Rican
kids used to get beat up real crazy.
This guy killed this one kid, so we used to not want to go to school
because of that. We used to cut school and go downtown and rob.

Caesar

The complex interfaces among family, school, and peer group are crucial
to the construction and enforcement of social marginalization,
especially in one’s pre-teenage years. Consequently, I purposely
collected the childhood, school-age reminiscences of the crack dealers
in Ray’s network in an effort to explore their early institutional
relationships with both mainstream society and inner-city street
culture. This also led them to talk about their intimate home lives.
Much of this material is presented in this and the following three
chapters, where I address changing gender-power relations and the
transformations in family arrangements with respect to emotional
nurturing and economic stability. In this chapter I focus on the
quintessential early-socializing institution of mainstream society in
the inner city: the public school. This leads fluidly into street
culture’s alternative to school – the peer group or the proto-criminal
youth crew – gang – which effectively fills the formal institutional
vacuum created by truancy. When the crack dealers began confiding to me
about their earliest teenage experiences of violence and crime on the
street, I was also forced to confront the brutal phenomenon of sexual
violence that was central to both their formal and their informal
schooling. Consequently, the chapter ends with an analysis of how
street-bound, school-age boys learn to enforce the misogyny of street
culture through gang rape.

Kindergarten Delinquencies: Confronting Cultural Capital

Most elementary school teachers assert that up through second grade, the
majority of their students desperately want to please their teachers,
even when they are prone to acting out their personal problems in the
classroom. Primo’s and Caesar’s very first school memories, however, are
overwhelmingly negative.

Primo: I hated school. I just hated it. I used to fuck up all the time
in school. I never did homework in my life. I just didn’t want to do it.

From first grade to my last year that I dropped out, I only did two or
three homeworks.

Never in my life did I do homework. Never!

Primo’s institutional alienation was compounded by the cultural and
generational gap that had destabilized the traditional power relations
of his household. His monolingual Spanish immigrant single mother was
embroiled in a cultural confrontation with her New York City—born
toddlers, whose very first delinquency was to refuse to answer her in
Spanish.¹ Her children’s enrollment in kindergarten exacerbated this
crisis. Following the insights of Bourdieu, if forms of cultural
interaction – and literacy, more specifically – are the basis for the
“symbolic capital” that structures power in any given society, then one
can understand from the perspective of a new-immigrant mother and her
second-generation progeny the trauma of first contact with the public
school system.

The inability of Primo’s mother to speak English and her limited
literacy skills were a recipe for institutional disaster in her very
first opening-day interactions with her kindergarten child’s homeroom
teacher. No precocious, healthy five- or six-year-olds can stand
witnessing the instantaneous transformation of the mother – the
authority figure in their lives – into an intimidated object of
ridicule. Worse yet, over the next few years, this hostile, alien
institution proves itself to be much more powerful in determining one’s
future fate than all of a mother’s caresses, criticisms, or beatings.

In his kindergarten homeroom, Primo inherited the instantaneous onus of
his mother’s identity as former rural plantation worker, and now
new-immigrant inner-city sweatshop employee. Her functional illiteracy
and her inability to communicate with the educational bureaucracy
condemned Primo to appear uncooperative and slow-witted to his teachers.
Perhaps right away he had to protect himself by resisting his teachers
lest they unconsciously insult or hurt him should he make the mistake of
trying to please them – and inevitably failing. Despite his anxious
mother’s admonishments that he respect his teacher and do well in
school, success in the classroom would have betrayed his love for her.

Theorists working at the intersection of the fields of education,
anthropology, and sociology have built a body of literature – sometimes
called cultural production theory – to document the way teachers
unconsciously process subliminal class and cultural messages to
hierarchize their students. Tangible markers like accent and clothing
combine with subtler forms of expression such as eye contact, body
language, play styles, and attention spans to persuade the agents of a
mainstream, middle-class, white-dominated bureaucracy that a particular
child is a disciplinary problem, emotionally disturbed, or of low
intelligence. Imagine how Primo must have looked to his teachers by
second grade:

Primo: I never wanted to do nothing in class. I never raised my hand. I
would just sit there.

I used to wanta really hide. I was really a shy kid, like, sitting in
the back of the class and like, “Leave me alone.”

So I started drawing – my whole table was all decorated – like graffiti.

Sometimes I used to feel fucked up and just started making noises.
They’d throw me out of class.

But when the citywide test’es used to come, I would pass them.

Primo’s behavior and demeanor in the classroom inspired the symbolic
judgments of his teachers and peers that on a macrolevel constitute the
glue that maintains class and economic inequality in any given society.
I have already occasionally referred to the exclusionary power of
cultural capital – for example, the inability of Ray, the semiliterate
head of the franchise of crack houses I frequented, to obtain a driver’s
license, or, more important, Primo, Caesar, or Leroy’s experiences of
disrespect in high-rise office corridors – but it is in school that the
full force of middle-class society’s definitions of appropriate cultural
capital and symbolic violence comes crashing down on a working-class
Puerto Rican child.

Primo: When the teacher used to dish me for talking a lot, or not paying
attention, I’d probably curse the shit out of her.

Like if she said, “Shut up!” or something. I’d say, “Fuck you asshole!”

Caesar’s delinquent status was almost physical in its immediacy.

Caesar: The teachers used to hate me. They used to say, “He’s big and
mean.” And I used to be the class clown.

I was wild. I was a delinquent. [laughing]

The enforcement at school of the symbolic parameters of social power is
an unconscious process for everyone involved. It poisons the most
intimate facets of a vulnerable child’s life. For example, when Primo
achieved minimal literacy and an understanding of grade school
conventions, he was able to manipulate the system against his mother and
betray her trust. The normal channels of mother—child authority were
subverted. She lashed back at him helplessly with beatings, anger, and
distrust.

Primo: My whole first-grade notebook was marked red. And my mother had
to sign anyway. I never used to tell her nothing about why it was red so
that she would sign it.

Then the teachers told her about the red, and she went like, ”AAAAGGGH!”
[flailing both arms in rage]

So then I used to draw a lot, and I was always tracing things, so when
they wrote her a letter about my homeworks that she was supposed to
sign, I just traced her signature right over where it was supposed to
be.

I was a kid. I was probably like my son Papito, six or seven years old,
yeah that’s second grade.

Primo’s elementary school resistance escalated into truancy, petty
crime, and substance abuse as he reached pubescence. His mother tried to
save her son by sending him to live with her parents in Arroyo, the same
Puerto Rican plantation community where she had grown up. Primo moved
into his grandparents’ household in the newly constructed federal
housing projects on the edge of the sugar plantation owned by a U.S.
multinational corporation, which at one time had employed his
grandfather and all of his uncles and great-uncles. His mother’s
desperate attempt to compensate for her child’s traumatic experiences in
the U.S. inner city backfired. Fourteen-year-old Primo became a legal
truant in Puerto Rico when the East Harlem school district failed to
forward his papers. More devastating, however, from a psychological
developmental perspective, the rural plantation community of Primo’s
grandparents immediately rejected him. Puerto Ricans born and raised on
the Island are acutely aware of the breakdown of community and social
control among return emigrants, and Nuyoricans are generally distrusted.
Primo discovered that he straddled two cultures – both of which rejected
him.² Rural Puerto Rico confronted him with the classic uprooting
experience faced by the adolescent children of immigrants whose dreams
of upward mobility and full citizenship have been crushed in segregated
inner cities.

Primo: [sipping beer] My mother sent me to P.R. when I was fourteen,
because I was fucking up out here [waving out the Game Room window].

I was just a kid, and so were the girls I was trying to get next to.
They would stand far away from me, like from here to the other side of
the room. Like they was scared.

I had never met their fathers, but still they used to speak to me, “No
te puedo hablar mucho, porque mi papá no quiere.” [I can’t talk to you
much, because my father doesn’t want me to.]

And I would say, “Who’s your Father?” thinking like I met him already,
and he don’t like me.

But they had just been warned about me. You see, in those small towns
news spreads like this [snapping his fingers], and ’Cause somebody’s
from Nueva York he’s probably fresco [oversexed].

Caesar: Yeah, that happened to me too. Puerto Rico is wack. I done went
plenty of times too. They don’t really like Puerto Ricans from New York.
They call us “gringos,” They say people from New York are like slicker,
wilder, [grinning and wiggling his finger] Manipulative.

They try to say, “You be coming here and trying to make us look like
hicks and shit.” You know, like jíbaros.

You gotta be careful in Puerto Rico or you be getting into problems.

Primo: Yeah, I fucked up over there too.

I mean I’m a real condenao’ [damned person]. With my cousin we stole
five hundred dollars from my grandmother who was selling lottery
tickets. We just went into her purse in her room. And that woman
[morosely lowering his head], she loved me.

Her husband caught us and gave us a beating. So it was back to New York
for me.

Violence: Family and Institutional

Caesar’s school experiences were more profoundly violent and negative
than Primo’s. Like Primo, he is the son of a woman who immigrated as a
teenager, but Caesar’s mother came from an urban shantytown rather than
a rural plantation village, and she was more literate and acculturated.
This translated into even more violent personal disruptions in her life:
serial teenage pregnancies with different men, heroin addiction, petty
crime, and eventually murder and incarceration. Hence, the personal and
institutional discontinuities and hostilities in Caesar’s life.

Caesar: I wasn’t that dumb in school. I was violent. The only reason I
came out wild is because ... I didn’t have no guidance.

I’m the oldest. I had no pops, nor mom. I mean, my mother used to live
with me a little bit, but I was always with my grandmother.

My moms was all over the place. She was only sixteen when she had me.
She was like a beauty queen in P.R. at the time, and she got a lot of
raps. My pops was young, he was about twenty.

She also used to sniff coke and dope, and drink. My mother, she had
problems, man.

I mean she couldn’t take care of me because she was taking care of my
little brother and my little sister, so I was with my grandmother.

We was moving a lot from El Barrio to Chicago to Connecticut, and all
that.

I lived’ed with my grandmother, because my moms had already done what
she had to do, and was in jail.

Several weeks later, in private, Primo explained in greater personal
detail Caesar’s relationship to his mother.

Primo: Caesar’s mother was a wild bitch. She was a dope fiend, and he
used to get treated like shit. She was a son of a bitch with him.

His mother was so fucked up that she killed a doctor. And that was
premeditated murder. It was some doctor who was writing scrips for her,
that she was fucking.

Caesar might even have been born addicted to heroin.

Caesar: I was born sick. I had to stay in the hospital a coupla’ months.
And my mother she had problems.

Later my moms killed some man, ’Cause he got wild on her. I think she
was trying to defend herself; that’s what she told me; she wind up
killing a man.

My mom had a wacked public defender and they jerked her. They really
dogged her. The judge gave her twenty-five years. That’s all of my life
practically.

Philippe: Do you keep in touch with her? How’s she doing?

Caesar: I done went plenty of times to visit her. I don’t like to go up
there.

She’s in jail with Jean Harris. [grinning] You know that Scarsdale Diet
doctor. Well, my moms is in jail with her. I met her, Jean Harris. She’s
kind of cranky, though. I got a picture of them. They hang out together
in an honor prison. Big time.

Caesar claims that the repeated moves he made with his grandmother from
one extended family member to another were the precipitating factors for
his dropping out of school at an early age.

Caesar: The first move was to my cousins in Connecticut, ’Cause I was
getting into too much trouble in New York.

And from there, I went to Chicago. ‘Buela [grandma] got real sick. She
was going to the hospital to have an operation, and I was getting in
trouble, making it worse.

I was in trouble with the law, and they told me, if I don’t go back
where I came from, that I was going to go to jail. And I was scared, so
we left back to New York.

I would move, because I would have family in those places, who would
tell me to go with them.

But every time I had moved, I would come into the next school, and then
you gotta wait a long time for papers, and it was like when I came back
to New York, I just didn’t go back to school; I went to work.

I wasn’t so little, I was like eleven, twelve, up to sixteen.

I don’t even remember how many times I changed school. Six, seven, eight
times, ten times.

Violence organized daily life in school to become his primary memory of
formal education. It is necessary for youths to cultivate violent
personas when they are repeatedly shifted from one school to another.

Caesar: I went to a whole bunch of schools before I dropped out. I went
to 113, 117, 102, 109. I was all over the place. Ward’s Island. Upstate.
Downstate.

I used to fight so wild that they wouldn’t bother me for a while. I
would go real crazy! Real crazy, every time I would fight, so they’d
thought I was wild and real crazy. I remember one nigga’, I had rebuilt
his face, but I broke my wrist.

Primo: I always got into fights. Even if I lost, I always started
fights.

Caesar: You see, I remember whenever I came to a new school, the first
days, all the older niggas would wanta like initiate you. And they be in
the hallway calling out, [eerily] “Roookieees.”

They stand right there [bumping into me and almost knocking me over],
just to start trouble with you.

Yeah, they would slap you on the back of your neck [slapping me].

They be sitting on the stairwell banister, but the first nigga’ that
slapped me on the back of my neck, I tried to throw him off the
banister, you know, like off the steps to break his head . . . [lifting
me up in the air] ’Cause I was scared.

But they were biiig niggas, though. Like bully niggas. But we were
ready, man.

Primo: Everybody used to get bullied; but nobody fucked with me because
I used to pick up a chair, or pencil, or something, and fuck them up.

That let me relax more.

Caesar: Yeah, and then later I used to run up on niggas too, when I got
big.

I mean, Felipe, you’ rich. You didn’t have to handle this shit, but me
and homeboy [pointing to Primo], we was all jumpin’. And there used to
be a lot of us like that.

It was worser in Connecticut, because there it was like blacks against
Puerto Ricans.

This violence conflates with a machistic focus on sexual conquest as a
central parameter for schoolyard respect.

Caesar: I never even got bullied that much because I used to always be
like rappin’ to girls and shit. So the niggas wouldn’t bother me. I
didn’t have too much violence.

Despite his triumphal celebration of street culture’s violence, Caesar
did acknowledge his ultimate vulnerability in the institutionalized
school setting.

Caesar: My only problem was when I was sent to reform school upstate.
There, all the kids would get beat down well by the counselors. They
used to do wild shit to us.

Plus, we’d get beat down by other kids and shit. I was getting my ass
kicked. I used to get hurt.

Niggas has me mopping floors for them and shit. I used to be out there
[a dominated victim].

It was a nasty reform school. I used to see the counselors holding down
the kids naked outside; and the counselor beat him down; stripped him
up; and threw him outside in the snow and shit. It was fucked up.

I was about twelve or thirteen. It was fucked up, man. When I saw that
shit, I said, “I’m outta here.” The counselors was too wild and shit.

Surprised at Caesar’s unusual expression of vulnerability I probed into
this period of his life. I was able to collect several alternative,
complementary accounts of his reform school experience from his younger
cousin Eddie, who, coincidentally, was also interned as a juvenile
delinquent with Caesar at age nine in the same institution: “One of them
schools where you used to have to fight to survive.” Both their families
were in such a state of crisis at the time that no one told the children
that they would be confined to the same reform school.

Eddie: I didn’t even know Caesar was in there, until one day they took
us all out swimming, and I saw him. Once we was together, it was a
little bit better. Niggas had to be respectin’ us more, because we would
be watching each other’s back.

Eddie provided me with his own painful account of being “a disturbed
little nigga’” who “got in a lot of trouble all the time” at school. By
seven years of age, he had already tried to commit suicide; and at nine,
he attempted to throw himself out of a third-floor school window when a
teacher “roughed me up for not paying attention in class.” Like Caesar’s
mother, Eddie’s mother was abandoned by her alcoholic husband, “a
stingy, cheap, nongiving, just-making-babies-type person.” She also used
heroin and “had to split the family up among other relatives.” Unlike
Caesar, Eddie was able to admit, “I missed my mom. I used to cry every
day; be a big sucker. I was thinking suicide.” The school authorities
interpreted the nine-year-old’s paralyzed depression at being rejected
by his mother as a violation of classroom discipline. They sent him to
reform school.

Eddie: They told me, “You not gonna be seeing your mom, ’Cause you need
that seclusion.” I was in the treatment ward. I had to get separated for
a while.

Eddie’s uncharacteristically emotional portrayal of how the trauma of
his preadolescent family life meshed with institutionalized violence in
the public school system, encouraged me to delve deeper into Caesar’s
home life during these same tender childhood years. Eddie politely
limited his descriptions of Caesar’s battered youth, however, to
sympathetic generalities, stressing the special humiliation of Caesar’s
public beatings.

Eddie: Caesar’s been through some wild shit. ’Cause I remember when he
was a little nigga’, ‘Buela used to abuse him in front of everybody in
the streets – like with bats and sticks for being one minute late – or
some shit like that. She was like abusive: Go to your school, and beat
you down.

At first, Caesar simply denied any youthful vulnerability, but the
terrors and anxieties of his youth emerge between the lines of his
reconstructed memories. Finally, in later conversations, he poured out
the classic battered-child rationalizations and denials of his early
childhood abuse:

Caesar: Nah, my grandmother never hit me. I was like a God. My
grandmother is my moms’. She loves me.

Philippe: How about your mother? Did she used to hit you?

Caesar: My mother never hit me, ’Cause I wouldn’t do nothing around her.
’Cause I was scared of her.

I seen my mother having a few fights when I was little. That made me
nervous a couple of times. One time I seen my mother throw one of these
black ladies that had attacked her through a store window. And I was
always scared of my mother after that. That was why my mother never hit
me.

The only one that ever hit me, was my grandmother, but I liked’ed it,
’Cause it didn’t hurt. She hit me, and it’d be funny, but it never hurt
me. I liked’ed to get hurt.

Philippe: What was the worst beat down you got?

Caesar: ‘Buela threw a knife at me. Yeah, it cut me. Right here on my
chest, but I don’t got no scar or nothing.

I remember the knife went WSSHHHT. If I wouldn’t have weaved, I probably
would’ve been jigged a little bit.

That’s really the only wild time I ever ... it was ’Cause I was being
real bad.

Philippe: What do you remember about it?

Caesar: I remember that I was scared, and I didn’t mess with ‘Buela for
a long time after that.

I was bad though, I deserved to have been hit a lot of the time. She had
to beat me with wires, but it didn’t hurt man.

I mean I was always looking forward to getting beat down by ‘Buela.
Sometimes she’d even throw a punch. And she would hit hard. But mostly
she might just give me like a cocotazo – you know, tap me on the head
with a broomstick.

’Buela always treated me with formal respect when I visited Caesar at
home: Before running into the kitchen to fetch us all food and drink,
she would turn up the volume on the oversized floor-model color
television in the center of the room, and motion us to sit. The
overstuffed couches that were part of a fuchsia-colored and gold
tinsel—striped living room set were surprisingly comfortable, despite
still being covered by the original plastic factory-wrap. The whole
ensemble was wedged into the undersized project living room space,
forcing us to slide sideways around the orange-pink plastic-laminated
coffee table in order to sit down. Despite her traditional, polite
demeanor, even the toughest of the dealers gave ‘Buela a wide berth. I
once saw the manager of a sex-for-crack den in the apartment across the
hall from ‘Buela warn an unruly customer, “Shut the fuck up! If you
don’t chill, that old lady across the hall is gonna come at you with her
cane and hit you upside the head.”

Given his family background, it is not surprising that Caesar might have
attempted to resolve his school problems violently in his earliest
youth. I took advantage of our occasional bouts of drinking and sniffing
in the solid concrete playground of the junior high school both he and
Primo had been thrown out of some ten to fifteen years earlier, to
tape-record their schoolyard reminiscences. That particular school’s
recreation yard was encased on all sides by solid cement walls, two to
five yards high, offering an Alcatraz-like prison ambience. As if to
drill home the infrastructural irony of apartheid segregation in the
urban United States, a suburban commuter train cuts through the center
of El Barrio’s stretch of Park Avenue precisely at this point, casting
its shadow onto the edge of the concrete playground. Every school day,
this particular commuter line whisks thousands of New York’s highest
paid finance, insurance, and real estate executives to their suburban
homes in Connecticut and “upstate” New York. The train serves some of
the wealthiest census tracks in all of the United States. If the
commuters were to look out the window, they might catch a fleeting
glimpse of the whirlwind blaze of aerosol spray paint that covers the
cement walls of the schoolyard. Artists from all the inner-city
neighborhoods of New York City have converted these particular walls
into the self-styled “Graffiti Hall of Fame.” They compete for the
artistic control of the hundreds of square yards of highly visible
smooth concrete space to exhibit their painting skills with psychedelic
representations of fire-breathing monsters in combat, cryptic hip-hop
initials, or renditions of Bart Simpson in triumphantly resistant poses.
The best artists are able to maintain their “pieces,” some of which
cover up to half a dozen square yards, for several weeks before they are
defaced by competitors or jealous wanna-bes. The aesthetics of street
culture have assertively triumphed in this otherwise infrastructurally
and institutionally hostile environment. It is as if the miracle of
human creativity and aesthetic genius has to assert itself in the face
of despair and oppression. Not a single inch of cold, gray concrete
remains visible in the schoolyard.

[images]

Inside the Graffiti Hall of Fame. Photo by Henry Chalfant.

From the perspective of the students and the teachers in this junior
high school, Caesar was an agent of personal terror and institutional
decay. His truancy must have been a relief for everyone. The problem was
that he actually spent time at school, even as a truant:

Caesar: Oh yeah, I came in late one morning, and this teacher – I think
his name was Mr. Washington – he got wild on me.

So I got mad, and I think about it:

“Ah’m’a’ pick up this chair, and . . . and Ah’m’a’ bash his head in.”

I thought about it for a while, until I saw this other kid named Toto.
He was crazy too.

Jaycee, Primo’s girlfriend at the time: [interrupting] He’s dead now. I
heard they killed Toto.

Caesar: [nodding at Jaycee] So I said, “Fuck it, I’m going to jail,
’Cause I’m a criming thief.”

I picked up that chair, and I went up to the teacher – he was writing on
the blackboard – and I went up to him, and I hit him with the chair on
the back, and I broke his arm. [burst of laughter from all four of us]

Primo: You were a sick little nigga’. I never broke no chair over no
teacher’s head.

Caesar: I just cracked it. I didn’t break the chair. I hated that
teacher.

Primo: I hated teachers, and I used to wanta cut, but I wasn’t really
that wild.

Caesar: You remember that tap-dancing teacher? That skinny bitch? Stupid
bitch! We tried to rape her.

Jaycee: Yeah, boy! You was really bad.

Caesar: There was this one bowlegged, bastard, science teacher. His name
was Mr. Poole. He was like a nervous wreck, and we used to rob him every
day. We used to wait in the park for him.

He never used to rat us out neither. He didn’t suspend me or nothing.

We made a fire in his classroom, and we burned it down. Me and some
black dudes. The whole student body had to leave the school.

Primo: Nobody wanted my class. They gave us substitute teachers and we
used to throw them with erasers, spitballs. We used to diss the shit out
of them.

That’s when I went AWOL. I never used to show my mother my report card
in junior high school, ’Cause I didn’t want her to see all those
absences and stuuuupid latenesses.

Caesar: I never went to school neither. I used to go in for gym, and
lunch, and then to play with the girls and shit like that in the
afternoon – but I never used to go in the morning.

No, I’m lying. We used to come to school to fuck Special Ed niggas up –
kick their asses. Because they had the retarded here, and the ones that
used to walk like this [scraping his toes, inflecting his knees, and
pronating his arms to imitate someone with cerebral palsy]. We used to
beat the shit out of them. We used to hurt them, because we didn’t like
them.

There was this one little kid named Lucas that used to walk fucked up
[exaggerating his cerebral palsy motions], who we used to love to kick
the shit out of. [Primo and Jaycee giggle]

Everybody used to come in the morning, see him, and smack him, like PAAA
[hitting me hard on the back of the head]. Real crazy! [noting my scowl]
We was really mean to that kid.

One day, we had a rope and we pretended that we were going to hang him
in the gym. We pull’t him up a little bit, but then we dropped him when
he started coughing.

Another time, we stole a rubber hammer from the science class, and we
hammered his head.

Primo: [concerned by my facial expression] You was fuckin’ dumb Caesar!

Caesar: [also looking at me with concern] We kicked his ass so hard
around, that he started walking normal, and he started being in the
posse after a while.

Primo: [perhaps remembering that only two months earlier my one-year-old
son had been diagnosed with cerebral palsy] He . . . got ... he got . .
. [putting his arm around my shoulder] he got initiated, Felipe!

Philippe: [fighting back tears and clearing my throat] Wha’ . . . what
happened to him?

Caesar: [confused by the emotions] He walked a little bit fucked up,
[scraping his toes delicately] but not that bad. He started smoking
cheeba and shit . . . getting girls.

[reaching out reassuringly to grab my shoulder as well] The nigga’ even
took my girl, Felipe!

I remember this 2:00 a.m. schoolyard conversation clearly because it was
one of the first times on the street that I personally confronted the
contradictions of anthropology’s methodological caveat of suspending
moral judgment. At the time, I was still in shock over having to deal
with my own son’s physical challenges, and I never forgave Caesar for
his cruel brutality. Significantly, his unusual attempt to comfort me
via macho bonding immediately uncovered another Pandora’s box of
gender-based brutality that the cultural relativism of my
anthropological training was, once again, incapable of accommodating.
Before this conversation was over, he shocked my already numbed ears and
spinning emotions with boasts of schoolyard rape. I vividly remember
trying to persuade myself that he was speaking metaphorically, or was
exaggerating. It was not until several years later that I had the
courage or the confianza and respect of the Game Room dealers to collect
systematic accounts of adolescent gang rape.

Caesar: We used to break the lock and go out on the roof; rape bitches;
and have some sex.

Jaycee: You’a fuckin’ asshole Caesar!

Philippe: Word! Schmuck!

Primo: [coaxingly] Nah, you exaggerating Caesar. You didn’t really rape
them, but just fuck around with them.

Caesar: [laughing, and smashing an empty quart of malt liquor against a
ten-foot-tall spraypainted dragon] My bitch was raped, troop!

Primo: [looking worriedly at me again] Nah, come on, man.

Caesar: [changing his tone] I mean we used to finger these bitches and
go all out. And smoke cheeba and everything.

Yo Pops, I’m thirsty, let’s get some brews.

Learning Street Skills in Middle School

Primo’s resistance to school tracked him into the “low-IQ” undesirable
classes; Caesar’s rage, on the other hand, interned him in an
experimental Special Education facility at a hospital for the criminally
insane on Ward’s Island where psychiatrists were pioneering psychotropic
treatments with tranquilizers. It also initiated his dependence on
social security insurance. Caesar has been receiving this monthly
federal subsidy ever since, with the exception of the three or four
intervals in his life when he has found steady legal employment.

Caesar: They called me “emotionally disturbed” because my violence was a
little wild, so they put me in Special Ed.

[almost puffing out his chest] Ah’m’a Special-Ed-person, Felipe. That’s
how come I be getting SSI and all that shit – because I was violent.

But shit, I learned more in Special Ed than in public high school. We’d
finish books and shit in Special Ed.

The way I got into Special Ed, was because one day, I had got high, and
my science teacher kept fuckin’ with me; I was cheeba’d up, and my posse
was with me, and everything was all wild: so I took a scissor, and I
grabbed his tie, and I cut the shit.

It was funny, ’Cause afterwards the principal told me, “Why you gonna do
something crazy like that?” And I told him, “‘Cause . . .” – What did I
tell him? – oh yeah, I told him something crazy, like, “I heard voices.”
I said I was hearing voices and that’s when they put me on Thorazine.

They had us in a school on Ward’s Island for Special Education. Ward’s
Island is where they keep all the lunatics. They had everybody on
Thorazine there. They used to experiment with Thorazine on the Spanish
and black kids. They had us all on Thorazine. That was the testing
ground for those drugs. They had kids on all kinds of drugs. Word up!

That lasted for like three years and then I was mainstreamed. I came
back here.

Caesar’s “future career” as a mentally and emotionally disabled SSI
recipient was forged and legitimized in his earliest school years. Of
course, in Caesar’s case – as in most people’s – a conjunction of
personal and sociological factors overdetermined his qualifications for
being certifiably crazy. His remorseful response to my berating him for
being too lazy to work illustrates this well.

Caesar: Yeah, you’re right, Felipe. I always use excuses not to work:
’Cause of the hospital stuff [he had recently been released from
Metropolitan Hospital’s psychiatric ward following his third suicide
attempt];³ and because of my moms [who was in jail on a twenty-five-year
sentence for murder]; and then my sister [who was stabbed seventeen
times in their project stairwell].

Caesar was not socially isolated by his disability; on the contrary, he
felt it gave him honorary middle-class status. Of the three men who had
had children with Caesar’s mother, his father, who was a salsa singer,
was the only one who did not qualify for SSI disability payments.

Caesar: We live pretty good – like middle-class. My grandmother’s
retired and she gets her social security. My little brother, he gets
money from his father’s SSI. And then my sister – when she was still
alive – was getting money from her pop’s SSI. So we never had no
problem.

Poor people they can’t afford nothing. They short on groceries. They got
to buy cheap products. But I’m more middle-class. Whatever I want, I can
get it on time [monthly credit payments].

Primo’s future career in the underground economy was also established –
or learned – at school. He spent most of his time in the hallways
avoiding classrooms because they are the only physical space still under
a modicum of teacher control in tough inner-city schools. His most
important lessons revolved around selling, and using, drugs. In another
class and ethnic setting, alcoholized autobiographical reminiscences in
childhood schoolyards would probably elicit tales of playful mischief
with only occasional overflows of offensive violence. In the courtyard
of the Graffiti Hall of Fame, however, this balance between “normal”
adolescent rebellion and serious delinquency was reversed.

Primo: I was always in the hallways because they’d throw me out of
class, ’Cause I was a son of a bitch. I talked too much in class;
bothered the girls; wrote on the tables – my whole table was all
decorated.

We had fun in the hallways. One day, we was smokin’ pot, and we see this
box, and it was clay. They had just made a delivery of clay. We said,
“Oh shit! Clay.” And we clay’ed the whole school.

Caesar: [aggressively] We used to go in posses, and bum rush through the
hallways. One time at exit sixteen, we saw two niggas. They was men from
the street, and they was giving each other a blow job . . . sixty-nine
on the floor. We kicked the shit out of them.

Primo: We used to do everything in school. We got the special keys that
you needed for the light switches. And we turned off all the lights in
the basement. We had the whole entire basement to ourselves.

Everybody started hanging out in that basement. I used to sell smoke, so
everybody was smoking. We was hiding in the lockers, smoking pot.

I used to go to school with like ten joints a day. And sell four or
five. I wasn’t making much in those days, because I used to smoke all of
the rest. Whatever money I had, I would take and buy more for the next
day. It was just for me.

Philippe: What about you Jaycee? Did you graduate from junior high? Tell
us some of your stories.

Jaycee: Naah, I fooled around too. I had to leave the school when I got
pregnant.

Caesar: [interrupting] I never used to throw joints. I was a Special Ed
nigga’, a big stupid nigga’. But I was doing a lot of drugs at that
time. I became a playboy, because I just didn’t give a fuck no more. I
had women: Ah’m’ a man.

I had a posse. We used to play dice.

Primo: Me, too. I loved to play dice. One time we got up on the roof,
and we used to throw apples on the street at people.

Caesar: [interrupting] I used to throw bottles up there. And one time, I
took a shit off the roof. ’Cause we was moonin’ people, so I said, “Let
me make it more dramatic.”

There was nine of us, and we all mooned, and I took a shit. Then the
whole school chased us.

[images]

Looking into the Graffiti Hall of Fame. Photo by Henry Chalfant.

All of a sudden, with no logical transition except for the theme of
“acting stupid,” Caesar launched into a series of stories about turning
pigeons into “Halley’s comets” and “running roasts” by setting them on
fire after dousing them with lighter fluid; drowning a dog in the East
River by tying bricks to its tail; and throwing cats off roofs. He
seemed to be calling clinical attention to his “personality disorder”
around violence and aggression. Indeed, at the time I tape-recorded this
I worried that instead of analyzing the social context of violence in
street life in my book, I would be forced to address individual
psychopathology. When Caesar ended this particular tirade with “What’s
the matter, Felipe? You never murdered an animal, or try to throw a cat
off of a high building to see it smack down hard on its feet
[grinning]?” all I could muster was “As a matter of fact, no; I never
have. That shit is sick, Caesar!” To my disappointment, neither Primo
nor Jaycee seconded my condemnation; they just laughed.

As we left the schoolyard that night to drink more beer, I could not
help wondering, once again, at the extraordinary skill and creative
energy that was sprayed on the concrete walls all around us. Over the
past two generations, this school has effectively channeled hundreds of
children like Primo, Caesar, and even Jaycee, into careers of drug
dealing, violent substance abuse, social security insurance, and single
motherhood. Primo learned the entrepreneurial skills necessary for drug
dealing when he stole the keys that controlled the basement’s electrical
system and set up shop “throwing joints.” Caesar learned to take
Thorazine and explain away his rage and violence by claiming to hear
voices. Even Jaycee learned the survival skill of escaping failure,
meaninglessness, and unemployment by becoming pregnant.

The Peer Group

School is obviously a powerful socializing force, but it is by no means
the only institution pushing marginal children into street culture and
the underground economy. When asked how they ended up on the streets,
most of the dealers blamed their peer group. Indeed, one of the messages
to come out of my schoolyard conversations with Caesar and Primo was
that they spent almost no time in class. They learned a great deal
during their school days – but almost none of it was academic. Most
important, they spent their time cultivating street identities both
inside and outside the physical confines of school.

Caesar: We used to cut school and go downtown and rob. You know
anything, you know, like cars, and tires, and shit like that.

Everybody was wild, and I wanted to be with the wild crowd, because I
liked it. I didn’t want to be a nerd, or nothing like that. I figured it
was wise, so being wild became a habit. I used to get into trouble and
do atrocities.

I was trying to look for an image, and it was like black. We wear
kangos, earrings, jewelry; wear leather blazers, straight legs and shit,
leather pants, big radios, and shit like that. We be smoking cheeba;
drinking brew; hanging out on the Deuce [Times Square]; just being wild;
being black; rapping on the mike, shit like that.

Primo was more instrumentally criminal than Caesar. He was not merely
pursuing an image of “evilness” and playful delinquency. This is
reflected in the almost apprentice-like manner in which his older peer
group incorporated him into street crime.

Primo: You see, it was me and my older cousins. I was a little nigga’
and they was already thieving.

I was like eleven – no, I’m lying – when I was like ten that was my
first one. I was an ignorant idiot. It was me and my older cousin
Hector. We was shitting in the same place where we eat – stealing right
in our neighborhood.

My mother used to warn me not to, and stuff like that, but I liked’ed it
out on the street with my cousins; and they taught me the tricks as to
how to get into cars; how to break into places; how to pick locks. Ray
used to key us on the techniques.

Back in the days, it was mostly car radios. Me and Luis together, we got
good at it. By then we don’t shit where we eat. Instead, we used to go
downtown . . . rob all the niggas with big cars.

I was part of the epidemic of car stealing. Me and my cousin, added to
it. We were part of it. It was a thing downtown.

That’s why they came out with the Bensi box, man, and they’d have a
sign, “No Radio.”

The cops already knew all about us downtown, and we were known on the
block [La Farmacia’s corner] by all the cops. We even talked to them
sometimes.

The only time Primo broke the invisible apartheid line between El Barrio
and the Upper East Side was to steal. I remember how surprised I was
when in the course of a random conversation when he revealed that he
knew the address of the Whitney Museum. I asked him what he thought of
the highbrow modern art institution, but he had never been inside: “I
used to go down there with Luis to steal car radios. It was a real good
spot.” Naive suburbanites would park their luxurious cars at angles that
offered car burglars camouflaged hiding places.

Car thieving was a memorable rite of passage into teenagehood for an
enterprising youngster. It also offered a modicum of revenge against the
rich white neighborhood hemming and tantalizing El Barrio at its
southern border on East 96th Street:

Primo: Luis used to have me as a lookout because I was so inexperienced,
so I wanted to graduate and do my own cars.

So one time when Luis be in the back taking out the speakers in this big
car, he said, “Okay, you take the radio out this time.”

That first time, it was too hard. I couldn’t do it. As a matter of fact,
I’m thinking now that probably Luis maybe gave me a radio that was hard
to take out just to test me.

So what I just did was, I took the long-nosed pliers – which is the
basic tool that you need to steal the car radio – and since I couldn’t
have that radio, I pushed the pliers inside the cassette hole, and just
started ramming it in there real hard, and fucked the whole car system
up. And I kept the buttons [knobs], you know, the radio buttons, even
though, I eventually just ended up throwing the buttons away.

It was a good radio that I fucked up. It was a Blunt Point [Blaupunkt] –
I don’t know if you ever heard of that brand – so that the normal guy
who owned the car probably said [shaking his head in disgust], “Damn,
son of a bitch!”

But I was like, “If I can’t have it, they can’t have it.” I was a young,
ignorant, stupid idiot. You know, estupido. We just broke out of the car
and laughed.

Although Primo’s mother was quick to blame her son’s demise on the “bad
influences” of his friends, there was a powerful economic imperative,
coupled with a gender-based definition of dignified male adolescent
behavior, that propelled him into petty crime before he was even a
teenager. As noted in the preceding chapter, Primo’s mother’s earnings
as a seamstress – despite the supplements she received from welfare and
food stamps – could not supply Primo during his childhood years with the
sneakers, candy, or occasional comic book that most ten- or
eleven-year-olds in suburban North America take for granted. The
economic logic of stealing from wealthy neighbors melded into a street
culture identity. In fact, Primo was AWOL from his mother’s home as much
as he was from school.

Primo: I was just thinking about mahahahni [money]. ’Cause I just wanted
to get the little things that I wanted. You know, like . . . just like,
little things. Anything that you can’t have, that you wanta get for
yourself, and shit.

It was just like, junk shit. Like a bag of Vicks cough drops. I forgot
really, but it wasn’t for drugs, [pausing to sniff cocaine] Maybe I
wanted a new pair of sneakers ... or something to eat; or just to have
money in the pocket.

My money used to last. It used to go a long way, because mostly we used
to buy food or clothes. We wasn’t drug addicts, but we needed money.

We would be selling the stuff we stole, little by little. Asking people
whether they wanted this, or whether they wanted that.

Everybody always wants a radio, man. And the prices we used to have!
Cheap! Cheap! We were stupid little niggas and we’d get jerked.

Philippe: Your mother couldn’t buy you the shit you needed?

Primo: My mother didn’t give me allowances. I wasn’t the type to ask.
Gotta get money on my own.

I mean my mother would see if my sneakers were really crazy-looking, but
I wasn’t the one to beg. My sisters used to ask for an allowance, but
not me.

Philippe: And would she notice that you had money to buy things?

Primo: I didn’t like the idea of my mother knowing. I used to always
come in when she was sleeping. Or else come in with a bag, and stash the
shit. If I come in in the morning, I’d go to my room quick.

But she used to see the stolen goodies, and she used to hate it. I used
to have a lock on my room. She would scold me and bitch the shit out of
me. But I didn’t listen.

Philippe: Would she worry when you were out all night?

Primo: Hell, yeah. My sisters – everybody – used to tell me, “You better
go home Primo. You’ve been gone for three or four days. At least go home
and change your clothes.”

Philippe: Where would you break night?

Primo: Anywhere. With girls. We always had a crib. The top of the club.
We used to run that building back in the days. We had apartments
everywhere; bitches all over the place. It was wild, man.

Caesar’s attachment to his home was even more fragile, but he did not
focus on the skill and art of petty thieving. In fact, it is not clear
that he was stable enough to be integrated into a solidary peer group or
youth gang. Consistent with his adult crack-binging behavior, as well as
his propensity for uncontrollable rage as a young teenager, Caesar
celebrated the public, rowdy dimensions of street culture. He excelled
at conspicuous consumption, for example.

Caesar: Yeah, that’s when I started being like a pre-teenager. I wanted
to dress well; I wanted like fresh sneakers, and have my hair combed
good; and go dancing, and stuff like that. I liked’ed it.

I didn’t get high; it was just like I had money; and I was spending it
on things. Like tapes for my radio.

I was addicted to tapes for my radio. Music! That was my first
addiction. I grew up real close to a radio.

My second addiction was clothes. I needed to buy stuff every week.

Philippe [Turning to Primo]: This is what you were like as a little kid
too?

Primo: I wasn’t really brought up to do that. I was only doing what the
big boys were doing. Because I was hanging out tough. My mother used to
care.

When I was stealing from the cars, there was always that thing goin’ in
my head: “My Moms don’t like this"; and that when I was going to take it
home, she’d know I didn’t really earn it; and then, I got to hide it;
and that it’s not accepted.

I knew I did something that I wasn’t supposed to do. I knew I was going
to get my ass beat when I got home, if she found out.

Adolescent Mischief and Inner-City Rage

Despite claims to an ex post facto sense of guilt, crime was a part of
youthful common sense to a precocious junior-high-school eleven-year-old
like Primo. The boundary between stealing car radios and playing, for
example, was intangible. In another class and ethnic setting, Primo’s
activities might have confined themselves to harmless mischief; his
mother would simply have scolded “the boys for being boys.” Indeed, this
is illustrated in her accounts of growing up on a sugar plantation.

Primo’s mother: [in Spanish] Boy, we really did bad things [maldades]!
One time a group of us boys and girls went to a farm where there was
lots and lots of mangoes. I think there were ten mango trees there, and
we didn’t have a single tree in our house. It was far away.

It was a private farm, but you know how boys and girls are. We would get
together as a group, and walk over there, and hide.

We would hide from my grandfather to do it, because it was stealing. We
also had to hide near the mango trees, because the guy had a dog. One
time we even got shot at.

And those were good mangoes, they were pink mangoes that had a real good
smell. And I would throw rocks at them to knock them down, and the boys
would be picking them up under the tree. But then, when the man would
come out, we would all run away.

Boy, we really did bad things! Sometimes we’d even steal sugar cane too.
We’d wait until it was dark, and one person would look out.

We’d have to eat it in hiding. If my grandfather found out about it,
he’d be angry. He was strict, and he would give me one heck of a
beating, because he was strict.

So you see, we weren’t little saints, we did our mischief. We’d even
steal fresh corn from our neighbors. We’d make a little fire and put
ears of corn right on top of the charcoal.

But then they’d find the eaten ears of corn and they’d get angry at us.

This was when I was fourteen, fifteen, sixteen years old, ’Cause I came
here at seventeen.

The social control and repression exerted by the family and the
community on unruly children was obviously qualitatively very different
in rural Puerto Rico during the 1930s and 1940s from inner-city New York
in the 1970s. Most important, the consequences for a fourteen-year-old
are tremendously different from being barefoot and stealing pink mangoes
for their “sweet taste” versus wearing dirty sneakers and stealing car
radios for money to buy Vicks cough drops or “fly clothes.” The acts
themselves, however, are symbolically the same: precocious childhood
mischief. The difference in the long-term outcomes between children
raised in the relatively subsistence-oriented and commodity-poor
plantation economy and those born into the fetishism of urban cash needs
in the industrial decay of the U.S. inner city, becomes even greater
when, by the ages of fifteen or sixteen, drugs become easily available,
prized objects for recreation. As a teenager, Primo excelled in his
second-generation urban immigrant context. He rapidly graduated from
pre-teenage car-stereo thieving, to bona fide apartment burgling:

Yeah, then I became a burglar. The first apartment I ever robbed I was
eleven years old. I remember that first time. I loved’ed it and liked’ed
it.

I never got caught out there. I even robbed a dance studio, a liquor
store, and two different pharmacies . . . burglarized it all. Took cash,
liquor . . . the most expensive shit they had.

You know that pharmacy right there on 103rd Street and Third Avenue? I
burglarized it before; robbed it.

On top of the pharmacy there’s a dead building – an abandoned building.
We climbed through from another building with flashlights; made a hole
through the floor [illustrating with hand motions], PPKKKKK, PPKKKK; and
went in through the ceiling, GGWSSSSHHH; the alarm rang; the cops came;
the owner came.

It was a silent alarm; the owner was there with a gun! And we were kids!
[throwing his arms up in mock astonishment] I was shaking. I saw the
cops and the gun.

But we jumped outta there and by the time they opened the store and
looked through the hole, we were already buildings away.

And they didn’t really want to go in that building in the dark because
it’s like a whole abandoned building, empty. The shit is real old
inside. Like a landmark. It was antique.

It took hours, but we came out with some good shit, and stashed it in my
cousin’s crib. But it was wack. We got jerked selling it, because we
were little niggas. I was twelve or maybe thirteen.

Philippe: Man! You were a little kid!

Primo: The last baddest thing I did was when I was sixteen, with Luis
and this other guy named Papito – which is Ray’s present wife’s brother.
We went downtown for the purpose of stealing from a pharmacy that was
connected with an electronic goods store.

I don’t know whose idea was it. These guys had really scoped the store
before. It was downtown, so we went in a small car.

But we kept hesitating. I was like, “I don’t want to do this; it doesn’t
seem right.”

And then, when we got there, they couldn’t break the locks. But by
coincidence we bumped into Ray. He was walking from downtown on
Lexington Avenue.

So Ray said, “What you up to?”

We told him, and then I was saying, “Damn, these guys can’t even bust
the locks.”

So Ray said, “Watch it, watch it.” And he came with a police crowbar.
[making full body arm motions] POW! POW! Busted those locks like butter,
PSSSHHHT [grinning widely]; open the gate; [making deliberately
efficient hand motions] and took the boards out – because the windows
were boarded and gated – put them to the side; and he got a big rock;
wrapped it up with cloth. [more full body hand motions] PFFFF. Bashed up
the windows.

[pausing to remember] I wanted to do it though – I mean throw the rock –
I don’t know for what reason, but that’s the way I was back in them
days.

But they told me, “No.” ’Cause I was little, and skinny, and I
wouldn’t’ve even break’ed it; ’Cause the first time Ray bashed it, the
window didn’t even break. It just went, like, PSHHHWT. [making hand
motions to mime vibrating plate glass] It cracked. It just like shook.

So then he came, the second time, PGHHHHWWWW! And it’s a thing that,
when you rap a brick with cloth, the impact doesn’t sound hard. The only
thing that you’re going to hear, is just the glass going SHHZZZT. So the
second bang was just like, PSSSHT.

And then the alarm started ringing, so we just started grabbing every
kind of shit that we could grab from the window and everything. And as I
grabbed; I was going to grab some – what was it again – oh yeah, a
radio-cassette TV, a beautiful color TV set. But Ray grabbed it real
quick from under me, [hand motions] WSSSHHHHT.

So I just grabbed this other one. It was just like a radio and TV, but
when I grabbed [moving his arm in slow motion to exhibit the long scar
stretching from his wrist to forefinger], my hand got cut up with glass,
SKKKKTT. And I knew my hand banged the glass, but I didn’t realize that
I was cut.

Then we had to run. And when I was running, I saw the top of my hand was
flipped over. I was like, “Oh my God! There was no skin.”

My tendons were still holding on – as a matter of fact, they locked
because I couldn’t open my hand anymore. So they locked onto the radio
and this other shit I had in my hand.

I went into the car to throw this shit in, CSSSSHHH. And I got into the
car and flipped my skin back over my tendons, and pressed and said,
“Luis, take me to the hospital, I’m cut.”

So he said, “Yeah, Papito too.” Papito was sitting in the front seat. It
was me, Ray, Papito, and Luis was driving.

It was raining real hard. Pouring real hard that night. Papito was
moaning and groaning. I like looked over, and he had his muscle split
right here [pointing to the top of his other hand]. You could see his
muscle meat fresh, ahhhh [wincing].

So what we did, was, we went to 110th Street where Ray lived, and we
dropped all this shit off before we went to the hospital, in case they
investigate.

Lucky it was raining, because nobody was present. It was crazy.

I was bleeding like crazy, but this guy wasn’t even bleeding, but he was
fainting. I don’t know why. Maybe he was just fainting at the sight of
his muscles, which were sticking out, and shit.

They couldn’t take care of me in the hospital, ’Cause I was under age.
And Luis and these guys looked’ed too wild, and they didn’t want to put
them down as responsible. So I just kept holding on to my shit.
[grasping tightly in mock pain at the scar above his wrist]

I didn’t really know what was going on, I was scared. I saw my bones in
there. The skinny bones in your hand. My man [Papito] burst out crying,
but I told him “Shut the fuck up. You gettin’ me nervous, you son of a
bitch.”

I started cursing. I was thinking, “Oh my God Jesus this is punishment.
I should not have done this shit.” I knew it from the whole get-go. It
was like; I knew I deserved it, and I didn’t want to steal no more.

The hospital people had to call my mother, so we invented a story. We
just said that we had a fight at 111th Street with some people. You
know, some guys with knives cut us up. Plus we had to just write that
down on the report at the hospital. And that’s the way the story stood
to my mother and sisters until I just decided to say the truf after a
while.

At the hospital they say, “Your tendons are cut; they’re splitting.” I
didn’t know anything about tendons, but it was like definitely operation
time.

They set up a date; they operated me; they had a cast. And to this day,
this hand ain’t even right; it can’t go down. [demonstrating the limited
mobility]

Philippe: So you stopped stealing after that?

Primo: After a while, I just stopped. I got stuck with my son’s mother.
We were teenagers going steady; found a job, and stuff like that.

But this guy [Ray], was always into something, working on his own thing.
He was a big guy, and probably would bash somebody and take theirs – or
whatever.

My other cousin Papito used to work in New Jersey burglarizing, but he
got locked up.

Automatic gunfire rang out from the project’s courtyard just as we were
about to cut diagonally through it to reach a grocery store to buy more
beer. We abruptly stopped and turned around to walk the long way around
the projects along the avenue. Three teenage girls came running past us
giggling, “These niggas be crazy.”

Caesar’s stories of being initiated into the common sense of crime in
his early teens were suffused with a more violent rage. They lacked the
obvious instrumentality and the extensive, almost ritualistic, peer
group solidarity of Primo’s burglaries and car break-ins. This expressed
itself symbolically in their different opinions on mugging, which Primo
roundly condemned, even though he admitted to having mugged several
people in his lifetime. Whenever the subject came up, Caesar would
ridicule Primo’s righteous censure of the practice by relating it with
irony to the kinds of deeper sociological tensions that I often steered
our conversations toward. He enjoyed contradicting my structural and
antiracist analyses by emphasizing instead his own heartless
psychopathology and by sarcastically conjuring up a racialized notion of
“evil Puerto Rican-ness":

Caesar: When I was about sixteen, fifteen – something like that – I was
with my cousin; he had just come back from P.R. We was downtown in a
shopping mall in Connecticut, in New Haven by Yale. We were kinda
starving, and we needed some money. So my cousin had convinced me into
robbing a purse.

We noticed this old lady on a corner next to a hospital, but I was
scared to do it. But then I said, “Fuck it. I’m gonna do it.”

I thought it was a good spot, because she was waiting for a red light.

So I snatched it; but she didn’t want to let it go. So I dragged her for
a half a block; but she held on.

So I punched her in the head a couple of times, and she got real hurt,
and finally let the purse go.

Primo: Shut the fuck up Caesar.

Caesar: Like I’m saying [thrusting his face into Primo’s], I dragged her
. . . dragged her for a while. She didn’t want to let go, so I punched
her on the head. [demonstrating the motions]

Then we ran about half a block into somebody’s backyard, and we looked
in the purse, and there was only forty dollars, and I gave my cousin
half. I shoulda took it all, because he didn’t want to do it, and so I
said, “Fuck it.”

We kil’t [figurative] that fuckin’ bitch. [contorting his face with an
evil gleam that caused us all to laugh]

Primo: [irritably suppressing his laughter] I think mugging sucks.

Caesar: [retorting harshly to Primo] You know why I mugged her? Because
I was desperate, and was in Connecticut, and I had been in New York, and
I didn’t have motherfuckin’ shit.

I was going to kill that bitch, because I wanted money; ’Cause I had
been getting . . . dissed.

Ah’ kill that fuckin’ white lady – no offense [to me] – I would kill
that fuckin’ white lady, ’Cause I was desperate.

[raising his voice] I was Puerto Rican I was nightmarish. I kil’t that
fuckin’ bitch, because I wanted money to get high, and food. ’Cause I
was a crazy motherfucking Puerto Rican that didn’t know shit. How about
that? [shouting into Primo’s face]

Philippe: She was white?

Caesar: [spinning into my face] It would not have made a difference if
she was Puerto Rican, Portuguese, or Spaniard. I was starving.
[shouting] I was: “Kill that motherfuckin’ bitch!”

If it had been a black woman, I would have fucked her up some more you
know. Just because she was black; and I hate black people.

Because I don’t give a shit. I’m a racist motherfucker.⁴

Adolescent Gang Rape

Witnessing Caesar’s celebration of violence and gratuitous cruelty was
disconcerting, to say the least. At the end of the second year of my
residence in El Barrio, however, I was exposed to an even more brutal
dimension of the school-age, childhood socialization of the members of
Ray’s crack-dealing network: gang rape. I remember vividly the first
night Primo told me that Ray and Luis used to organize gang rapes in the
abandoned building where the Social Club crackhouse was located. He
approached the subject casually in a conversation near closing time at
the Game Room, catching me unprepared. At the time, these childhood
stories of violently forced sex spun me into a personal depression and a
research crisis. Furthermore, Caesar’s voyeuristic bonding and sexual
celebration of Primo’s brutal account made me even more disgusted with
my “friends.” Although I might have expected such behavior from Caesar,
I felt betrayed by Primo, whom I had grown to like and genuinely
respect.

Primo: I’m hanging out by myself; nobody’s on the block; I’m wandering
down the street; the block is quiet. The club’s here; [hand motions] the
corner’s up here; on the last floor they had an apartment.

Standing in the corner, Luis looks out the window, and yells, “Primo,
you wanna eat?” I thought he had like a pie – a pizza – something. I
said, “Bet!” When he said that, I got the munchies real quick.

But when he looks out the window, he goes like that, with his cock out
the window, and I’m like, “Oh shit! Motherfucker!”

So they threw the keys down; I went upstairs, it was Sapo, Luis, Tootie,
Papo, Ray, probably Negro; five or six guys there. And that girl.

She was naked in the room, she was naked there with a beer in her hand,
a big forty-ounce, getting boned and laughing. They were holding her
down.

Caesar: Yeah! Yeah! The bitch was wit’it, though.

Primo: When I opened the door, she was getting fucked by Papo. He was
dogging her, and all of us were there looking.

[to me, nervously noticing my horror] It wasn’t really all that
critical. I’m telling you Felipe! The bitch was laughing with a quart in
her hand.

Caesar: Yeah! Mah’ man dicked her with shtrength and animosity.

Primo: After he left – since he wasn’t used to hanging out with us and
he couldn’t concentrate – we locked the door; turned on the light; she
was there, free meat. It was just the fellows.

Caesar: You niggas was training her!

Primo: [concerned again by my expression] She didn’t give a fuck. She
just ain’t nothin’; everybody was there with their cocks all different
sizes and widths and everything. All naked; with their pants halfway
down; just waiting. Niggas showing off with their dicks.

Caesar: [turning to me and misunderstanding my negative reaction for
incomprehension] They just was training her, Felipe. All six niggas
boning her in the same room, at the same time.

Primo: [looking back at me] Not me! They wanted me to do it, but I said,
“Fuck that! I don’t want you niggas’ leftovers. Don’t want to catch no
fucking gonorrhea, herpes.”

Caesar: Training her!

Primo: She was there stark naked, and them niggas was saying, “Go ahead
Primo.” She was there like a hole. They were holding her there.

Caesar: Training that bitch!

Primo: She had a nice body, man. She was great. But I didn’t want
someone with . . . shit like that.

I finally grabbed some tits and felt her body. She felt’ed good. I felt
with my fingers in her hole and that shit felt nice and tight. But I
ain’t gonna put my dick in that bitch.

Caesar: They were training that bitch!

Primo: I stuck my thumb in her pussy, and my finger in her ass, while
they were sucking her tits. It was crazy. I washed my hands after that,
but it felted’ed good though.

Caesar: [trying again to bring me into the conversation] Them niggas
used to bone some good-looking girls.

Primo: She was seventeen years old. She was already a woman; she wasn’t
a virgin. She’s a piece of meat – already fucked up.

Despite the almost three years that I had already spent on the street at
the time of this particular conversation, I was unprepared to face this
dimension of gendered brutality. I kept asking myself how it was
possible that I had invested so much energy into taking these
“psychopaths” seriously. On a more personal level, I was confused
because the rapists had already become my friends. With notable
individual exceptions, I had grown to like most of these veteran
rapists. I was living with the enemy; it had become my social network.
They had engulfed me in the common sense of street culture until their
rape accounts forced me to draw the line.

From an analytical and a humanistic perspective, it was too late for me
to avoid the issue or to dismiss their sociopathology as aberrant. I had
to face the prevalence and normalcy of rape in street culture and
adolescent socialization. In any case, Primo and Caesar would not let me
escape it, and over the next year, as if peeling off layers from an
onion’s core, they gave dozens of accounts and versions of their direct
participation in sexual violence during their earliest adolescent years.
Few people talk about rape – neither the perpetrators nor the victims.
In fact, rape is so taboo that I was tempted to omit this discussion,
fearing that readers would become too disgusted and angry with the crack
dealers and deny them a human face. As a man, I also worry about the
politics of representation. Most of the dozens of tape recordings I
collected on the subject came from the perspectives of the perpetrators.
I tape-recorded several accounts by survivors to obtain alternative
perspectives, but I did not have the same kinds of long-term
relationships with these individuals to allow for the detail and
confidence of a meaningfully contextualized life-history interview or
conversation.⁵

From a political perspective, as I noted in the Introduction, I am also
worried about creating a forum for a public humiliation of the poor and
powerless. Readers in the United States are so unconsciously subjected
to the racialized common sense of their society, that many of them are
likely to interpret these passages as some kind of a cultural reflection
on the Puerto Rican community. Such an airing-of-dirty-laundry
interpretation runs counter to the theoretical and political arguments
of this book. There is obviously nothing specifically Puerto Rican about
rape. Once again, as a white male researcher, to avoid pushing
unconscious taboo buttons it would have been easier to eliminate this
discussion of gang rape. I feel, however, that a failure to address
sexual violence in street culture would be colluding with the sexist
status quo. Rape runs rampant around us, and it is as if society
maintains a terrifying conspiracy of silence that enforces this painful
dimension of the oppression of women in everyday life.

Learning to be a rapist was very definitely part of Primo’s
coming-of-age. Tagging after the big boys on the street, he was
repeatedly excluded for being too young – or for not wanting – to
participate.

Primo: Back in those days I was younger. My dick wouldn’t stand up. It
was like nasty to me; I wasn’t down with it. I can’t handle that.

So they be goin’ upstairs with a girl, and of course they already knew
that I’m not going to be down with it, so they ask me, “What cha’ gonna
do man? Go home or what?”

So fuck it, the best thing I could do is break out. “See you guys
tomorrow"; or else, I just wait downstairs in the bar, or something.

The alternative was for Primo to bond with his older peer group by
participating actively in this violent male ritual.⁶ It was only later
that Primo learned to become sexually aroused.

I wasn’t really with it, but I used to act wild too, because the bitch
is gonna have to pass through the wild thing. And sometimes, it could be
me acting stupid with a bat or something, so that she has got to stay in
the room with whoever is there.

Sometimes the older guys, they would play the nice role for a while with
the girl, but once they get that piece of pussy, she gets dished. It’s
like PSSHHHT, PSSHT. [making slapping motions] She gets beat down: “I
own you now, bitch.”

I used to play that shit before man: There is always the good one, and
then the bad one. My man, here [grabbing Caesar by the shoulders], be
the meanest one, and you and me [putting his arm around my shoulder], be
the good sweet ones . . . that we don’t, like, wanna bother her. Then
Luis over here [putting his arm around Luis, who had just walked in to
drop off three freshly bagged bundles of crack and retrieve the
midshift’s receipts], is like both good and bad; but Ray [pointing to
the doorway], is the meanest one.

So this way, the bitch get comforted, and we explain to her, that we
just want some pussy. “That’s what you have to give up; it’s the price
for freedom.” And the whole posse be there; they are like saying, “Yeah,
Yeah!”

That was back in the days. Nobody is with that shit no more. Pussy is
too easy to get nowadays.

The rapists were careful to develop a logic for justifying their
actions. For example, Primo separated the women his peer group raped
into categories of worthy versus unworthy victims. He also projected
onto them the sexual depravity of his male companions. Despite his
attempt to reconstruct some of the women as voluntarily submitting to
the gang rape – or even enjoying it, as in his original account at the
beginning of this section – when specifically confronted on the issue,
Primo admitted that ultimately violent force and physical terror were
the organizing mediums. Ironically, the particular conversation recorded
below was interrupted by gunshots, as if to illustrate the extent to
which life-threatening violence permeates, in an explicitly less
gendered manner, much of day-to-day street interaction:

Primo: I mean the way I remember it, I was so fucking young. I looked at
it like, most likely, whoever never came back to hang out at the club,
passed through some trauma, and it’s gonna be hidden within their life,
for the rest of their life, and they’re never goin’a’ hang again.
Instead they go home, and chill the fuck out, and keep a dark secret for
the rest of their life. [looking at me defensively] I used to feel
sorry, sometimes too, for them.

But some bitches was more suitable, and used to just come back and hang.
’Cause I guess it was like they was on the streets, and they passed
through their first shit, and now fuck it: “Voy a hangear.” [I’m going
to hang out.]

Philippe: [interrupting] Come on, man, get real! Nobody likes going
through that shit.

Primo: [speaking slowly] Well ... It was their decision, Felipe. I mean,
the first time, maybe they weren’t into it. Sometimes there be tears in
their eyes. They didn’t want to be forced.

Caesar: [laughing at Primo’s confusion and my anger] But they were
forced; but they liked’ed it; and they come back for more; ’Cause
they’re with it. They just get used to the fact: “We own you now bitch!”

Philippe: You motherfuckers are sick! [loud gunshots followed by the
sound of someone running]

Primo: No! You gotta understand Felipe, even when they say no, they’re
loving it.

Caesar: [interrupting from the doorway of the Game Room, where he was
looking out] Yo! Yo! Check this out! Felipe, give me that. [grabbing my
tape recorder]. I’m gonna say into the mike, that someone shot someone,
and just ran by us.

Primo: [ignoring the interruption] Sometimes the girls would end up
staying with like, one guy, and maybe having a kid from him. And this is
after the whole fuckin’ posse – everybody – had fucked her.

I remember this one bitch, she wanted to stay with Luis because he gave
her like a tremendous cock fuck. She was a young bitch; she liked’ed
that huge cock of Luis’s, boy. She fell in love with Luis’s cock.

Luis busted out a lot of virgins. He used to soup up the girls, and bone
them instantly. If not today, then the next day. He used to “Da, da, da,
boom, bang them!”⁷

I used to get my nuts off watching that shit there. Word! It was good.
Hell, yeah. It was exciting because after a while a girl gets into it.

Luis’s favorite was: He fucks and we watch. And I know, I used to get
off on that!

Philippe: [interrupting again] Shut up man! What the hell is the matter
with you!

Primo ignored my response and continued with an exceedingly explicit
account of how Luis would angle his body to maximize the visibility of
his actions for the voyeuristic benefit of his gang-rape companions. The
pornographic detail of Primo’s description supports the interpretation
that there is also a homoerotic dimension to male sexual bonding among
gang rapists.

Grappling for a confrontational response that would shock Primo into an
awareness of the pain he and his friends inflicted on the girls around
them, I tried to jostle his conscience by appealing to the patriarchal
logic of family honor.

Philippe: Did you ever worry about this happening to your sisters?

Primo: Hell yeah!

But I knew my sisters were innocent. Me and Luis used to talk about it.
We used to be in the streets, and we said, “We got those sisters, man.”

Caesar: That’s why I wouldn’t never want to have a daughter, if I was to
get my girl pregnant. I couldn’t handle the fact of having a baby, and
then I have to see her being a ho’. I would probably kill myself. If I
was going to have a baby girl, I don’t want nothing to do with it. I
don’t even want to touch it. Word!

Primo: [trying to reassure me] Put it this way, Felipe, these bitches
were young, dumb, and full-a’-cum. If they are hanging out too much, and
they start seeing that we are wild, and if they are still hanging out,
then we know that we can take them.

Philippe: That is some sick shit you’re saying. You motherfuckers were
nothin’ but a bunch of perverts.

Primo: [frustrated that he could not convince me] I mean look at their
attitude; if they hang out too long, believe me, then they know what’s
happening. If the girl is gonna hang then she’s gonna get dicked. I mean
these bitches, they would just keep hanging out, and hanging out. They
be coming back to the bar every day, so then we know that they really
want a dick.

So Ray and them guys, they would take the bitch aside, because we had
her confianza [trust]; and by then it was easy to force her into doing
it with all of us.

Besides the bitch get smacked, or something, if she don’t.

In some conversations, especially when Caesar was not present, Primo
responded to my open condemnations by claiming repentance. Even when he
was responding so as not to offend me, however, he still maintained the
profoundly patriarchal logic of his peer group.

Primo: Now, every time that I think about those times it makes me feel
weak. Because I used to, like, not be with it. And I used to feel sorry
when I would go back to my house and see my mom and my sisters.

Those fucking girls used to go through shit, and if they were good
girls, then we used to ruin their lives. Now I think about the ages of
those girls. They might have been fifteen or thirteen or twelve or
fourteen or fifteen or sixteen, and that’s some crazy shit. They looked
exactly like the little girls we see now.

Philippe: Bothers you now?

Primo: There was never a time that it didn’t bother me, Felipe. I never
liked that. I hated it. I was like the kinda person that pleads, “Don’t!
Stop!”

It was happening all the fucking time. All over. But I never said
nothing. [morosely] I wished that I had told them to stop raping her.

I used to be a fuckin’ psychiatrist for these girls. Word, Felipe. I
shoulda got paid, because they used to talk to me, like, I used to give
them advices and shit. Like: “Get the fuck out of here before your life
really gets more fucked up.”

But then again, like you said [nodding at Caesar, who had just walked
inside the Game Room from the doorway to listen more carefully], they
liked’ed it.

Ultimately, the violence against women orchestrated by Primo’s older
role models, reflected itself back on their own sense of internalized
worthlessness:

Primo: We used to talk between each other, that these women are living
fucked up, because they want to hang out with us.

And what the fuck we got to offer? Nothing! We used to wonder.

Caesar: We don’t be doing nothing! Bitch be stupid to go with a nigga’
like us.

6 REDRAWING THE GENDER LINE ON THE STREET

I used to take all my husband’s shit. I even used to support my husband,
but I woke and smelled the coffee, like they say. And I put a bullet in
my man.

Candy

The gang rapes discussed in the preceding chapter were not the isolated
brutal excesses of a fringe group of pathological sadists. On the
contrary, they provide an insider’s perspective on the misogyny of
street culture and the violence of everyday life. A biting reminder of
the pervasiveness of sexual violence in El Barrio was the comment made
to my wife and me by our eleven-year-old neighbor, Angel, in the course
of an otherwise innocuous, random conversation about how he was doing in
school, and about how his mother’s pregnancy was progressing. He told us
he hoped his mother would give birth to a boy “because girls are too
easy to rape.”

Witnessing Patriarchy in Crisis

Focused on in isolation, the crack dealers’ accounts of gang rape can
overwhelm readers with anger or despair. Women on the street, however,
are not paralyzed by terror. On the contrary, they are in the midst of
carving greater autonomy and rights for themselves in El Barrio, just as
they are among most social classes and ethnic groups in the United
States, and throughout much of the nonfundamentalist world. In East
Harlem, daughters, sisters, and wives can no longer be beaten
submissively and sent upstairs as authoritatively as they were in the
past for socializing on the street, or for pursuing careers in the
underground economy. As has been the case historically for all major
power shifts between antagonistic groups, the complicated process
whereby women are carving out a new public space for themselves is rife
with contradictory outcomes and human pain. This is exacerbated by the
fact that the fundamental status quos that enforce male domination have
not been altered. As many feminist theorists have long since noted, much
of the struggles and achievements of women in the past decades have been
framed in terms of individual rights that ultimately largely mirror
patriarchal models of “empowerment.”¹

[images]

Girls playing stickball: Carving out new spaces for women. Photo by
Philippe Bourgois.

As men on the street lose their former authoritarian power in the
household, they lash out against the women and children they can no
longer control. Males are not accepting the new rights and roles that
women are obtaining; instead, they are desperately attempting to
reassert their grandfathers’ lost autocratic control over their
households and over public space. Of course, this does not in any way
imply that women in El Barrio, or anywhere else on earth, have provoked
male violence against themselves because of their demands for greater
rights. Such a blame-the-victim interpretation not only glorifies the
stability of previous patriarchal status quos, but also overly
individualizes the long-term macro-structural transformation in gender
relations that is occurring across the globe, even if that progressive
change is bounded by a liberal, middle-class, and largely Anglo-oriented
hegemony.

In the Puerto Rican case, the change in power relations between men and
women conflates with a structurally induced wrenching of traditional
gender roles as men steeped in jíbaro rural identities confront
unemployment and social marginalization in the postindustrial, urban
United States. Old-fashioned household economies defined around the
productivity of an autocratic male have long been under siege in the
Puerto Rican diaspora – especially in the inner city. Men and women
whose consciousness harks back to idealized memories of jíbaro sugar
cane flatland plantations, highland farming communities, or urban
shanty-towns find themselves confined inside the isolated towers of
public housing projects surrounded by people they do not know or trust.
The high-finance, FIRE sector—dominated economy of New York City does
not pay high school dropouts the working-class wages that would allow
them to support a nuclear family of four on a single income. The
traditional “Spanish ideal” of a large, male-dominated household blessed
with numerous children is recognized as an anachronism by even the most
reactionary men and women of the new generations born in New York City.

As noted in Chapter 4 on legal employment, the male head of household
who, in the worst case scenario, has become an impotent, economic
failure experiences these rapid historical structural transformations as
a dramatic assault on his sense of masculine dignity. Worse yet, the
stabilizing community institutions that might have been able to mediate
the trauma do not exist in the U.S. inner city. Instead, men struggle
violently in a hostile vacuum to hold on to their grandfathers’
atavistic power. The crisis of patriarchy in El Barrio expresses itself
concretely in the polarization of domestic violence and sexual abuse.²

In attempting to document this long-term transformation in gender
relations, I faced the inescapable problem of how – as a male – I could
develop the kinds of deep, personal relationships that would allow me to
tape-record conversations with women at the same intimate level on which
I accessed the worlds of men. The challenge of engaging in frank, open,
respectful dialogue across gender lines is exacerbated in the Puerto
Rican street scene by the way the former family-based male
authoritarianism of past generations has been recast around a concern
over sexual fidelity, promiscuity, and public displays of male
domination. Although my wife and I had many female friends in the
neighborhood, and I tape-recorded at least a dozen life histories of
women, only in my relationship with Candy have I felt I was able to
tape-record sufficiently frank and contextualized conversations that
explore the complex subject of changing gender-power relations. Candy
also had the advantage of being one of only two female employees in
Ray’s network, as well as one of his closest childhood friends. In fact,
as I noted in Chapter 3 when discussing how crack operations are
managed, Candy was the person who sold Ray the rights to the Game Room
when her husband, Felix – the original founder and owner – was
incarcerated after she shot him in the stomach.

At the same time, there is nothing “typical” about Candy. On the
contrary, she is much too charismatic, and her life has been more ridden
with violence than most people’s. Nevertheless, her experiences as a
woman capable of commanding respect on the street embody the
contradictory processes through which gender power relationships are
being redefined in street culture.

I still vividly remember the night I first “met” Candy, about a year
after I moved to the neighborhood. She skidded her oversized black car
with tinted glass lopsidedly to a halt by the fire hydrant in front of
the Game Room. Bedecked in skintight orange stretch pants, and perfectly
balanced on her black high heels despite being six months pregnant, she
barged into the Game Room furiously – not even pausing to notice me. I
mistook the viciousness of her snarled curses, and the way she was
wildly shaking her dyed blond hair, to be an argument over missing
money. Naively, I assumed that being the wife of a crackhouse owner, she
must control large quantities of money. I thought her expressive comfort
in handling herself aggressively in the street was evidence of how
skillful she must be as a crackhouse manager. I also remember feeling
like a greenhorn because I could not even figure out whom she was
cursing. Her rapid-fire chorus of “muthafucka’s” and “son of a bitch
cocksuckin’ assholes” overlapped with many of the most intimate
nicknames – Papito, Papi, Papo, Nene, Pops, Negro, Junior – of virtually
everyone hanging out on the stoop that night. I was relieved, however,
to note that Primo did not appear to be offended. In fact, he seemed to
be agreeing sympathetically with everything she said.

I was still a relative novice on the street and I did not yet know how
to recognize the suffering of a local “kingpin” drug dealer’s wife.
Candy was angry – always angry – during those first months that I knew
her. Since my own wife was also pregnant at the time, I was fully
conversant in El Barrio’s folk theories on the psychological stresses of
reproduction. I therefore fell into the sexist trap of assuming that
Candy’s rage was a culturally mediated case of reproductive hormones
battling New York City’s summer heat.

In fact, of course, there was nothing biological about Candy’s problems.
Her husband had failed to deliver a $3,000 payment to his lawyer,
spending the money instead on a cocaine binge with one of his
girlfriends. A few months before, he had been arrested for selling
cocaine to an undercover agent; coincidentally, earlier on that very
same day a lenient judge had sentenced him to five years probation for
firearms possession. His incarceration, consequently, was imminent, but
he was obviously giving no thought to providing any savings for his
pregnant wife and their five children. While Felix served his prison
sentence, his family was going to have to fend for itself on Candy’s
welfare check and with the SSI payments of their adopted grandfather,
Abraham, who boarded with them.

Domestic Violence in Postindustrial Turmoil

It took me two years to develop the confianza and respeto I needed to
tape-record Candy’s painful life story, and to realize how profoundly
vulnerable the furious pregnant woman really had been on those nights
when she cowed all of us on the stoop of the Game Room with her curses.
The night I finally broke the ice and began tape-recording, we carefully
maintained ourselves in full view of the Game Room lookout, Caesar, so
as not to appear improper. In fact, throughout all the years I knew
Candy, she never came to my apartment unchaperoned to talk and
tape-record with me. It would have been interpreted as suspicious,
improper, or even dangerous behavior on her part. This did not prevent
us, however, from feeling safely private in our publicly visible and
socially approved street conversations. People usually respected our
desire to talk in private and gave Candy a wide berth whenever she waved
them away if they came within earshot. On this particular night, for
example, sitting on the hood of a parked car with my tape recorder
between us, our words were safely drowned out by the bustle of
midevening street sounds.³ My opportunistic invocation of our common
condition of being the parents of newborns prompted Candy into a jíbara
celebration of motherhood:

Candy: I love kids. I believe kids are the most wonderful things alive;
that’s what made me live until now.

Because . . . you know how you love a mother? You can never love a
mother more until you have a baby. I loved my mother more when I had my
first daughter; that’s when I loved my mother more.

Because when a baby is born . . . when you see a baby . . . and you see
it so small, you say, that baby can’t come and smack you, and say,
“Mommy, don’t do this; don’t do that.” He’s so innocent. And that’s
pure.

And you see so much child abuse, but that baby doesn’t know nothing.
It’s pure and innocent. That’s why I still wanna have twelve.

[laughing at my reaction] That’s right Felipe; I’m not shitting you. I
always wanted twelve children.

This first private conversation with Candy soon focused on the details
of her own abusive childhood.

Candy: I was a child-abused daughter. I mean my father beat’ed me like
crazy. There was nine of us and for some reason I was the ugly duckling.

Why? I don’t know!

So, at the age of thirteen he gave me such a beating, that I told my
father, “I’m gonna get married, and get away from you, if you don’t
leave me alone. I mean it.”

So I slept in the street at the age of thirteen. Eventually I met up
with my husband who at that time wasn’t my husband – but then became my
husband – and I came out pregnant.

I didn’t know what pregnant was being all about. I mean I didn’t know
nothing. I was thirteen.

In the traditional small-town context, the family and perhaps the entire
rural community or neighborhood might have intervened in this kind of
crisis situation when a patriarch’s violence against his daughter or
spouse becomes so abusive as to force her out of the household. Romantic
elopement in the jíbaro context is a legitimate cultural institution
allowing a teenage girl to resist her father’s domination and to express
her needs as an individual with rights. The runaway girl and her
abandoned parents suffer no cultural opprobrium so long as the girl
resubmits herself to the control of her lover, and establishes a
conjugal household with him as soon as she becomes pregnant. In fact,
often the new husband’s mother shelters the young eloped couple until
they are able to establish themselves as a viable economic unit. Should
the new husband treat the young woman badly, she has the further option
of falling in love with another person and eloping once again. This
possibility of elopement, in the traditional context, consequently
accords a certain degree of bargaining power to women in rural community
or plantation settings, or even in cohesive urban neighborhoods.⁴

At age thirteen, fleeing an abusive father,⁵ Candy was faithfully
following this traditional cultural scenario. She even had her mother’s
full cooperation. The disjunction with the rural past at this point in
Candy’s life could not have been more marked: Instead of being protected
from her abusive father and guided into a new male-dominated household
by the villagers living around her, Candy faced the closed corporate
inner-city street gang, and she was raped by the adolescent boys that
Felix, her future husband, led.

When Primo told me his version of Candy’s elopement and her eventual
marriage to Felix, he harkened back to a past sense of community morals.
He explicitly condemned both Felix and Candy’s father for their
treatment of Candy. Caesar, on the other hand, translated Candy’s
childhood trauma into the logic of contemporary inner-city misogyny. In
a burst of laughter that caused him to spit up his beer onto the Game
Room floor, he marveled, “Felix got that pussy brand new, boy!” Caesar
and Primo immediately began arguing over whether thirteen was too young
an age for a girl to become sexually active. The subject of rape was not
alluded to, except indirectly as having to do with rumors about Candy’s
promiscuity, and the fact that she was “definitely not a virgin” when
she married Felix.

Candy interprets these same events in a more traditional framework, but
from an assertive women’s perspective. She remembers her flight from her
father as a love affair with Felix, and she reminisces over the
excitement of becoming a first-time mother. The formal state
institutions designed to help Candy in her new urban setting, however,
interpreted her situation in a completely different manner.

Candy: I had my daughter. The courts was gonna take her away ’Cause I
was a minor. So my husband at the age of fourteen tried to marry me, but
the judge said, “No, You’re too young. You’re two kids. You don’t know
what you want.”

Okay, so we didn’t get married. But we hide’ed from the family court.

I can’t deny that. The cops came to our house and we hide’ed with the
baby on the roof.

But I wanted the baby so much that I cried for the baby, so I told my
mommy, “The courts can’t take the baby away from me.”

I remember I slept in the hallway with my daughter next to my mother’s
doorway. I had nowhere to go with my baby.

So they told my mother, “Since you’re having a daughter so young having
a baby, we have to take all your kids away too.”

My mother sold her furniture, hiding everything, and went to Puerto
Rico, but gave me my daughter and told my husband, “Be responsible for
my daughter, because she’s a baby.”

We lived together on i 110th Street between Lexington and Third Avenue.

Twenty years later, at the age of thirty-four, Candy has a
psychoanalytic understanding of herself as a battered woman. She blends
a resigned folk Catholicism with the New York City therapeutic jargon
that she learned during her sporadic, mandated referrals to the mental
health clinic at Metropolitan Hospital. Felix’s beatings and Candy’s
numerous suicide attempts frequently forced her into the emergency room
of East Harlem’s public municipal hospital. Consequently, she has had
extensive contact with mainstream social service bureaucracies and knows
how to manipulate them.

Candy: My husband was like my father: I was a child-abused daughter, and
I became a child-abused wife. I escaped my mother’s house, because I’m a
battered daughter; but then I’m going to be a battered wife. I thought
it was love.

I’m not gonna lie. I loved’ed to get beat ’Cause I was used to it as a
baby to thirteen, and then my husband was doing it from thirteen to
thirty-two. So I thought life was that: Getting beat up. I used to look
for fights for him to beat my ass.

You see when you’re a child-abused daughter from the age of eight months
to thirteen then you find an abused husband. You think that the way a
man shows you love is by beating you because Coño [expletive], I says,
“My father loves me, that’s why he’s beating me.”

I was foolish, because I never got therapy. I never got psychiatry. And
I tried to kill myself since I was eleven. The last time I succeeded was
the time I was thirty-three. I almost made it that time.

But you know – I’ve been through a trauma life – but you know, life goes
on. And God is with me.

And the doctors knew that I was an abused woman, but because I did not
want them to know – because I was a battered woman – they used to cover
up for me.

So my husband beat me up.

The psychotherapeutic literature on the battered woman syndrome and on
the intergenerational transmission of violence and substance abuse could
certainly be applied to Candy. No matter how psychoanalytically
appropriate this kind of individualistic, medicalized explanation for
Candy’s suffering may appear, however, it misses the key structural
components to her life experiences. It ignores the systematic
dislocation in family structure caused by the massive rural-urban
migration of Puerto Ricans to New York City in the post—World War II
period.⁶ Felix’s extreme brutality against Candy, especially during her
pregnancies, emerges as an almost caricatural expression of this
structural maladjustment, rather than being merely the isolated excesses
of a psychopath.

Candy: Felix broke my arm. He did everything to me – once he cracked my
head.

I used to get three beatings a night, every day, from when I was
thirteen till twenty-one. He made me lose five stomachs [pregnancies].
That’s five miscarriages because of him.

I’m talking about five and a half months, five months, four months.
Nothing under four months. He used to give me beatings, and I would lose
them.

Believe me, you don’t even want to know.

Perhaps Felix’s sadism was the last agonized gasps of the anachronistic
traditional ideal of the large jíbaro family that both he and Candy
still maintained, despite being stranded in high-rise housing projects.
A generation earlier, Felix’s domineering and bullying would have been
understood, within limits, as the “legitimate” role of a father
coordinating his household laborers for the urgent agricultural tasks of
the small family farm. The material basis for the respeto that men
commanded on the jíbaro hillsides of Puerto Rico, however, is obsolete –
and even contraindicated – in Felix and Candy’s new postindustrial
world. Grotesque as this may seem, perhaps Felix was unconsciously
killing the children he and Candy kept producing but could not possibly
raise with dignity on their declining access to factory work. Through
all of this, however, Candy still desperately holds on to the primacy of
males.

Candy: I wanted twelve kids; I only got five – but I wanted twelve. My
husband took out five of them with his punches and beatings.

He made me lose five babies. [holding up all the fingers on her right
hand]

And the one that I hold against him more, is the one after my daughter –
Tabatha – the one that is twenty-one. Because I was six months pregnant,
and that baby died due to the reason that he would beat me up.

When I saw that baby, I knew it was a boy. It was dead when it came out,
and the only thing that came out was blood clot, because the beatings
that he gave were forming a blood clot, instead of performing a baby.

One day, when I came out pregnant with my son, I told Felix, I said,
“Maybe, if you won’t hit me I will have this baby.” He made a promise to
God. And look what happened. I had Junior, my only son. [pointing to her
thirteen-year-old son hanging out on the crackhouse stoop]

Female Liberation Versus Traditional Sexual Jealousy

When Candy finally shot Felix in the stomach about a month after my
first tentatively polite conversations with her in front of the Game
Room, everyone supported her. At the time, I hailed it as an
emancipatory act of resistance. Candy, however, understood her
liberating act as the traditional outburst of a jealous woman who was
uncontrollably romantically in love with an unfaithful man. She was
desperately holding on to the traditional family values of a past where
gender confrontations and assertions of individual rights express
themselves in the romantic idioms of sexual jealousy. Of course, the
inner-city context has polarized the old-fashioned scenarios. Easy
access to narcotics and guns has raised the stakes and augmented the
levels of human suffering of traditional, gender-based household
struggles.

As in the case of elopement, romantic love in a conjugal relationship
enables a subordinated woman to assert her individual needs while at the
same time binding her to the principle of a male-dominated nuclear
household. Candy very distinctly identified Felix’s sexual betrayal of
their marital relationship as the precipitating factor that caused her
to shoot him. She had always been aware that Felix “had outside women
out there,” but when he violated the rules of kinship solidarity she
finally exhausted her battered-woman’s dependence on him.

Candy: Womens think that their man fooling around with another woman is
the worst trauma you can go through; but it’s not.

[grabbing hold of the tape recorder] And I tell every woman in New York
City: You think your man playing you dirty with a woman is bad. No! The
worst trauma you can go through, is when it’s sleeping with your own
sister – your own blood.

And I’m thirty-four, and I know, ’Cause it was with my sister that he
started fooling around – I’m not going to lie.

And when you love a sister so much like me [putting the tape recorder
back down, her eyes misting] . . . And that’s the pain I will die with
until now.

Philippe: [holding her forearm] Hold on, Candy, start from the
beginning. Explain all this to me better.

Candy: Okay Felipe, people say you’re a wife for a man, and that your
husband is your life.

Wife for a man! Yeah, maybe when you’re an adult, but I was only
thirteen. So he trained me. Because it’s like, when you grow up drinking
a bottle to the age of four years old, you’re used to that bottle.

And he had me from thirteen. So I was trained by him; and I was raised
stupid, because I was thirteen and he raised me up his way: [snarling]
“Be by yourself; don’t have a friend; don’t believe in nobody; don’t
look out the window.”

I mean I couldn’t even look out the window! That’s how bad it was.

I’m not going to lie: I had found him before with another woman; but
then, when I found out what he did with my sister, I went crazy. They
sent me to Puerto Rico to calm my mind. I came back from Puerto Rico. I
still hadn’t forgot.

I found my husband twice with my sister in a hotel. I wanted to kill him
and I wanted to kill her. But when I got to the hotel, I was too late. I
threw a knife at him, and I cut him in the leg.⁷

And I’m not going to deny, even if it affects my records in the future
[gesturing at the tape recorder]: I tried to kill myself a lot of times.
I’ve been to a state hospital. I’ve had a record since I was eleven
years old because I’ve tried to kill myself. He throwed me up a wall.

But look at me now. [opening her arms, pulsing her body to the beat of a
loud, nearby radio, and smiling radiantly] I don’t know, but God wants
me alive, ’Cause I’m a good-hearted woman. I have no bad for nobody. And
God wants me here for some good reason. Maybe it’s for my kids.

Candy’s violent and sometimes suicidal rages were directed at holding on
faithfully to the sanctity of her hearth. It took her another four
months of abuse before she finally pulled the trigger on her husband.
She condemns her husband within the confines of the cultural rules of
her mother’s or her grandmother’s generations. She expresses her
desperation and anger through jealous hysteria caused by her husband’s
failure to respect the integrity of their conjugal household. In keeping
with how Candy frames her rights as an individual in classical romantic
terms, a lipstick stain was the final catalyst.

Candy: One day, I went to his mother’s house to see where he was at.
When we were talking outside, I saw he had lipstick on his mouth, so I
got mad. You see, I had found out he was fooling around with another
woman – with me, my sister, and another woman!

I went crazy. And I always carry a gun for my protection – I always had
that gun for my protection – it was in my pocketbook.

And that’s just what I did. I just took it out, and did it. I just went
crazy.

So I shot him. I’m telling you, Felipe, I shot him.

I don’t know Felipe; it’s my nerves. I didn’t feel no pain, or no pity,
or nothing. I just took out the gun in my pocketbook, and shot him, and
kept walking.

But then, when I was walking away, he said, “Candy, I love you;
remember! I still love you. Please, please!”

But I said, “I don’t give a fuck.”

But then, I have a heart of gold. I have a heart of God. I came back,
and told him, “Man, you fucked up on me.”

He said, “Candy, please, you don’t understand.” I said, “No. But I’m
gonna get you an ambulance.”

I got him a van. They took him to the hospital and then the detectives
are there, questioning me.

But I don’t know. I don’t think I had any feelings. I mean, I’m a
good-hearted woman, but at that moment, I didn’t care.

He hurt me so much. He destroyed me so much. He took my childhood life
away. I mean, from thirteen to thirty-two, I was trained his way –
streetwise.

[sipping from a pint-sized Bacardi bottle in which she had a premixed
supply of “Sex-on-the-Beach” sold as bootleg by one of the few remaining
local Italian delicatessens] And I was a respectable wife for eighteen
years. When he messed around with my sister, he destroyed me completely,
[handing me the bottle]

Philippe: What happened after you shot him?

Candy: I got rid of the gun. And then I went through everything with
him. In the hospital they questioned me, and I said, “No, it was a
holdup.” And we both lied.

In the hospital he tells me, “Don’t say anything, because the detectives
are recording us.”

The cops went to 110th and Lexington, and people there, they said it was
a blond-headed woman that had shot him. We had said it was a black guy
[laughing]. But it was a lie.

But they kept questioning me, but I said, “I don’t know; it was a black
guy.” [shrugging innocently and then laughing before swigging from the
bootleg Bacardi bottle]

I told them I didn’t want to go to jail. I was six months pregnant with
his daughter Lillian, my baby. So the cops were so good with me, that
they did not pay any attention to anything.

[shrugging, laughing, and drinking again] So I got away with it. I think
it’s because I believe too much in God.

Candy and her network of friends and family had a traditional Puerto
Rican folk explanation to account for her dramatic action. It was “her
nerves” – what on the island of Puerto Rico is called an ataque de
nervios. Puerto Rican psychiatrists identify ataques as a “culture-bound
Puerto Rican syndrome” most commonly found in women who have been abused
since childhood by men.⁸ The closest equivalent phenomenon in
middle-class Anglo culture might be a panic attack. In rural and
working-class Puerto Rican culture, ataques are a legitimized forum for
a woman to vent her anger against the dominant man in her life when his
abuse oversteps accepted boundaries. Straightforward jealousy is the
most conventionally cited provocation for these culturally scripted
violent outbursts by women. In other words, Candy had followed the
traditional, abuse survivor’s scenario down to its most minute details
when she shot Felix. In fact, she almost reaffirmed rather than violated
patriarchal etiquette when she cathartically burst her cyclical shackles
of intergenerational abuse by putting a bullet in her husband’s stomach.

Recovery: Sex, Drugs, and More Romantic Love

Candy gave birth to her fifth child, Lillian, two months after Felix was
incarcerated following his recovery in the hospital. She fell into a
deep depression as well as a severe economic crisis. During the same
confusing months she misplaced her public assistance papers and two of
her four children were excluded from her welfare allotment when “a mixup
happened with my social security numbers.” She soon exhausted the $3,000
Ray had paid her to take over the rights to sell crack at the Game Room.

Candy pulled herself out of her depression and economic crisis by
falling madly in love with Primo and by getting a job selling drugs for
Ray. She combined the traditional female strategy for making an
assertive life-cycle change – falling romantically in love – with the
reality of El Barrio’s underground economy – selling drugs. In private
retrospective accounts, Candy attributed her recovery to the new man she
loved. Despite having proven her effectiveness as an independent single
mother, she continued to frame her future life and well-being in a
conjugal template.

Candy: Without Primo, who knows where I would have been. And forever . .
. I could marry anybody in the future, but I would always have Primo in
my mind, because he taught me to be the strong woman I am now.

Primo’s retrospective descriptions of his love affair with Candy are
less adulatory, but they still reveal a supportive sensitivity, despite
the stylized, semipornographic lechery that male-to-male accounts of
former romances often adopt. According to Primo, they stumbled into
having sex by accident after several months of intimate platonic
conversations.

Primo: I used to really feel sorry for Candy. She used to cry a lot. So
I used to try hanging out with her more at her crib. I saw her every day
in those last four months after Felix was locked up, when she had just
had the baby – it came out beautiful, boy! Nice and fat – se ve bién [it
looks healthy].

I used to, you know, be there as a listener. She was telling me
everything about my cousin; how he used to hit her. I used to be her
paño de lágrimas [shoulder to cry on],⁹ because I guess you need
somebody to talk to.

I was saying, “You gotta go out and enjoy yourself. Whatever is behind –
is behind – that’s history. Whatever comes up tomorrow, you gotta do
something for yourself that will make your life better.”

That night when the shit started happening, it started out cool. We just
stood there talking. We wasn’t on coke or anything. I didn’t even used
to sniff at all at that time.

So I took her to the kids’ room. And it just had a small bed, and I sat
her down there, and I started making out with her.

I don’t know where the hell the kids were. They were probably all in
another room; or sleeping together in her room. ’Cause her room had a
big bed, so they probably all stayed there watching TV, and all fell
asleep together in a heap.

We was kissing, and then I just slipped her panties to the side. She
liked’ed it.

But then she got up; went to the bathroom; and started crying.

And I was like, saying to myself [burying his face in his palms], “God
maybe she didn’t want to be doing this,” and I was like [burying his
head again], “Maybe I was forcing her.”

You know, I was feeling like shit. I was thinking, “Maybe we should just
forget about all this right then and there. Because we could make sure
it would never happen again. Nobody has to know.” Because you know how I
am Felipe, I wouldn’t have never told anybody.

I started to tell her that. But she said [hands on hips, shaking his
head sternly] “No! Now that we’ve started, let’s finish it off.”

And then, we flew to the bed; [giggling] we got more comfortable; and
wheeeee [waving his arms in the air]. And we did it right. It’s like we
were one. [staring upward at the plaster peeling from the ceiling of the
Game Room]

To counteract the latent sensitivity of Primo’s account, Caesar, who was
standing in the Game Room doorway, cackled with laughter, cheering,
“Yeah! Yeah! I like that! Pops stuffed her like a Thanksgiving turkey
that night.”

The economic independence afforded by the drug economy, as well as her
love affair with Primo, enabled Candy to break the paralyzing grip that
her abusive husband, Felix, still maintained from his prison cell. Ray
hired Candy to work the night shift at the Social Club from midnight to
6:00 a.m. This allowed her to return home just in time to prepare her
older children for school and the Head Start program, as well as cuddle
her newborn. At this point Abraham, her ex-husband’s adopted
grandfather, who had been left to baby-sit all night while Candy worked,
would have long since passed out from some combination of Thunderbird,
vodka, Bacardi, and beer.

Ironically, like her imprisoned husband, Candy could not force herself
to minimize her profile at “The Club” as a dealer. She could not even
manage to stay inside the Club and let the customers come to her for
their twenty-dollar packets of powder cocaine and ten-dollar vials of
crack. Instead, she took control of the entire corner outside, cursing
freelance competitors, chasing off self-appointed steerers, winking at
well-built men, and doing favors for all her friends. Her charisma was
instantly visible: dyed blond hair with jet-black roots shining through,
full-length scar down the left side of her chin, spiked high heels,
black leotard pants, proud full body, and the loudest, most confidently
rasping voice on La Farmacia’s corner. Luckily for Candy, the police
were too incompetent and demoralized to notice her, and the Club was
never busted during her six-month tenure.

When I expressed concern to Ray that addicts and stickup artists might
assault his new female manager—worker on the midnight shift, his retort
made me feel like an ignorant sexist: “Candy knows how to get her
respect. Can’t you see? Didn’t you hear what she did to her husband?”
Ray’s respect and confidence in Candy reminded me, once again, of the
crucial role that public displays of violence play in establishing
credibility on the street. Meanwhile, from midnight to 6:00 a.m., Candy
dominated La Farmacia’s corner, supplying much of the cocaine being
injected by addicts in between the jungle gyms of the neighborhood’s
public school playgrounds that the local newspapers subsequently
denounced in an exposé series entitled “Devil’s Playgrounds.”¹⁰ Business
boomed. Candy sniffed more coke, lost more weight, saw less of her
children, made more money, and had more sex and power than ever before
in her life.

I could support my family and my drugs, because I was a dealer. When
you’re a dealer, you can support any habit.

I did coke. Pure coke – sniffing it for five months. From coke, I could
have gone to crack, but I was just sniffing, that’s all. I’m against
heavy drugs. Because let me tell you something, drugs ain’t shit.

I stopped, and look at my weight now. [opening her arms and swiveling
her hips] I’m a hundred and thirty-seven pounds.

Inverting Patriarchy

With her husband safely incarcerated, Candy thrived – at least that is
what it looked like from external appearances. She effectively resisted
the violent males who had been surrounding her since childhood. She even
demonstrated solidarity with fellow abused women in her social network.
For example, she advised the wife of Felix’s older brother, Luis, to
shoot her husband for beating her up every time she moved the curtains
to look out the window of their eighth-floor project apartment.

Candy: I went to Wanda’s house one day, right? I went to look out the
window at the kids playing downstairs, and Wanda almost hit me.

“Candy, what you doing?” I thought I did something wrong.

I said, “What the hell is this?” I mean . . .

She said, “Be careful, that’s a booby trap. When Luis closes the
curtains, he does it a certain way so that if you open it, he’ll know
that you looked out through the window. We’re not allowed to look out
the windows here.”

He’s got like a heavy-duty blanket over the window, and the sun don’t
even go in.

You know what I told Wanda? That she should put a bullet in her man. But
she hasn’t put a bullet in Luis because she’s a victim. . . .

I told it to Luis too. That I would have killed him a long time ago, if
I was Wanda. I would’ve got rid of him. You think I’m going to go
through all those changes!

Candy’s solidarity did not run deep, however, and, ultimately she
accepted and participated in the patriarchal logic that blames women for
male promiscuity and violence.

Candy: I tell you, Felipe, my husband was a lot like that too. It’s
because the women in that family like to play their husbands dirty. So
maybe Felix thought every woman was like that.

Luis always used to sleep with other people’s women. He used to sleep
with the sisters of his women. Remember [turning to Primo], how he did
it with Lucy, his first wife, and her sister.

Primo: And Luis used to have other bitches in the background too, in
those days.

Candy: Yup. And Luis always used to say, “Keep it in the family.” But
when it happened to him [hugging Primo from behind], he didn’t like
those things. You see, you don’t like your own medicine. [chuckle]

Wanda caught it real bad from Luis. Forget it! Ever since Luis caught my
husband up there [chuckle], she can’t be lookin’ out the window. Luis
caught him hiding behind the bed. Luis beat the shit out of Wanda.

But that’s what Luis deserved. He always used to say, “Keep it in the
family.”

And when this happens between me and Primo, Luis made a lot of
controversy about it, saying his brother and Primo was cousins. But
being a cousin ain’t that close. And now he’s telling me I can’t be with
Primo, when he took the sister of his own wife, and when his brother
took his wife. That’s worse, you know, being brother-in-laws, because
they’re the uncles of the kids. That’s stronger genes.

He should just mind his own business and worry about his own woman.

On a deeper level, Candy never escaped her abusive husband’s control.
She was following in his footsteps: selling drugs, neglecting her
children, and flaunting her sexual conquests. By becoming Candy’s kept
lover, Primo became her vehicle for confronting these gender taboos of
Puerto Rican street culture. At the time, Primo pretended he was
fulfilling the inner-city male’s street fantasy, cacheteando
[freeloading] off a woman. In fact, however, in retrospective private
conversations Primo admitted that he had felt as if he were creating a
Frankenstein: a formerly battered mother of five children was
out-machoing all the men in her life.

Primo: That bitch was crazy. She’s madness. Because from there on, bro,
it was horror. It was horror. [burying his head in his hands]

Boy! That bitch be trying to kill me; trying to beat down all my women,
any girl that got near me.

That was some crazy shit I had to go through. That woman dissed me.

Primo could not accept the reversal in gender roles: Candy was bragging
publicly about her sexual exploits, much the same as Felix had done by
parading his girlfriends in front of the Game Room crowd before being
shot.

Primo: Candy was making so, fucking, much money. That bitch was making
even more than I knew about.

Then she started going around . . . umm . . . spreading it, telling how,
like giving hints out . . . about me being upstairs at her place.

And then when Felix used to call her, she used to say she had a
boyfriend. Like, “Don’t worry you find out,” type shit.

Then, when she told the people in her family, I used to feel stupid,
man, I was like . . . I couldn’t believe it. I didn’t want to deal with
this.

And I used to want to be doing my own shit. That used to make her flip.

Then when I didn’t want to bother with her – like sexually – she was
always telling me that I “used” her. I was like, “Used you! In what
sense? Can’t be sexually because you are the one that wants it.”

She was saying “I buy you things.”

But I was saying, “I don’t ask you for nothing. It’s you’re the one that
likes to do favors. You just have to have an excuse to be pissed off.”

After about six months, Primo finally rebelled against Candy’s inversion
of patriarchy. He struggled to recoup his personal sense of male respect
by the only means immediately at his disposal: physical violence.
Classically, their breakup was precipitated by his unwillingness to meet
Candy’s demands for sex. Years later, on slow nights at the Game Room,
Primo provided Caesar and me with detailed accounts of the fateful night
of his breakup with Candy. It was almost as if he used these
tape-recording sessions as therapy to resolve the confusion generated by
the gender taboos he had broken when he fell in love with Candy. He also
needed to bond with us, by celebrating his ability to triumph over the
misbehaving woman, and Caesar would inevitably oblige Primo even when I
remained neutral or critical.

Primo: You see, like she used to get in a mood, or something, and I
didn’t wanna bother.

One day she put on one of her negligees. And I was like, “leave me
alone.” And she was like [snarling], “You have to!”

I told her to leave me alone, but she didn’t wanta get off me, so I
pushed her away. It was fucked up, because she had grabbed a knife.
[distant gunshots]

Caesar: Yo! Pops! I didn’t know you hadda go through all this shit. She
was like the woman in Fatal Attraction.¹¹

Primo: Shut up Caesar! You used to be so high all the time, that I
didn’t even want to know you. [handing him a quart of malt liquor]

And she was threatening me, all crazy-like. So I tell her, “Go ahead,
come at me with that fuckin’ knife, because I’m going to hurt you.”

Caesar: [unbearably excited once again] That was definitely like Fatal
Attraction, man.

Primo: Yeah! Because I was watching this bitch, seeing how close she
was, because I was planning to kick her in the face. And she was gonna
get fucked up, because with my kick, I’m gonna break her jaw.

Caesar: [cheering and then drinking] Yeah!

Primo: [taking back the beer bottle] I tell her, “Don’t try it, because
I’m gonna get you. You’re not going to get me; I’m gonna get you.
Because, I’m ready for you.”

She put it away, the knife. But she didn’t want to leave me alone; so I
grabbed her to take her to the kids’ room; so that I could show them
what she’s doing. I called out to her children, and I looked into her
eyes, and told them to look at what their mother’s doing.

But she started pretending in front of the kids, saying to me
[dismissively], “What the fuck is this? I don’t know what you talking
about.”

She looks at the kids and she says [in a gentle tone], “No, it’s all
right, I’m just . . . just playing with him.”

But then when we stepped out of the room, she turns to me and whispers
[snarling], “You motherfucker.” She like turns on me again. And then I
went [burying his head in his hands], “Oh, my God.”

And I got mad [making exaggerated whole-body wrestling motions], and I
grabbed her by the neck, and I threw her to the sofa. [pounding fist to
palm] BOOM . . . and I WHAAAAAM, POOOM [pounding again], smacked her in
the face with all my might.

But the bitch laughed. I hit her like hard, man! Hard man! Hard!

Caesar: [jumping up] Ooh, she laughed. I like that!

Primo: [fanning Caesar’s appreciation] Yeah! She was all wild-looking,
with her negligee on, and everything.

So I bugged out, I mean this bitch is crazy. So I hit her again
[pounding his fist again]. It was like, it was all okay; like she wanted
it.

So I hit her again [pounding], and POWW, she like flew to the other
sofa, like that [making hand motions of a body flying], and she laughed.

Caesar: Yeah! Yeah! She had a thing about the hitting shit. She had to
get hit.

[turning to me, perhaps worried by the uncomfortable expression on my
face] You can imagine someone like Felix with her. ’Cause Pops really
ain’t all that bad.

Yo Pops, you think she was doing that because she loved you? Was that
it? She wanted to keep you?

[turning to me again] Imagine, Felipe, that she come at you screaming
[waving his arms], “You son of a bitch!”

And it didn’t even look like that, man. I would look at Primo and Candy,
and they looked like a couple that was just chilling.

They didn’t look like they were doing what he is saying now, with knives
and shit. They just looked like they used to get high, and just be . . .
normal, like high all the time.

Primo: Yeah, you wouldn’t know Caesar. You was always on a mission all
the time.

[turning to me and looking down] God! I hate to think about this Felipe,
because really all that time, she was crying through all this.

And then the kids were there in the room all nervous. I guess they were
crying. She was over the limit, and what could I do?

The kids were watching. Even Lillian was there. She was less than a year
old.

Caesar: Yeah! Yeah! They wanted to scratch your eyes out. Because you
clocked her.

[passing Primo the beer] Pops, she wanted to keep you? Or, did she just
want to be boned or something?

Primo: [drinking] She wanted me to hit her. She made me stay. So I sat
on the sofa where she had fallen when I hit her.

I was thinking, “She wants to mess around with me,” like lovey dovey,
which I really didn’t want.

But I was sitting there [handing me the beer bottle], just like you
sitting here, right? And all of a sudden, she jumps up, and she started
walking back and forth, back and forth, with her tacos [high heels] on.
Making a noise, like clack, clack, clack.

She was high, you know, so that was bothering me. Because she walked
into her room. I didn’t know what she’s doing over there. Like, I didn’t
trust her.

Caesar: You scared of her?

Primo: Of course! ’Cause I knew she had her gun, and shit, and all that,
in her room.

Caesar: [sniffing] You thought she was going to kill you for real, Pops?

Primo: Of course! But wait a minute, be quiet, I need to continue the
story.

[turning to me and taking back the bottle of beer] At this point, I
would do anything she wanted. So, she started, like, staying quiet, and
looking at me. And for some reason, she started looking at me, trying to
get me to start some trouble.

I forgot exactly what she was saying, but I got quiet. I was waiting for
the big one.

So right there, she started mentioning Jackie [Primo’s previous
girlfriend]: “I know that you must have been kissing her the day
before,” and this and that.

And I was like, “No! Come on, you know . . . I haven’t kissed her, or
nothin’ like that, for months.”

But no matter what I said, she was trying to get it out of me that I was
messing around. She just kept going at it.

And so finally I say, “Hey, all right, I’m . . . I . . . I kissed her
before.”

Like right there, she flipped. She said, “I knew you were a
motherfucker!”

She actually tried to hit me. Boom! I caught her hand, and tell her to,
“Chill!”

She screams, “You motherfucker!” – like if I was her husband or
something – “I knew you were fucking around.” And she started crying.

I told her “That’s what you want to hear, so I tell you.”

So she was like walking back and forth again, with her tacos. It was
like a whole scandal, man. It was late at night.

Next thing you know . . . she wanted to get dressed to go to Jackie’s
house, right then and there, to fuck her up. And I was like [shrugging],
“Fuck it!”

She put on her sneakers and clothes, and everything. I was like, “Oh
shit! This is bugged.”

All of a sudden, she changed her mind. It was like she was looking for
me to hit her, to start trouble.

So I said to myself, “No!” And I just stood like this [standing at
attention], real calm like.

She went into her room and I saw that she had her shirt all tucked in,
but when she came out she had her shirt untucked. She screamed at me,
“Hey you bugging? You wanta go home?”

She had her shirt untucked like that. [motioning to where a bulge would
be, if one were hiding a gun at one’s waist] She was looking for
trouble. She was standing towards the door, and I was standing, like,
sitting towards the window.

And I was scared, man! I was looking at her in the eyes, and I said, “I
don’t want to go.”

She said, “Why not? You motherfucker!” And she was cursing at me real
nasty.

Caesar: [bothered by Primo’s admission of vulnerability] What did she
want? She still wanted to be boned or something?

Primo: [irritated] No, man! She wanted me to hit her.

She was standing towards the door [delineating the layout with hand
motions], and I was sitting towards the window, and the sofa was there;
so I was like, there.

I was saying in my mind, “I know this bitch. God, like, now I’m done
with. She wants me to do something stupid. She wants me to hit her so
she could shoot.”

So what I did was, I tell her [in a soothing tone], “Why don’t you sit
next to me; put your gun away; and then, get bad with me if you need to.
First, show the gun to me; take the bullets out of the clip; and get to
where I can see both your hands.”

She said, “I ain’t got my gun with me.”

So I told her, “Let me frisk you.”

She said, “No!”

So I say, “Forget it [in a soothing voice once again], I’m sorry man, if
I ever did anything wrong to you, I’m sorry . . . dah . . . dah . . .
dah . . . let’s talk. I don’t even know why you’re doing this to me; you
shouldn’t be doing this to me.”

So finally she went [sigh], “Okay!” And took the gun out, because she
had it on her, all the time, under her shirt.

As soon as she put it down – I don’t remember exactly where she put it,
but I saw her take out the clip – I went, “Fucking Bitch!” [swinging
both fists] And I mushed her.

I was pissed man. I shouted, “Come on, Bitch! I’m not playing with you
anymore.”

But that bitch was bugging, boy; she still didn’t want me to leave. She
had like that evil look in her.

Lucky thing, at this point, Tabatha came, and I told her, “Your mother’s
fucking with me. She don’t want to let me go.”

It was like a big thing; it lasted a long time. I don’t know exactly how
long, but I think Tabatha went out to get Luis or something, because
then Luis came over. And I told him, “Candy don’t want to let me leave.”

You see, Candy was chasing me around the house. Man! She was throwing
shit; fighting with me; shit was breaking; the clock fell. She was
flipping, boy. And this, like, lasted until the afternoon of the next
day.

Finally by this time, we was all crying. And I felt like Tabatha was on
my side, and that she was going to end up hurt that day too. Because she
started arguing some shit over there with her mother, and they got into
a scuffle, and Tabatha took a hard swing at Candy.

Caesar: [furiously] Tabatha be fucking everybody up. I think that bitch
got a bad attitude.¹²

Primo: No, man! Candy was over the limit, and Tabatha had come to help.
She was chilling. What could she do? She was trying to calm her mother
down. But [grimly], she had taken a hard swing at Candy.

So Candy started screaming and acting stupid, “My daughter hit me,
aaaaaahhhhhh!” And then everybody was saying all kinds of stupid shit,
and the kids were all crying.

Philippe: Why didn’t you just leave?

Primo: You see, she had one of those inside locks, and I couldn’t get
out the door. So when she was fighting with Tabatha, I was trying to
unscrew the lock to get out. But she saw me and caught me.

Finally Tabatha and Luis held her, and pulled her back, so I kicked her
hard in the chest.

Caesar: Yeah!

Primo: But she still had me like this [grabbing my lapels]; and she
ripped my shirt; and she bit my hand, so that I couldn’t even get my own
grip on her, like, to get her off of me.

Caesar: Like the grip of death, man.

Primo: Yeah. So anyway, I just played it off. I just backed off a little
and then . . . WHAAAM, POOSH! [making the motions of a karate kick to
someone’s face]

Caesar: Hit her hard enough to hurt her?

Primo: Not real hard to hurt, but hard enough for her to fly away. Luis
and Tabatha was right there. But they wasn’t even helping me anymore.
They were like scared, or something . . . I don’t know.

They had gone back into the sala [living room] next to the front door.
Luis looked’ed like he was going to swing at me after I finished kicking
Candy.

They all looked like they was going to swing at me, man, even the kids.
Put it this way: The children knew their mother was wrong, but I was
hitting their mother, and they wanted to jump on me.

Caesar: [cheering again] Yeah! Yeah! They wanted to scratch your eyes
out. Because you clocked their moms.

Primo: When I saw their faces, I knew that I had to be prepared for
them, too. I was ready to like, block their swings.

But I turned to them, and I tell them, “She gotta let me go; I wanta get
outta here. Hold her, or something. Help me! I wanta get outta here.”

And they did; and I ran.

But when I was outside, she still managed to throw a gallon of liquor
out the window at me.

In keeping with her new, macho street-dealer identity, rather than
flying into an ataque de nervios when confronted by Primo in public,
Candy pursued the male scenario for revenge against a disrespectful
ex-lover. She would loudly proclaim how much she had enjoyed having sex
with Primo: “Best sex I ever had!” This inevitably escalated to blows
when she chanced upon Primo while he was accompanied by his new
girlfriend, Jaycee, whom he had gone back to after breaking up with
Candy.

Primo: So Jaycee and me were just walking through Candy’s project, and
she comes down, all wild. And she’s bitchin’ at me, “You motherfucker,
come to my block with your shit” – she meant Jaycee – “that you be
fucking. Why don’t you tell her that you fuck me? Why don’t you tell her
that you fuck me!”

It was wild. And everybody was saying, “Whahh?”

And it was in front of her kids. [passing a ten-dollar packet of cocaine
to Caesar for him to crush into powder]

She had me nervous because I see her coming back again the same way at
us, walking wildly. I thought she might have her gun. I started shaking
inside myself.

She said, “Why don’t you tell her the truth, you fuckin’ faggot? You’re
not a man.”

And this is in front of the housing [maintenance] men, and everybody
else, so they could hear her loud. “Why don’t you tell her . . . [waving
his arms wildly] He fucked me! And I liked’ed it! [stepping back, arms
still waving] And tell her how many times I used to make you do it.”
[grabbing his crotch with both hands and gyrating his pelvis]

I couldn’t believe it, right? And everybody was lookin’ out the window.
I didn’t want to hear that shit. [reaching for the cocaine, and washing
down a matchbook sniff of powder with several gulps of beer]

And I told her, ”Vete para el carajo [Go to hell]. Tu quieres de esto?
[You want some of this?] [grabbing his crotch again] Pero no te voy a
dar más nada [but I ain’t giving you nothin’ no more]. Vete a cagar en
la crica de tu madre [Go shit in your mother’s cunt].”

I swung at her, but she blocked it. She knows the way I get. If I
would’ve been in her house, she would’ve not done it. I would’ve smacked
her flat. [slamming his fist loudly into his palm]

I should’ve just gone and kicked her in the face. She’s just a fuckin’,
stupid, crazy old bitch that needs some fuckin’ psychiatric help.

Caesar: [looking up from the cocaine he was sniffing] What about her
gun?

Primo: [drinking] I thought about it, so once I seen her, I try to just
play her close, ’Cause I know she has to reach for it. Once I see her
reach for it, I just smack her on the head. Unless she’s faster than me,
then she would just shoot me once, and then I’ll get her, and report the
bitch.

Contradictory Contexts for Women’s Struggles

When I went to Puerto Rico several months later, I made a point of
visiting the picturesque fishing village of Isabela from whence Candy’s
parents had emigrated. Candy’s public, almost schizophrenic agony of
behaving like a macho street dealer, while at the same time still
wanting to bear twelve children, made more sense to me as I sat in
Isabela’s central plaza, watching teenagers flirt coyly under
century-old trees. It is obvious that gender relations have undergone a
profound transformation in rural, and small-town, Puerto Rico as well.¹³
Had Candy’s father remained in his grandfather’s shack, and continued
juggling subsistence farming with artisanal fishing, Candy might have
grown up to work for minimum wage at one of the garment or
pharmaceutical factories located on the periphery of Isabela. At sunset,
framed by immaculately white-washed Spanish colonial architecture, and a
spectacular vista of the Caribbean, she would have had to encounter the
inevitable contradictions of negotiating new women’s rights within the
oppressive confines of a changing, formerly jíbaro, community. There is
no reason to believe that the complicated process of contesting male
domination in public and at home would have proceeded smoothly for Candy
in this small-town, patriarchal context. Immigration, rapid capitalist
development, and manufacturing-to-service restructuring have obviously
not invented sexism, and they cannot explain the existence of domestic
violence in a reductionist manner. Nevertheless, in her
seventeenth-floor New York City Housing Authority project apartment and,
even more intensely while she sells crack in front of Ray’s Social Club,
Candy’s problems are compounded by the hostile migration experience and
the polarized violence of the underground economy. In either setting,
Candy is probably the kind of charismatic person who would have forged a
new space for herself in public. She is determined “to get some of
mine’s.” The problem is that her arena for action, fulfillment, and
economic advancement is limited to El Barrio’s street world. The
objective forces that impinge on her struggle for new public rights are
rendering her public autonomy excruciatingly painful. Furthermore, as
the heading for this chapter’s section “Inverting Patriarchy”
underscores, Candy’s struggle for autonomy and rights have been defined
by patriarchal parameters. When she finally broke away from her
husband’s abuse, she went on to take pride in making money as a street
dealer, in having a kept lover, in bragging about her sexual prowess in
public, and in requiring her lover to have sex with her upon demand, and
so on.

The issue of what kind of liberation, emancipation, or autonomy is being
carved out by women on El Barrio’s streets raises a complicated question
within larger feminist debates over who defines the meaning of women’s
rights, and what do women’s rights mean in the context of class and
racial oppression. The new public autonomy that Puerto Rican women have
gained over the past few generations is largely defined around liberal,
middle-class standards of individual freedom rather than of group
solidarity, collective empowerment, or even a countering of patriarchal
domination. This was brought home to me by Primo’s mother’s
dissatisfaction with her accomplishments as a single mother in New York
City. Her structural oppression as a resident of El Barrio is
undeniable. She is economically exploited as an off-the-books seamstress
working at home for a garment subcontractor, and she is socially
marginalized in a segregated inner-city housing project. When she leaves
her immediate neighborhood, she is often subject to racial hostility,
and she always has to struggle with a foreign language that she was
never been able to learn.

At the same time, in New York Primo’s mother has successfully asserted
herself as an independent woman in ways that would have been impossible
in her natal community, where she had also been economically exploited
but where she had not been as subject to a cultural—ideological assault
on her ethnic dignity: (1) She left home to come to New York City alone
at the age of seventeen; (2) she chose her own husband; (3) she
separated from her husband when he proved to be alcoholic and abusive;
(4) she raised three daughters and a son by herself in an autonomous
household; (5) she picked her own lovers as an adult; (6) she worked
full time most of her life; (7) she had complete personal control of her
income; and so forth. Primo’s mother, however, is dissatisfied with the
autonomy she “gained” by uprooting herself to New York. Part of that
dissatisfaction is related to the individual isolation that pervades
much of the U.S. urban experience. It also stems from being forced to
define rights and accomplishments in individualistic terms. She longs
for the women/family/community solidarity of her hometown plantation
village in Puerto Rico. Even though her memories are bound to be highly
idealized in retrospect, they offer an interesting critique, in the
context of her working-class, inner-city social marginalization, of the
limits to a middle-class, Anglo definition of empowerment that hinges on
individual autonomy and upward mobility.¹⁴

Primo’s mother: [in Spanish] In those days in Puerto Rico when a woman
gave birth to a child, your neighbor was right there with you; and the
midwife was there too. And they all helped you.

For a whole week they brought you soup; they brought you chicken soup,
and other things. But now, nothing! No way! No one will bring you
chicken soup.

I have given birth to four children in New York, and I’ve never even
eaten anybody’s chicken soup. Right the same day that I came out of the
hospital, I had to cook my own food. And who came here to help me?
Nobody! I had to put the baby down and cook for myself.

In those days, it wasn’t like that. There was a lot of respect in those
days.

Confronting the State: Forging Single Motherhood on Welfare

As part of this book’s argument about how historical political economy
processes are internalized in the lives of vulnerable individuals, this
chapter has focused thus far on the individual emotional experience of
the larger, long-term gender revolution. It is important also to examine
the role of the state and public policy. The violent emotional uproars
in Candy’s life might be categorized as pathological, but they also need
to be understood in the specific institutional and state-imposed context
that mediates daily survival among the inner-city poor. In the United
States, the government agencies that are supposed to be ameliorating, or
at least regulating, the difficulties faced by poor immigrants and their
children are, in fact, openly hostile to the plight of their “clients.”
The hostility is reciprocated. Policymakers and the press bemoan what
they call the dependency of the poor. As the historian Michael Katz and
many others have noted, U.S. policy toward the poor has always been
obsessed with distinguishing the “worthy” from the “unworthy” poor, and
of blaming individuals for their failings. More recently, conservatives
have blamed the paternalistic welfare state for promoting passivity and
dependency among the poor.¹⁵ The perspective afforded to me from the
bottom up – that is to say, from the family members of the dealers in
Ray’s network – was not one of passivity, or even of demobilization. On
the contrary, most of the wives, mothers, grandmothers, and lovers of
the crack dealers were aggressively struggling with the system.

Once again, Candy offers a good example of how mothers actively have to
manipulate hostile government agencies in order to keep their children
and themselves sheltered, fed, and out of prison. The Welfare Department
and the penal system have been the most salient state institutions
affecting the stability of her family. To fulfill what she saw as her
obligation to nurture her children, she was forced to walk a tightrope
between selling drugs, collecting welfare, and working at legal jobs.
She even maintained a second, “clean” social security number to register
her legal earnings with the Internal Revenue Service without
jeopardizing her welfare and medicaid entitlements.¹⁶

During all the years I was friends with Candy, she was almost always in
open conflict with the New York City Welfare Department. Much of the
problem revolved around their policy of routinely “churning the rolls,”
that is, recertifying the eligibility of their clients every six months
and occasionally altering the bureaucratic logistics involved in the
process. The local Welfare Department claims this unwieldy mechanism
discourages fraud and is needed to satisfy frequently changing federal
matching-fund requirements for accurate documentation. The net effect,
however, is that some 10 to 15 percent of all New York City welfare
recipients are routinely terminated each year for failing to present
appropriate documentation such as “proof of address,” or social security
cards.¹⁷ When an individual client is suspected of fraud, as might have
been the case for Candy, the recertification process can be enforced
with especially zealous bureaucratic rigor.

The particularly hostile institutional quagmire of state-mandated social
services in the United States conjugates with personal emotional crises
in the daily life of the poor. This was certainly true for Candy’s
household. For example, shortly after the incarceration of her husband
Felix and during the period before she sold drugs for Ray and fell in
love with Primo, Candy had been negotiating unsuccessfully with the
Welfare Department to have her biweekly check augmented to reflect the
births of her last two daughters.

Candy: A mix-up happened with my social security numbers, so they
penalized me for five months. See, at my face-to-face – that’s
recertification every three months, when you have to go down to the
office and bring proof that your kids are in school; that your kids are
on the housing list – you know what I mean – proof that you’re still
illegible for public assistance. They claimed I didn’t give them all the
information on my daughter, and my baby.

Can you believe it? They wanted my baby’s social security card. I don’t
know why welfare hassles you so much for the social security card of a
two-year-old little girl, when a two-year-old little girl can’t even
work! I don’t understand where social security cards come into any of
this, because a kid cannot work.

You know what I mean? And besides you don’t go, and take the kid to the
Social Security Department, and say, “Here, give him a social security
card.” You go by yourself. And how do they know if you really got that
kid? Because you could show any person’s birth certificate, and get a
fake card.

But you know, now they changed the rule again. They don’t ask you for
your kid’s social security no more today when you go down to
face-to-face for recertification. Because that fucking awful bitch, I
took her to court, and I won it. All they said in court was [imitating a
bureaucrat’s nagging voice], “Oh we don’t need social securities no
more.” She had to give me all my money back; this was from May of last
year until January.

The court ruling in Candy’s favor, with nine months of back pay, came
too late. By that time, she was already selling crack and cocaine full
time for Ray, and she was deeply immersed in a “successful” dealer
lifestyle, with Primo as her lover. When she missed another
recertification and, once again, was partially dropped from the welfare
rolls, she barely noticed it as she was receiving a steady income
working for Ray. Several months later, after breaking up with Primo,
Candy finally came to the realization that she was destroying herself
and her family through her drug dealing. She reapplied for welfare in an
attempt to quit dealing. Hoping to reestablish a stable household for
her children, Candy demanded her rights from the Welfare Department. Her
aggressive, streetwise single-mother persona, however, did not inspire
credibility at the welfare office. This occurred during the same months
when Candy was obscenely confronting Primo and his new girlfriend in her
project courtyard. By the time I tape-recorded this conversation, Candy
and Primo had reestablished a supportive, platonic friendship:

Candy: Let me tell you something about welfare. The last time I
reapplied was when I was working for Ray, I had trouble getting all of
us back on welfare.

They told me, “How could you survive so many months without welfare?”
That was because I was drug dealing. So I didn’t really need welfare.

Now I’m not even drug dealing. I stopped selling because I want a better
future for my life and my kids.

I had a disrespectful case worker at Welfare. I was so frustrated,
because I had so many problems. I wanted to stop working for Ray, and my
nerves were a little messed up; and this bitch in the Welfare Office was
telling me, “Oh, umh . . . [feigning a bureaucratic tone] you called in
and said to take you, and your daughter off the budget.”

I said, [incredulous] “I called in to tell you! To take me! Off the
budget? How the hell am I going to call in, if I’m the mother of my
kids?”

So I got mad [calmly], and I took the case records and I broke them. So
when I took my case record and broke it, she called the supervisor to
come in, and then she had to hold me.

So when she was holding me, I hit her. [smiling abruptly and pausing for
effect]

Philippe: Come on; tell us what happened.

Candy: [shrugging her shoulders, expressionless] They closed my case.

Candy’s deadpan portrayal of the hostile bureaucratic logic of welfare
made Primo and me burst out laughing. I actually fell off the car hood
we were leaning on in front of the Game Room, when Candy redoubled our
mirth by imitating the motions and matter-of-fact tone of a smug welfare
clerk snapping shut a file and declaring, “Case closed! Next!” Just as
we were catching our breath to sip from our 16-ounce cans of malt
liquor, Candy sent us laughing back over the car hood choking on
mouthfuls of beer, by continuing her bureaucratic saga still in a
deadpan voice:

Then they reopened it. [finally breaking her deadpan expression and
joining our laughter] You see, they had me for . . . a, uh, a . . . what
did they call it? Oh yeah, they had me for “assaulting a case worker.”

Because I’m not going to lie, this was like around Thanksgiving time,
and I called her up on the day before Thanksgiving, and I say, “Thank
you for my Thanksgiving dinner, I hope you have a beeeautiful one.”
[bitter chuckle]

Then for Christmas, [agitatedly] I call up again. I say, “I hope you
have a lousy Christmas.”

Then . . . then I threatened her . . . I’m not going to lie. [laughing
alone] I told her, “I’m going to go with a gun, and blow your head off.”
[nervous chuckles from Primo and me]

You see I was like . . . my nerves . . . just couldn’t take it anymore.
I don’t have a husband who supports me; my kids depend on my income
alone. Felix was in jail at the time. And I mean even if he wasn’t in
jail, I can’t depend on him [piercingly at Primo]; you know what I mean?

So it was like, Christmas was there, and it was gonna be my first lousy
Christmas. So I got mad, and I call my old case worker, and I said, “I’m
going to go over to welfare, and I’m going to shoot your head off; so
you had better think about it.”

So the supervisor called me, and asked, “Is that what you said, that
you’re going to shoot her?”

I say, “Yeah, ’Cause she got me mad.”

Philippe: Were you really gonna shoot her?

Candy: I didn’t have a gun yet, but I was looking for one. I was in the
range to do it. I was in a very bad way.

I mean, when it comes to your kid . . . If I don’t eat, fine, okay, but
I’m not going to let my kids starve, and they didn’t, because I was
supporting my own self, with my own money. Because I was working at the
Club at that time. I wasn’t even on welfare, but we were eating.¹⁸

Six Uzi shots burst from the project courtyard behind us. Candy rolled
her eyes knowingly and shook her head disapprovingly. “Ohhh, Carlos is
getting wild. I have to talk to him.” She was referring to the leader of
a group of youths that sold crack in her stairwell. They were feuding
with another group of drug-dealing teenagers, from another stairwell in
the same housing project. Occasionally, for a fee, she allowed Carlos
into her kitchen to “cook” the crack that his boys hawked downstairs for
three dollars a vial.¹⁹

The Internalization of Institutional Constraints

Candy’s next personal—institutional crisis landed her in jail. It was
precipitated by her husband Felix’s release from prison on weekends
through a work release program. Concretely, this meant that Primo and I
had to stop hanging out publicly with Candy in front of the Game Room,
out of “respect” for – or, rather, out of fear of – Felix. Candy had
filed divorce papers and had even gone to court to obtain a restraining
order against her husband – but she could not bring herself to enforce
it. Every Friday and Saturday night, carefully avoiding any cocaine,
marijuana, or opiates because of the routine urine testing upon his
return to prison, Felix would arrive at Candy’s project apartment,
furiously drunk. Bursting into tears, he would demand the right to see
his children. Hugging them, he would then collapse asleep in a pile with
them, on Candy’s king-size bed where the entire family usually slept.

The emotional crisis generated by Candy’s inability to assert her legal
right to single motherhood destabilized Candy’s fragile household
economy. Abraham, the adopted grandfather whose monthly social security
check augmented Candy’s insufficient biweekly welfare payments, moved to
another adopted daughter’s house to avoid the arrevolús [uproars] of
Felix’s weekend homecomings. My tape recordings from the period reveal
how depressed Candy was at the time. She was willing to accept a job,
any job, so long as it was just above minimum wage.

Candy: You know, Felipe, I don’t feel too great . . . I feel when it
rains, it rains . . . I mean, it pours. But it’ll get better. yeah, I
failed the GED by three points last week. I could go again, but I have
too many problems to put my mind to it . . . I don’t have my mind ready
for it.

I got to get a job first . . . that’s my main thing . . . find a job . .
. anything, any kind of job that pays more than the minimum wage . . .
that pays four to five dollars bottom.

I’m supposed to find a job this week, but I just don’t know what
happened, see, I . . . I . . . I was supposed to buy a job – you see you
can just buy a job from these employment places. But they didn’t find me
one.

Candy’s situation was exacerbated by the churning she was, once again,
facing at the hands of the welfare bureaucracy.

You see, Abraham was helping me with my financial problem. But they took
him away from me.

I don’t really get enough welfare. I don’t get welfare for me and the
baby, because of a mix-up with the social security papers. Welfare was
only giving me a hundred and six dollars every two weeks, which comes
out to fifty-three dollars a week for five people. You see, they were
really only giving me for three people, even though there’s five of us.
They don’t give me for me, or the baby.

And I can’t get a job in the daytime ’Cause of the baby. I’m not gonna
lie; let me just say that it is hard for me to get a job.

Felipe, I’m not going to lie to you, but do you know what it is to
survive with five of us in the household on only a hundred and six
dollars? Think about it; that’s fifty-three dollars a week. You know
what fifty-three dollars a week is? That ain’t nothing. Take my son,
Junior, he’s heavyset, he can eat fifty-three dollars in one day!

But I’m living on that, with only the help of my mother, who only gets
some cheap-ass money off of SSI. But she helps me. She collects cans
every day, makes twenty dollars a day picking in the garbage; and then
she comes to me and says, “Candy, here’s five or ten dollars for you.”

But my mother is an asthmatic, I don’t think she’s got that much to
live. But that lady goes out at six in the morning till eleven at night,
collecting cans to help me out.

But it’s hard. I don’t have a lover; I don’t have a husband; I don’t
have nobody giving me money. It’s like me, myself, and I. And to support
four kids, it’s hard.

The Department of Social Security makes you go through the worst
changes. You can’t be honest with them. It doesn’t pay to be honest.
’Cause I have the right for my kids.

You gotta realize one thing, Felipe, you gotta look at a parent who’s
like me, who’s not into drugs; love their kids like babies; have them in
Catholic school; want the best for them – what we do, sometimes, they
[pointing] make us do.

A few days after this conversation Candy was arrested. She had accepted
a daytime job at a badly managed cocaine-copping corner.

So I felt, like I was going crazy, and that’s when I went back into drug
dealing. But I didn’t want to, because I don’t like ruining my record
for nobody.

I went to Ray, and I told him: “Ray, they took Abraham, and I need a
better job, at least twice a week. I don’t care what you have me do, but
I need it at least twice a week. I need to get paid something for my
kids, like a hundred fifty dollars.”

And Ray said, “I don’t mind taking you back; but wait till I open my
place again, ’Cause we are going to open up the Game Room again. Wait
till it’s ready, and I’ll put you to work there on days [the day shift].
But right now I don’t have anything.

But I was in need. I was hurtin’ so I got a job instead selling
twenty-fives [$25 packets] of coke for Marvin. It’s only five hours a
day, and he pays seventy-five dollars a week – I mean it’s seventy-five
dollars a day. I mean that is money, you know. And all I had to do, was
just stand there, ’Cause I was just a lookout.

You see it was Welfare’s fault, because Welfare was penalizing me. As a
matter of fact, today it’s July nineteenth and they’re still penalizing
me for that social security paper.

Within hours of hitting the streets as part of a two-person team selling
cocaine on 105th Street and Lexington Avenue, Candy was arrested for
making a hand-to-hand sale to a member of New York City’s Tactical
Narcotics Team.

Candy: It was stupid hot on 105th, where we were working. It was stupid
that I got busted, because Marvin – he’s the owner of the spot – had
told us not to sell anymore, because it was stupid hot; but there were
three customers in front of the building, and so Chino said, “Okay, do
me a favor, Candy. Get the money from those last three customers; I’m
going to go upstairs and get the shit, and then we’ll close down.”

So I did it; and the last one I got money from, was the fucking cop. It
was a black guy. I knew the two ladies in front of him, but I didn’t
know him. I couldn’t tell that he was a cop. He looked like any old
street guy. So after I served the two ladies, that’s when the cops
grabbed me.

When they put their hands on me, I said, “Get the fuck off me!” [jabbing
her elbows backward into an imaginary assailant]. Because I thought it
was like a guy getting stupid . . . And that’s when the cop grabbed me
by my hair. He said, “Where’s the bundle” And he said, “Let me see
what’s in your bag.” So I gave him my bag. They even took my own
personal money.

I said, oh shit! And that’s when they busted this guy [Chino], and they
took his keys, and they checked all the mailboxes, and that’s where they
found the money. Because the money the cop had given to me, it was
marked money – twenty-five dollars – and they found it there in the
mailbox. He had only bought one bag of coke.

Okay, after they put the cuffs on me, they put me in a van with a whole
bunch of other men. Then they drove us to other blocks to pick up all
the other people they were busting. They were taking up, like, the
addicts. As a matter of fact, the only other female with me in the van,
she was pregnant, and she was a junkie. Once the van was full, they took
us to the 137th Street police station.

As if to mark Candy’s bad luck with poetic symbolism, she had been in
the traditional Puerto Rican act of blessing one of Ray’s babies when
the narcotics agents grabbed her. We learned this from the infant’s
mother, Gigi, a former girlfriend of Ray’s.

Gigi: Candy actually got busted on Ninety-ninth Street. Yeah, I saw it
all on Second [Avenue]. She went to say hi to Ray Junior. I had him with
me in his stroller.

Look, she was like this [bending over to hug an imaginary infant], ”Ay
mi hijo, qué lindo! God bless him.” [Oh my precious boy, how cute!]

Right then, the DT’s [detectives] grabbed her by her arms, and
handcuffed her, and threw her in the van.

See, I was right here; she got pulled right there [making hand motions];
I bugged the fuck out.

Caesar, who was still smarting from having been pushed onto his rear in
the middle of the street in front of the Game Room by Candy’s daughter
Tabatha, gloated over the fact that, as a lookout, Candy should not have
been taking the risk of “serving” customers. He took professional pride
in ridiculing her because he held the same position of lookout at the
Game Room under Primo’s management:

Caesar: She’s a convict; she’s a convict, the stupid bitch. Any
Joe-Doe-hole with a vibrator on high speed could tell you that
Ninety-ninth is stupid hot. It’s too close to Caucasian land. You could
fry an egg on the sidewalk where they was selling.

That’s a stupid ho’. I’ve never seen such a stupid bruta [jerk].

And she’s presenta’o [pushy], because she had to put her fucking nose in
the business, and had to know where the stash was. That bitch wasn’t
supposed to be making no hand-to-hand sales; she was a fucking lookout.

But no! Not Candy! She had to get in on the action.

In subsequent weeks, while waiting in the limbo of court hearings and
lawyers’ negotiations, Candy silenced our predatory gossiping over her
arrest with a firm and painful “Fuck you! I did it for my kids. Can’t
you understand? I got a class B felony for my kids.” Indeed, her
children’s welfare had been Candy’s primary concern through the
nightmare of her arrest and during her confinement before posting bail:

Candy: When they put handcuffs on me, and put me in their car with the
pregnant girl, the junkie, I was worried because I was thinking, “God,
my kids won’t know I’m in jail. What if somebody knows? What if someone
saw me that I went into jail? And what if they say, “This is the chance
to rob Candy’s house"? And maybe they’ll try to kill my kids; rob the
house . . . You know what I mean? Abuse my daughters. You know, all
these crazy things runs through your head – tú sabes [you know], Felipe.

And I couldn’t say anything, because I figured if the cops saw that my
kids were minors, they would try to take my kids away. Because they even
asked me when they had me in the van; they asked me, “You have any
kids?” I said, “Yeah.” He say, “What are the ages?” So I thought fast,
and I say, “My oldest is twenty.” And he say, “Your kids are all right.”

When in reality, my oldest at home is fifteen, and my youngest is two.

But thanks God that I got a sister-in-law. Once she found out, you know,
she, right away, went and took all my kids to her house; and she send
them to school, you know what I mean? She took really good care of them.

In contrast to her sister-in-law’s solidarity, Candy’s employer failed
to stand by his workers:

Candy: It’s fucked up, because the people that I’m with, the people I’m
working for, they didn’t bail me out. Word up! That is messed up. I
mean, I was actually there, in jail, because of them. And Chino didn’t
even get bailed out, and he’s been with them for over two years . . . I
couldn’t believe that. And I heard Chino was the best seller on that
block. I mean, Chino made them stupid money, good money.

His bail was only two thousand dollars, and they say they can’t bail him
out! What happens with his wife and his kids?

I mean, I’d be ready to do the time if my people backed me up. If they
bailed me out; got me a lawyer; and then the judge sentences me. But if
they just leave me there! Hell! I’m not a squealer, but I would start
giving up their names.

I mean, if you don’t take me out, then we’re all going in, ’Cause the DA
gives you a chance. He tells you, “If you give us a bigger person, we’ll
make a deal with you.” So if the people I work for were to leave me
rotting in there . . . like they’re doing with Chino right now . . . I
swear to God, I’d call them up and say, “This is the way it is, let me
tell you something, I see you don’t give a shit about me, or my kids,
then I don’t need to care about you.” And the first name I’d give the DA
is Marvin’s. Then from Marvin I’d go all the way down.

Then I’d turn to the judge, “Okay, now give me the one-to-three [years],
judge.” The only reason, I didn’t do that to them this time, is because
I just started working for them. So I didn’t give a fuck.

Ray posted Candy’s $2,000 bail.

Candy: So when I got busted working for that other guy [Marvin], I
didn’t even tell nobody to tell Ray to bail me out, because that wasn’t
his shit I was busted for. I can’t tell him to do that favor for me. I
didn’t get busted when I was working for him.

But then, when I saw my brother in court, he told me, “Ray told me to
come every day, ’Cause whatever amount it is, he is gonna pay.”

Ray did it out of the goodness of his own heart.

The ordeal proved to be a forum for Candy’s extended family and friends
to express their love and solidarity for her:²⁰

Candy: When I came out of jail, they had cooked up beans and pork chops
in my house.

But when you come out, you don’t come out with an appetite, and I
couldn’t eat. My friend Gladys came over, and they all went out and
brought me these chicken wings, because you see, they know that I used
to love eating chicken wings. But I couldn’t even eat that.

It took me, like, a couple of days for me to, like, really eat normally
again. Because I used to, like, have this feeling in my stomach. The
same with washing; even if I took a bath and everything, I used to still
have, like, a smell in my nose, like it stuck there; it was the smell of
that cell. I used to like, yeah, feel like, I was going to throw up.

Mothers in Jail

In the anxious months before Candy’s felony status was finally annulled
by a liberal judge, Primo and I spent many evenings listening to her war
stories from jail. Her accounts of resistance and aggression among women
in the bullpen evoked, on a personal level, the structural tensions
expressed in the spiraling female crime statistics in the United States.
The crisis of overcrowding in the penal system provides a snapshot of
the underside of the gender revolution in street culture. Concretely,
the traditional male space of the county jail is being “invaded” by
women, who represent the fastest-growing cohort among felons in the
United States.²¹ I could sense this tension during our tape-recording
sessions, by the way Primo repeatedly interrupted Candy in an almost
juvenile, obnoxious manner. It was as if he was jealous that a woman
could be considered an expert on such a male subject.

Candy: Jail is no place for a woman; it’s only for trash and garbage.
It’s a place where no clean woman belongs; a place nobody wants to be
in. Word up!

They treat you like everybody else. Even if you’re innocent, they treat
you like you’re guilty, without even being proven guilty. It’s for women
that deserve to be there.

I mean the people in there with you, that you have to deal with, they so
disgustin’. They have prostitutes in there; they have addicts; they have
gay people.

Forget it! Nothing to brush your teeth; no soap to wash yourself all
over. And I couldn’t eat nothing, because I was upset.

They served baloney and cheese. It was too disgusting.

Primo: Not for me boy! I ate all that shit up – every crumb. I ain’t
gonna stay hungry.

Candy: Plus the guys was whistling and all that. Because to get to my
cell they had to take me through the men’s part of the jail first. And
when they was taking my pictures, one of the guys come out and say,
“What’s your husband going to say about all this?”

So I come out and say, “Hey, Fuck you! Shit on your mother!” You know,
like I really didn’t pay no mind to him . . . “Fuck you!”

So they took us back upstairs, and the men was whistling.

Primo: [echoing jeers with his hands muffling his mouth] What is your
husband going to say now? Bitch!

Candy: [ignoring Primo] Then, in the cell, there was this gay girl who
came up to me – a lesbian – and says [exaggerating the rasp in her
voice], “You wanna massage.”

[fiercely] “I don’t want shit from nobody in this damn place!” And she
went back to her woman; she was rubbing herself all over her woman.

Then this other black girl came in and she says, “Move over, I wanna
sleep.”

I say back to her, “What you want me to do? What in the fuck you want
from me? I was here first.”

Then this other lady, she was like a pig; she had her hair all disgusted
and wild. I told her, “Don’t even think of sitting next to me. I don’t
want no bugs in my hair.”

Primo: [grinning] You was bummed, hunh?

Candy: And all we had to cope with the people that was throwing up, was
one garbage can.

There’s the prostitutes who don’t even wear panties, and they be with
their feet up and open. The gay people there, they be hugging and
kissing to their woman like they were in a private room and nobody’s
looking at them. They don’t care. It stinks.

Primo: [hissing in the background] Felt like a square cement block
that’s been pissed on – that’s been vomited on.

Candy: It’s a place where . . . let me tell you something, an honest
decent person wants to commit suicide, because that’s what I did. You
see, I use underwire bras, right? So I think, if its metal, I could cut
my veins, right? But after I break into the bra [making the motions], I
see that it was plastic, awww . . .

Primo: You got jerked; you couldn’t kill yourself.

Candy: I figure if I bleedin’ or something, they take me outta here, and
put me in a hospital that’s cleaner; you know, more decent place; better
food, that type of thing.

Primo: Couldn’t handle it, hunh?

Candy: Then by the last day I was there, the guards still wasn’t calling
my name, and I mean people was coming in and out, and I was like, “What
about me? Am I gonna stay here forever?” [gunshots]

Philippe: Was that firecrackers?

Candy: Sounds like an Uzi to me.

Primo: Nahh, that’s a nine-millimeter.

Candy: So, I thought they had lost my records, or something like that.

I was going to take that cell bar and start screaming, “Let me out of
here!” I was like going crazy.

Primo: I’m tellin’ you Felipe, people bug out in there.

Candy: Jail is crazy. The bullpen is wild. A place I wouldn’t recommend
to anybody.

But you know Felipe, that would be a beautiful place for you to
interview people. Because there was girls there, who they would actually
say, what they used to do. And they used to say it so foul.

Like this one con artist lady . . .

Just as Candy began describing con artist techniques, Primo interrupted
with his own accounts of stories he had also heard in jail. My tape
recording became an inaudible muddle of competing voices telling
different horrific street-crime stories. Surprised by Primo’s
unwillingness to let Candy continue her account of jail in peace, I
tried to shut him out of the conversation by changing the subject
completely and asking Candy how her baby was doing. This sent her
sprinting towards her project building, as she suddenly remembered that
her two-and-a-half-year-old was all alone, in her seventeenth-floor
apartment.

Over the next few months, Primo’s irritation with Candy became even more
pronounced as the charisma with which she was able to manipulate the
lawyers and judges assigned to her case began to bear fruit. She had her
mental health files from Metropolitan Hospital subpoenaed to document
her twenty-year history of battery, attempted suicide, and motherhood.
The judge who finally presided over the resolution of her case not only
dismissed all felony charges, but even arranged for the state to pay for
Candy’s enrollment in a job training program for nurse’s aides.

Candy’s triumph in court suffered several false starts, however. At her
first hearing, the judge almost ruled Candy to be in contempt of court
because of her clothing. It was a clash over their different class and
cultural interpretations of how a contrite mother should dress in a
formal public setting. Candy had thought she was faithfully following
her lawyer’s advice of wearing “a good, new suit” on her first court
date, and she had arrived in a skintight, blood-red jumpsuit. In fact,
she had borrowed the money to buy the suit especially for the occasion.
The judge, a conservative, elderly white woman nearing the end of her
career, thought that the thirty-four-year-old Puerto Rican woman, with
badly dyed blond hair, dressed for court in a bright red teenager’s
outfit, was purposefully provoking her. Worse yet, this obviously
streetwise defendant with a rasping voice, and a scar down her cheek,
was demanding clemency, claiming to be the traumatized battered mother
of five vulnerable children.

Candy, of course, had thought she was showing respect to the judge by
“dressing sharp,” and her feelings were hurt. She immediately sexualized
the judge’s remonstrations, interpreting them to be the jealous
expression of an older, less attractive woman.

Candy: So my first judge, she didn’t consider me with respect, because
of the way I was dressed.

Well, fuck her! I didn’t consider her, because of the way she was
dressed. If she doesn’t like my clothes, well, why doesn’t she give me
some money to buy some clothes.

No matter what she gives me, I’ll look good in it. I’ll look better than
her, ’Cause no matter what I wear I look good.

I got five kids to think about; I can’t think about buying special
outfits for the judge.

I tell you, that judge, she gots problems; she’s an old bag. Her husband
must be miserable with that bitch. If I had a woman like that, every day
. . . oouf [feigning a nasal Anglo accent] “I don’t like your underwears
. . . you can’t go to bed with me . . . I don’t like your pajamas . . .
I don’t like your sex.”

The whole system itself, it stinks. I tell you something, you’re not
going to see me in that court system again. If I kill somebody, I’m
going to cut out – disappear. Word up! I’ll dye my hair. Let me tell
you, this is the last time.

I gotta get myself a better lawyer. I gotta talk to Ray about this. He’s
got a great lawyer who don’t give up. He keeps your case out for years.
Look at Luis and Ray, they prior felonies like crazy, and they still
walking.

Primo: Yeah, but if you do the crime, you gotta be ready to do the time.

Look, Candy, I pleaded guilty. [referring to his first arrest a year
earlier]. Check this out . . . I did the fucking venta [sale]. I fucked
up. Right? A felony, five years probation.

If I fuck up, and do the same thing one more time, I get the maximum.

Candy: Primo, don’t you understand? I can’t afford a felony, I’m not
going to plead a felony. I want a misdemeanor. I don’t want to have a
class C felony on my records. I have to get me a class A lawyer, and
have my case dismissed.

Primo: When I got busted, I didn’t fight the fucking case; I was ready
to do the time.

Candy: If I plead a felony, I can’t sue this guy [Felix] for harassing
me. And I got the papers all ready. I just gotta get someone to serve
them.

Primo: I didn’t have a fuckin’ lawyer. [aggressively] Remember? I was
working for your husband, but nobody got me no money for a lawyer, and I
didn’t spoke to nobody; nobody got no money.

Plus I’m guilty; I did the fucking thing.

Candy: You people get attitudes. I don’t like that. Break the fuck out.

We had been escorting Candy home to her project apartment and we were in
her seventeenth-floor hallway. She grabbed Primo by the shoulders and
pushed him into the open elevator. I quickly jumped in after him but,
just as the elevator was closing, Candy jammed a leg through the almost
shut doors. Grabbing Primo’s waist in an affectionate hug she whispered:

Primo, you never believe me when I tell you, you’re the only true love I
have. Give me a hug. If you want to come back at five in the morning,
it’s fine with me.

I tried to look away politely, but all I could find to stare at were
three spent crack vials floating in the puddle of urine that almost
inevitably adorns the corners of New York City Housing Authority
elevators in El Barrio at 2:00 a.m. on Saturday nights. Instead, I
closed my eyes in denial and imagined that the sound of their kiss was
really the distant rumblings from out of a jíbaro time warp announcing a
future struggle for the emancipation of women.

7 FAMILIES AND CHILDREN IN PAIN

You know what’s wrong with these girls nowadays? They only think of
themselves. They only think of their sexual pleasures, their fun and
their happiness. But they don’t think of their kids first.

Candy

Developmental psychologists and psychiatrists are generally considered
to be the “experts” on early childhood socialization and family
violence. Most of their large-scale, multimillion-dollar,
cross-generational epidemiological surveys of “children at risk”
conclude that the bulk of an adult’s character is determined in infancy.
Their statistical studies demonstrate that most battered children are
virtually irremediable by the ages of six to eight. Furthermore, they
assure us that a child does not have to be the object of physical
violence to be emotionally scarred for life. Simply witnessing violence
can induce long-term trauma.¹

In other words, according to the standard psychological theories of
early childhood socialization, most people living in El Barrio, and
certainly everyone in Ray’s network and the crackhouses I frequented,
might be dismissed as antisocial sociopaths because of their early
childhood socialization experiences. Certainly, the
gun-and-knife-wielding, knockdown fights between Candy and Primo that
unfolded in front of twenty-year-old Tabatha, fourteen-year-old Junior,
ten-year-old Jackie, four-year-old Mina, and one-year-old Lillian must
have inflicted profound emotional scars. But once again, an
individualistic, psychological-determinist approach misses the larger
political economic and cultural context. It ignores historical processes
and the effects of unequal power relations around class, ethnic, or
gender and sexual categories. Developmental psychologists tend to focus
only on the epiphenomenon of individual neuroses. Their data and
analytic tools are also limited by the cultural and class biases of
their survey methods. White middle-class families are overrepresented in
their epidemiological samples because of the very logistics of
collecting reliable statistics.

The restructuring of New York City’s economy and the history of Puerto
Rican immigration have profoundly changed the ways East Harlem families
are organized. For many of the poorer households these changes have been
disruptive, and children, of course, are the ultimate casualties when
households disintegrate. The problem is integrally related to the
contradictory shifts in gender power relations discussed in Chapter 6.
Motherhood roles have remained fixed, while women’s rights and the
structure of the traditional family have undergone profound, long-term
transformations. Mothers, especially heading single-parent households,
are still saddled with the exclusive responsibility for nurturing their
children, even though they may no longer be willing to sacrifice
unconditionally their individual freedom for their progeny. This results
in a parenting vacuum when mothers take to the streets. It expresses
itself statistically in the dramatic increase in child neglect and
abuse, and in poisoned fetuses over the past generation.² By default,
street culture becomes a more important socializing force when
fragmented families force children to take refuge in the streets.

Politicians, the press, and the general public in the United States
interpret the visible problems faced by poor urban children as evidence
of “a crisis in family values.” Structural problems of persistent
poverty and segregation, as well as the more complex issues of changing
gender power relations are rarely addressed in public discussion. The
most immediately self-evident policy interventions, such as offering
affordable, developmentally appropriate day care for the children of
overwhelmed or addicted mothers, are not even part of most policy
debates. Similarly, effective drug treatment facilities, or meaningful
job training and employment referral services, remain off-limits to
women who live in poverty.

Street Culture’s Children

Children have always faced difficult lives in East Harlem. The
neighborhood has always been a poor, segregated home for first- and
second-generation immigrants. As the historical chapter documents,
academic and social service denunciations of the “worsening” plight of
youth and the exacerbation of violence on the street merge over the past
century into a pastiche of clichés portending imminent doom. In the late
1920s, for example, the Italian priest of the Catholic Church two blocks
down from the Game Room told a graduate student that “the reckless
destructive spirit of youth is getting worse and there is less and less
consideration of property rights. This is due to the want of religion
and the lack of respect for authority.”³

Similarly, in the mid-1950s, a Community Service Society report on the
conditions of the blocks opposite the Game Room complains of children
“feeling unsafe in a fermenting neighborhood.” The authors conclude:

From parents, teachers, Bureau of Attendance and Youth board workers
came the same response: “These children don’t have much of a chance!”

. . . Living constantly in an environment filled with disorder and
destruction . . . provoke[s] these youngsters to acts of aggression. . .
. they strike out in anti-social behavior.⁴

On a personal level, the most stressful dimension of living in El
Barrio’s street scene was witnessing the wholesale destruction of the
children of my friends and neighbors. I lived in the neighborhood long
enough to witness dozens of little girls and boys fall apart as they
passed from childhood to adolescence. I watched energetic, bright-eyed
children get ground up into what the United States calls its underclass.
Within five short years, my little neighbor Gigi metamorphosed from
being an outgoing, cute, eager-to-please eight-year-old who gave me a
construction paper Valentine’s card every year, into becoming a
homeless, pregnant, crack-using thirteen-year-old “teenager.” Meanwhile,
her older brother Hector was transformed from a shy, giggling undersized
twelve-year-old into a juvenile inmate, guilty of “assault with a
dangerous weapon.”⁵

Upon first moving onto the block, I found it heartwarming to see gleeful
children running, jumping, shouting, and laughing in front of my
apartment window at all hours of the day and night. Once again,
ethnographic description of these same blocks from the 1920s applies
almost verbatim to the 1990s:

The cross streets . . . become the chief playgrounds of children. Hordes
of them are seen . . . playing ball, craps, and cards. They become
expert in dodging traffic. . . . During 1927, fifteen children were
killed by traffic accidents principally on Second and Third Avenues.⁶

My early fieldwork notes revel in the warmth of the dozens of
pre-teenage friendships I was able to make within my first few months on
the block:

[May 1985]
I love the way the kids run up to me with excited smiles whenever I come
home. They shower me with hugs, stories, and questions at any hour of
the day or night. Whenever a mother walks by with a newborn it’s
considered normal for me to bend over it and bless it tenderly, “Que
Diós lo bendiga,” even if the mother doesn’t know me. I hope someday
soon I’ll be comfortable enough to pick up these newborns and hug them
like most other people do.⁷

In dissonance with my public celebration of street culture’s
relationship to children was the omnipresent underlying wail of crying
babies that competed with the salsa and rap music pulsing from my
neighbors’ windows.

Two years later, with my own newborn, Emiliano, in my arms generating
countless blessings and constant cooing, I remained convinced that El
Barrio has special energy and love for children. I even learned to
appreciate my local supermarket’s inefficiency and decrepitude, when
every time I walked by on the sidewalk in front, at least three of the
four teenage cashiers ran from their machines to tap on the display
window and to throw kisses and grimaces at my appreciatively giggling
baby. Downtown society’s industrialized Taylorist logic would have long
since obliged the manager to fire those affectionate wannabe mothers.
When I took Emiliano to Anglo-dominated parties downtown, I noticed that
he was disappointed with the adults. He expected a more appreciatively
physical reaction from them. Very few of my white friends and
acquaintances even knew how to hold my baby comfortably; none of them
grabbed him spontaneously out of my arms for a cuddle and a blessing the
way my acquaintances regularly did on the street uptown. In fact, some
of my downtown friends even requested I leave my son at home with a
baby-sitter when they invited me to their homes.

My love affair with street life’s intergenerational affection and
integration began to sour when my son’s first words at sixteen months of
age turned out to be “tops, tops, tops.” I had been trying to penetrate
a new and particularly active crack-copping corner, and had been taking
him along with me to allay the suspicions of the sellers that I might be
an undercover cop. That corner had four competing “spots,” each selling
three-dollar vials. The sellers on duty shouted or hissed at their
prospective clients to advertise their particular brands, delineated by
the color of the plastic stoppers on their vials: “Graytop, graytop,
graytop! Pinktop, pinktop, pinktop! Blacktop,” and so on. A few weeks
later, I found myself in the midst of an angry crowd surrounding two
white police officers who had just killed an African-American man high
on angel dust. It was only when the crowd had begun chanting “Open
season on the black man! Murderers! Murderers!” that I noticed that the
only other whites present were the two “killer cops” frantically
shouting into their walkie-talkies for help.⁸ Emiliano, perched on my
shoulders, caused the tense crowd to burst into laughter by clapping his
hands gleefully in time with the angry chanting.

As a parent, I was learning the lesson faced by all the working mothers
and fathers on my block. Either I had to abandon public space and
double-lock my child inside my cramped tenement apartment and assume a
hostile attitude toward street culture, or I would have to accept the
fact that my child would witness drugs and violence on a daily basis. My
perspective on the future of the children living around me further
soured when Iris, the mother of ten-year-old Angel and eight-year-old
Manny, my two favorite shiny-eyed street friends, fell apart on crack
and became pregnant. My wife and I stopped dropping by their apartment
unannounced after finding them one evening sitting in the dark (because
the electricity bill had not been paid), scraping the last corners of
peanut butter out of an empty jar. Their mother was passed out on the
bed, recovering from last night’s “mission.”

I began organizing biweekly trips for them, and whoever else happened to
be hanging out on the block, to cross New York’s invisible apartheid
barriers to visit museums and other world-renowned bourgeois havens like
the FAO Schwartz toy store and Trump Tower. They loved the Andy Warhol
exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art, and Angel even assured me that the
Frick Museum’s collection of Dutch masters was “not boring at all.” In
contrast, they were not impressed by the Whitney Museum’s “alternative”
multimedia rap/break-dance/graffiti/skateboard extravaganza.

The full force of the racial and class boundaries confining the children
of El Barrio became glaringly clear on these outings. In the museums,
for example, we were usually flanked by guards with hissing
walkie-talkies. Often I was eyed quizzically, as if I might be some kind
of pedophile, parading my prey. Angel was particularly upset at the Joan
Miró exhibit at the Guggenheim when he asked one of the guards – who
himself was Puerto Rican – why he was being followed so closely, and was
told, “to make sure you don’t lift your leg.”

On our way home from the Miró exhibit, I brought Angel and his friends
to my mother’s apartment in the Upper East Side’s Silk Stocking
district, located less than twenty blocks from our tenements.⁹ I was
sobered by Angel’s simple but naive wish, “I’m planning on moving my
mother into a building like this when I grow up too. I wish my mom lived
here.” When he added that “the schools probably be better down here
too,” I pounced on the opportunity to engage him in a discussion of the
structural inadequacies of the education system. His response, however,
focused on the destructive behavior of the victims themselves:

Philippe: What’s the matter? You got mean teachers?

Angel: No, It’s the kids I’m afraid of. They be mugging people in the
hallways.

Later that evening Angel complained to me that his mother’s boyfriend
had broken open his piggy bank and taken the twenty dollars’ worth of
tips he had saved from working as a delivery boy at the supermarket on
our block. He blamed his mother for having provoked her boyfriend into
beating her and robbing the apartment when she invited another man to
visit her in her bedroom. “I keep telling my mother to only have one
boyfriend at a time, but she won’t listen to me.” I was forced to
recognize in these guileless expressions of vulnerability on the part of
the children surrounding me, the brutal dynamic whereby tender victims
internalize the social structures that dominate them, to the point that
they eventually take charge of administering their own mutual
self-destruction. This was even more forcefully portrayed in the
hauntingly sad and violent pictures that they drew, when I provided them
with paper and crayons on the car hoods in front of my tenement after
dark.

As my youthful friends grew older, places like the Game Room or the
Social Club gradually emerged as central institutions in their lives.
They were socialized into the “normalcy” of drug dealing. In El Barrio,
the crackhouse is virtually the only adolescent space that is heated in
the winter and air-conditioned in the summer. There are simply no other
healthy social scenes to frequent if one has limited resources and wants
to be where the action is. Many – if not most – East Harlem apartments
are overcrowded, plagued with vermin, poorly heated in the winter, and
stiflingly hot in the summer. The street or the crackhouse consequently
offers a more comfortable alternative living room.

Candy’s son, Junior, was the first boy I watched graduate into crack
dealer status. When I first asked him at age thirteen what he wanted to
be when he grew up, he answered that he wanted to have “cars, girls, and
gold chains – but no drugs; a big roll [of money], and rings on all my
fingers.” In one of these conversations, Junior had even dreamed out
loud of wanting to be a “cop.” It was midnight and we were sitting on
the hood of Ray’s Lincoln Continental parked in front of the Game Room.

Primo: [with a drunken slur] Naah! You’re going to be an idiot like me
and Caesar. A no-good, good-for-nothing desperdicia’o envicia’o
[vice-ridden, life-wasting man].

Junior: [earnestly] Unh, uhh! I could be a cop if I wanted to be.

Primo: Yeah, yeah! A cop sexaholic – rape women, too – because you got
authority with your badge. [howling laughter in the background from
Caesar]

Angelo: [an eleven-year-old friend of Junior’s enthusiastically
giggling] Right, right!

Junior: [still earnest] Naah, just be a cop and that’s it. Bust people.

Primo: [seriously] Yeah, bustin’ people like me.

Junior: Naah, only like, if they rob somebody. If they do crime and
stuff.

Philippe: [turning to Angelo] What do you want to be when you grow up?

Primo: [interrupting] A pimp or a drug dealer, right?

Angelo: No, a rapper.

As the years progressed, Junior became increasingly involved in Game
Room activities. Literally before he knew it, he became a bona fide drug
courier. He thought of it as simply “running errands.” Junior was more
than eager to be helpful, and Primo would send him to pick up ten-dollar
packets of powder cocaine from around the corner, or to fetch cans of
beer from the bodega two doors down. Junior was not using drugs; he was
merely behaving like any eager teenager flattered by the possibility of
hanging out with grown-ups. Before his sixteenth birthday, Junior began
filling in for Caesar as lookout, when Caesar’s crack binges kept him
from coming to work on time. Soon Ray promoted him to working at the
Social Club as permanent lookout on weekends, replacing Luis, whose
crack use was making him an unacceptably erratic employee. Although
Junior had dropped out of school by this time, and already had a
juvenile record for hot-wiring a car, he was a strict teetotaler, and an
obedient worker. He was only available to run errands and work lookout
at night, however, because Candy often made him baby-sit his little
sister during the day.

When I tried to make Junior realize that he was being sucked into a life
of drug dealing, the conversation merely degenerated into a display of
how crackhouse logic maintains its hegemony in the daily lives of even
those children who want to be good:

Philippe: So Junior, if you don’t wanna be a drug dealer what are you
doing working here for Primo tonight?

Junior: Nah, I’m only lookin’ out. I ain’t touching no product. My moms
knows about it; she said it was okay.

Besides, I know drugs is wack. They just put you in the hospital.

Philippe: [smiling at Primo] Junior, what’s gonna happen to you? Are you
just gonna turn into another scum-of-the-earth drug dealer like Primo?
[in a serious tone] And keep on selling drugs, and get yourself
arrested?

Junior: No, not no more, ’Cause if I get busted again, I get in a lot of
trouble.

Primo: [interrupting] No, not the first time Junior.

Junior: But I could get sent to a home, ’Cause of that shit with the
car.

Primo: [condescendingly] If you get busted selling drugs now, you’ll be
all right. It’s the second time that you’ll get fucked.

[turning to me reassuringly] He’ll have someone lookin’ out for him;
someone who will send him bail – [giggling] most likely.

Punishing Girls in the Street

By the time I left New York, Junior had begun dabbling in substance
abuse, primarily smoking marijuana. He had not, however, been arrested
yet for selling drugs. His twelve-year-old sister, Jackie, on the other
hand, was more fully incorporated into the rites of passage of street
culture at a younger age – but in the brutal manner reserved for girls.
It happened during the difficult months when her father, Felix, was on
work release from prison and was demanding to be allowed back into
Candy’s household. Jackie followed her mother’s script to evade her
father’s turmoil, and ran away with a boyfriend. Her would-be prince
savior, however, invited two of his best friends to join him in
gang-raping her in his car. She was gone for a total of seventy-two
hours, and although Caesar subsequently accused Jackie of “being a hole
out there,” and Primo dismissed her rape with the terse comment “her
pussy itched and it got scratched,” both of them participated in the
wellspring of solidarity that mobilized around Candy and Felix during
Jackie’s abduction. The event actually became the catalyst for Felix’s
reintegration on a permanent basis into Candy’s household as husband and
father.

Caesar and Primo’s description of the first night of Jackie’s
“elopement” became an unusually honest forum for expressing mutual pain
and vulnerability.

Primo: We had just bought some ski [powder cocaine] to get lifted, and
we went to Candy’s house, and see what’s up.

There was Felix there, crying. He was getting coked up; crying with coke
in his nose. “I just want my daughter back, ahhhhh.”

[pretending to lift a folded matchbook with cocaine to his nose with
dry, efficient sniffs] Sniff, sniff, this-and-that.

It was like, four-something in the fucking morning.

Caesar: I had flashbacks to my sister.

Primo: [cutting him off] So while we were there, they gave me a picture,
so that we could go look for Jackie.

We went downstairs, and we started walking around, asking questions, all
through the projects.

The cops already knew about it, the whole shit.

We went back upstairs to see if there had been a phone call or anything.
And we started talking so much, that this guy [pointing to Caesar],
started tearing. He got flashbacks.

Caesar: [eagerly] Yeah, Yeah, I started tearing.

Primo: Flashbacks from his sister who was stabbed in the projects.

Caesar: I was on siiiick [rolling his eyes wildly]. ’Cause I was
thinking about stupidities.

And I told Candy – ’Cause I was in the room all sad – “Damn, I feel
sick.”

So she told me, “You should go to the hospital.”

And that’s when everyone really got, like, serious. Felix was like . . .
[raising his eyebrows and shifting his eyeballs back and forth] Word!
[shaking both wrists for emphasis] Bugging!

And we were all there.

Primo: [gently to Caesar] I didn’t know you was crying until Felix
started saying, “Don’t cry Caesar; don’t cry.” And I looked at you, and
I looked all around, and I said, “Oh shit.”

Caesar: Yeah, ’Cause I had thoughts already; you know, like how they
killed my sister when she was missing. Motherfuckers stabbed her
seventeen times! Why they have to do that?

Primo: [putting his hand on Caesar’s shoulder] Tabatha [Candy’s oldest
daughter] came over. And started crying loud. She got hysterical.

But then afterwards, everybody was cooling, and shit; and we went to the
precinct.

The police made some phone calls, and Candy checked every fuckin’
facility there could be, even in Queens and New Jersey, to see if Jackie
was in jail.

When she came back to the house, she was really fucked up. You could
tell from her eyes. She was crying. She hadn’t slept.

And that was Friday, and then Saturday came. Jackie was still missing.
Candy was out there with posters. She had put a coupla’ posters around
the neighborhood.

Candy was looking for you, Felipe. She needed to talk to you; I mean for
you to help her talk more correctly on the phone, ’Cause she was getting
dissed at the Twenty-third Precinct.

You know, they were just saying, “Awww, just another runaway, Porta’
rrican bitch.”

Now, Candy wants to see you. So she could tell you the story her way,
for the book.

Candy suffered a great deal through her daughter’s ordeal and extended
her full solidarity, as only a mother who has shared a similar agony
can. She was explicit in making all of us publicly accept the fact that
Jackie was raped – despite street culture’s double-standard denial of
this form of violence.

Candy: Felipe, you don’t know how crazy I went. I couldn’t eat; I
couldn’t sleep; it was like . . . I mean like, when you don’t know where
your daughter is; and you don’t know if she’s being tortured – killed.
All you know is that she needs you.

Your child is screaming for you; and you can’t reach out and help her,
because you don’t know where she’s at.

During the three nights she was gone, I even slept in her bed to see if
some sign came to me.

When they brought her back, one of the guys that were involved, told me
that it was a little scheme they had. Jackie was supposed to be going to
a party with them, but there was no party.

They weren’t violent to her. But she was scared, and she was way far
away from home – Jamaica, Queens. Imagine!

There were three guys and just one other girl.

She says she was too scared; she couldn’t think right. She didn’t have
her thinking cap on – she gave in. She’s only twelve years old.

I took my daughter to the hospital. She needs to have counseling, but I
didn’t take her back, because they put her through so much pain when
they were examining her, that she didn’t want to go back.

I want her to feel like it’s not her fault, even if she let it happen.
She was in a position where she felt her life was going to be in danger,
so she did it.

At least she didn’t get pregnant, thanks God for that.

Primo and Caesar resisted Candy’s solidary interpretation of her
daughter’s rape. Most of their conversations on the event over the next
few weeks centered on exonerating the rapists and excoriating Jackie.
They completely convinced themselves that Jackie had not been raped;
they unequivocally blamed the twelve-year-old child for her
tribulations. As a matter of fact, the very first time they told me the
story, Caesar had called out to me from across the street with a cackle
of laughter, “Yo Felipe, did ya’ hear? Jackie’s a little streetwalker
now.” When I argued with them that Jackie had been raped, Primo
countered by comparing Jackie to “one of those girls Luis, Ray, and the
posse used to train back in the days above the club.” He referred to
this as “getting influenced into screwing” rather than being raped.
Caesar was marginally more sympathetic, acknowledging that Jackie “got
conned into doing shit.” Although he recognized that she had been forced
to have sex with two or more boys against her will, he nevertheless
insisted, “I don’t think it was rape, though. It don’t seem to me like
she was held . . . forced to do it.”

To condemn Jackie for sexual wantonness, Primo invoked the guilty symbol
of a woman looking out of a window at men – never mind that the window
might be seventeen stories high.

It looked’ed like she knew what she was doing, ’Cause the way I see it,
she’s always in the window, calling guys from the block.

Jackie wants to be hanging out; she want to be in the street.

The ultimate exoneration of the rapists hinged on Jackie’s lack of
remorse and her failure to follow the traditional solution of
establishing a nuclear household with her rapist abductor.

Primo: [sniffing cocaine] Jackie’s cooling out. She’s not like, acting
like a victim.

Besides, she still talks to the guy. I asked her if he is good-looking.
She said, “Yeah.” [making shrugging motions] She wasn’t sad.

Caesar: What can you do if she got fucked out there, and she liked’ed
it?

Primo: Yeah, she probably have a baby, because she got a big itch.

Philippe: That’s some sick shit you’re saying Primo!

Caesar: She’s gonna just be a statistic out there; babies havin’ babies.

Primo: [drinking from his 16-ounce can of malt liquor, and then sniffing
from a packet of cocaine] You don’t understand Felipe? Jackie went,
because she wanted to go, and it happened, because she wanted it. She
asked for it. Now, Jackie’s acting too cool for it to be a tragic thing.

Caesar: [sniffing cocaine] I don’t think its such a big thing. It’s just
a mistake. I mean, if she’s just going to have a boyfriend, maybe she
should just stay with this guy and do all right.

[sniffing again] I think it’s a thing that like could be put in the
past, if she could just settle down with her man.

They ultimately blamed Candy for violating gender roles, and for
spawning a second generation of flawed females.

Caesar: Besides, if she had sex by accident, by . . . getting raped,
then there’s no reason why her mother have to tell her, “Well, now you
have to use birff controls.” ’Cause that’s like telling her, “You can
keep on fucking, but just avoid having kids.” Candy thinks the girl’s a
saint.

Primo: [drinking and sniffing] Her mother is always acting like a
beyaca. You know, a horny bitch.

Caesar: You know what the problem is? Nobody showing her no example: Her
mother’s wild; her sister’s wild.

Caesar concluded this particular discussion by turning the ongoing
crisis over changing gender roles on the street into the basis for
misogyny:

Caesar: That’s why I don’t really want a daughter.

I can’t stand the feeling of another man touching my daughter. I got
like a prejudice against women because of that shit.

In a classic example of how the vulnerable prey on one another and
internalize their structural marginality, the only “positive” action
taken by Candy on behalf of her twelve-year-old daughter – with the
exception perhaps of offering her birth control pills – was to mobilize
the men in her life to lash out violently against the mother of the girl
who was raped alongside Jackie:

Primo: Candy got to bash the moms in the mouth, ’Cause she said, “Your
daughter’s a ho’.” And the woman said, “What! My daughter?” and Candy
busted her in the lip.

The mother said, “I’m going to go bring my daughter down, so you can
fight me and fight my daughter.” But that’s when Candy’s friends,
Carlos, and all the other guys rolled up with guns, and some other
family members, and some cousins from Tabatha’s husband’s family. It was
a big posse.

In Search of Meaning: Having Babies in El Barrio

Witnessing the maelstrom consuming children on the street in their most
vulnerable years, one cannot help wondering why mothers continue to bear
so many babies into so much suffering. During my five years of
residence, virtually all my friends and acquaintances in El Barrio had
at least one baby. This was the case with Primo’s girlfriend Maria, who
refused to have an abortion when she became pregnant, even though Primo
was in the midst of a felony trial for his second arrest for selling
crack to an undercover officer. Only two months earlier, Maria and Primo
had been thrown out of the project apartment belonging to Maria’s
sister, who had fled to Bridgeport, Connecticut, when her husband’s
drug-dealing partner was found murdered in their car. At the time Maria
became pregnant she was living with her deeply depressed, alcoholic,
250-pound mother. I described it in my fieldwork notes:

[March 1990]
Primo took me over to Maria’s house: strewn with garbage, broken
furniture, and empty quarts of Bacardi. It smells of vomited alcohol,
and is crawling with cockroaches. Plates full of boiled cabbage, and
boiled meat, from Maria’s stepfather’s unfinished meals lie spilled
around the living room, where Maria has to sleep on a broken couch that
hurts her back.

Primo assures me that this is nothing compared to the howls, wails,
shouts, and sobbings of Maria’s bruised mother after she finishes her
evening bottle of Bacardi. Apparently, she fights with her husband,
accusing him of infidelities. According to Primo, on some nights she
actually stabs him, “but she just jigs him a little bit.”

Today she has a swollen face, because last night her husband – an
equally alcoholic janitor at a public school – retaliated and “clocked
her.”

Maria was overjoyed to be pregnant. It was the happiest I had ever seen
her, and it took me a long time to realize that it was precisely her
wretched living conditions that made motherhood so appealing. It offered
a romantic escape from her objectively difficult surroundings. The
pregnancy also cemented her deep love for Primo, who we all expected
would receive a four- to six-year prison sentence. Having Primo’s baby
was going to be her way of demonstrating her solidarity with him during
his incarceration. Maria began writing poetry to celebrate her
relationship with Primo and their future progeny. Maria’s high
self-esteem during this period in her life literally springs from the
pages of her diary, which she showed me. In the following excerpt, for
example, her appreciation for the beauty of her body both internalizes
and overcomes racist and sexist stereotypes:

I have light brown eyes, sexy cat eyes, and a nice big butt and big
juicy balangas . . . and I have big bubble lips that cover my face just
right; and I have hair, curly, and I could put it anywhere I want to.

She was also filled with appreciation for her javao’¹⁰ boyfriend.

I’m eighteen years old; he’s twenty-six. He has light brown eyes, big
eyes. He has beautiful lips too, nice teeth; and he has juicy buns . . .
and he has nice curly hair.¹¹

Primo, in contrast, was anxious and angry at Maria. He was overwhelmed
with anxiety over his court case, and he was at the height of his
personal disillusionment at not being able to find a legal job. He
begged Maria to have an abortion, and even went out of his way to abuse
her verbally when she showed him her love poems, calling her a “fucking
crazy bitch that looks like a negro Michelin man; like Black-a-Claus . .
. like Blackula.”

Maria also had a concrete material interest in bearing a child. It
represented her most realistic chance of establishing an independent
household given the extraordinary scarcity of affordable, subsidized
public housing in New York City. During the years I lived in El Barrio,
the waiting list for New York City Housing Authority apartments was
eighteen years long.¹² Homeless pregnant teenagers, however, were given
priority in obtaining apartments under a special outreach program
designed to relieve crowding in emergency homeless shelters and welfare
hotels. The “only” negative in Maria’s strategy to forge an independent
household was that she had to survive for three long months in a
homeless shelter before being placed in a “youth action” renovated
tenement for homeless teenage mothers. As a matter of fact, Primo Jr.
was born while she was still in the shelter.

During this same period, Maria’s sister Carmen also became pregnant with
her boyfriend, Caesar. Caesar’s abusive tendencies did not dampen her
joy and love. At the time, Caesar had obliged Carmen to make her oldest
sister the foster mother of her six-year-old daughter, Pearl. He also
frequently beat her two-year-old son, Papo, claiming that he lacked
discipline and was “slow in the head.”¹³ Just before Carmen’s pregnancy,
Caesar gave her an ultimatum, “choose between Papo or me.” She was
negotiating with her older sister to adopt Papo as well.

Carmen’s pregnancy solved her immediate crisis. Not only did Caesar
agree to become Papo’s stepfather, but his grandmother invited Carmen to
move into their apartment and live in Caesar’s bedroom. Caesar’s
grandmother even formalized Carmen’s status by registering her
officially on the Housing Authority lease. Caesar himself had never been
legally registered as living in the apartment, to avoid having his SSI
payments included in the rent calculation.

Carmen and Maria were following the traditional path of escaping from a
troubled home by falling romantically in love with an idealized man, and
embracing motherhood wholeheartedly. Carmen showed me her journal
entries shortly after becoming pregnant. She was even more infatuated
with Caesar than Maria was with Primo, describing her relationship with
Caesar as “paradise on an island":

The years that I’ve seen Caesar, I’ve always had a crush on him. But
when we first got together, it was like love at first sight. And still
to this day I feel the same. I guess you could say I fell in love with
him. But when I see him, my heart skips a beat, and when he gets near, I
just want to faint.

I really love him and care for him always, no matter. And as for my son,
Benito Jr., [Papo], he loves Caesar, as far as I know.

Both Maria and Carmen were young, but their enthusiastic embrace of
motherhood should not be dismissed as the fleeting romantic whims of
immature women. The dearth of alternative scenarios for female adulthood
on the street not only normalizes motherhood at an early age but also
makes it attractive.

In Candy’s case, for example, when her love affair with Primo ended
violently, it was her love for her children that stabilized her and
restored meaning to her life. By wholeheartedly reassuming the
traditional “jíbara role” of being a self-abnegating mother at age
thirty-four, Candy saved herself and her household from terminal
self-destruction in Ray’s street-dealing scene.

Candy: I used coke for five months to kill myself. Then I woke up and
said, “I love my kids too much to kill myself.” Because if you love your
kids that makes you do nothing wrong.

I was real skinny, and I was like neglecting my kids, in the way of not
paying mind to them. I didn’t hit them, but I didn’t want to be bothered
with them. Like, I was [gruffly], “I don’t want to hear no noise.”

They used to tell me, “Mommy, what’s wrong with you? Mommy, please!
People are going to think you are on crack.” And yes God is with me,
because I had a dream back then. I was dying. I saw my son Junior, my
only boy, crying that I was dead. And I saw my other two daughters
looking very different. [stopping abruptly] I wish to God I wouldn’t
even think about it, ’Cause I’m against drugs. I think my children
would’ve gone into drugs.

But don’t get me wrong. I’m a strict mother where I believe in the best
education. I believe in being a strict, strong, good, loving parent.

You know, Felipe, what it is? When you see your kids everyday telling
you, “I love you.” And you know I’ve been through a lot – a beating
every day, three times a day, from the age of thirteen. Why you gonna
make that baby pay for your mistakes? No!

That’s why I’m crazy about my kids. And I still want twelve. Because a
baby means purity to me – innocence. And a baby can’t come and smack
you, and say, “Mommy, don’t abuse me.” But you do it. And I’m against
child abuse.

But I’m thirty-four now, and I still wish I could have five more now.
Because my kids come to me, kissing me, saying, “Mommy, love you, love
you.”

You hardly see that in kids now. You see kids streetwise, like my
sister’s kids – Angelo, for example – where they don’t have a lovable
parent.

But I did my best. My children all went to Catholic school from first
grade to now. And I have paid for it all.

The Demonization of Mothers and Crack

Candy went back to defining her life around the needs of her children.
The irony of the institution of the single, female-headed household is
that, like the former conjugal rural family, it is predicated on
submission to patriarchy. Street culture takes for granted a father’s
right to abandon his children while he searches for ecstasy and meaning
in the underground economy. There is little that is triumphantly
matriarchal or matrifocal about this arrangement. It simply represents
greater exploitation of women, who are obliged to devote themselves
unconditionally to the children for whom their men refuse to share
responsibility.

When abandoned mothers do not sacrifice their individual needs for the
sake of their children, chaos wrecks their precarious households. No one
remains to feed, hug, and watch them. Street children in El Barrio are
caught in a historical limbo: The old-fashioned patriarchal forces that
created female-headed households are breaking down, and there is nothing
to cushion the fragmentation of the family unit when mothers follow the
paths of fathers in seeking independent lives in the underground economy
or in substance abuse.

Street culture’s double standard on gender became clearly visible to me
during the months when Candy sold cocaine for Ray, and maintained Primo
as a kept lover. The men in Ray’s network roundly decried her failings
as a single mother and head-of-household. They completely ignored any
obligations for family sustenance on the part of her incarcerated
husband, Felix, and none offered to help provide Candy’s children with
food, shelter, and love. One of their recurrent criticisms was that
Candy needed a strong male figure to discipline her.

Primo: That bitch was no good. It was like the kids were all living
without their mother. The kids were taking care of themselves, because
their mother was just going from the club to sleeping, back and forth,
just like that [making a yo-yo motion with his hand].

Lillian was less than a year old. Hell! Junior was the mother. He was
changing the diapers.

And sometimes I felt sorry and shit, so I would do it. I was there,
changing the diapers and she wasn’t around!

Caesar: That lady just fell apart after that idiot Felix got locked up.

Primo: And then there was Abraham [the adopted grandfather]; he used to,
like, try to change the diapers, but he said, “No lo aguanto” [I can’t
bear it].

Caesar: Fucked up! She just went AWOL once her man left.

Primo: I mean, I couldn’t eat her food, because if you go to her house,
and look at her kitchen, the way the mess is she’s cooking. You don’t
want to eat that food. I’m talking roaches!

The same dynamic of women increasingly refusing to submit to
old-fashioned patriarchal definitions of family roles was also clearly
visible in Ray’s crackhouses, where women and girls were carving out a
new public space for themselves. At the same time, street culture
strives to maintain women in subordinated roles as mothers or as
dependant girlfriends. Hence, my fieldwork notes from a hot summer
night:

[July 1990]
I was greeted at the entrance to the Social Club by three, shiny-new,
baby carriages parked symmetrically alongside the Pac-Man machine, out
of the way of the pool tables. Each one had a tiny newborn in it, sound
asleep, clenching tiny fists.

Their teenage mothers were competing for Little Pete’s attention. He
just broke up with his old girlfriend after she became pregnant.

Fifteen-year-old moms in minimal tank tops peck the necks of the pool
players, in between crack sales, while their babies sleep peacefully.
One mother danced outrageous salsa steps to the rap.

How many will get addicted to crack this summer? How many more will get
pregnant?

When I asked Maria why there were so many teenage mothers and newborn
babies in the club, she answered, “‘cause it’s air-conditioned.” I can’t
really argue with that. We’re having a terrible heatwave, and I am sure
none of the girls have air-conditioning at home – if they even have a
private room to share with their babies.

As I noted in the opening pages of this chapter, New York City’s
official statistics demonstrate an explosion of child abuse and neglect.
Children have been ordered into foster care in record-breaking numbers
since the crack—cocaine epidemic began in the mid-1980s.¹⁴ Politicians,
the press, and popular culture have reacted to this phenomenon by
sexualizing the antidrug hysteria that gripped the United States through
the late 1980s and early 1990s. Drug scares are nothing new to the
United States, especially during periods of economic and social strain.
Whatever illicit substance happens to be in fashion is invariably
portrayed as the “worst ever,” harbinging imminent social breakdown.¹⁵
Often, journalists and even medical doctors assign a peculiar
pharmacological vulnerability to whatever social class or ethnic group
is especially vulnerable in the contemporary social structure. This was
the case, for example, with the Chinese opium scares in California in
the late 1880s. The same applied to African-Americans during the cocaine
hysteria of the early 1900s, when sheriffs in the deep South justified
raising “the caliber of their guns” on the grounds that “the cocaine
nigger is sure hard to kill.” Mexicans in the Southwest were not treated
much more humanely during the marijuana scares of the 1930s.¹⁶

The distinctive feature of the crack epidemic of the late 1980s and
early 1990s, however, was that instead of an ethnic group or a social
class being demonized for their proclivity for substance abuse, women,
the family, and motherhood itself were assaulted. Inner-city women who
smoked crack were accused of having lost the “mother-nurture instinct.”
Quite simply, this was because for the first time in U.S. history women
represented almost half of the addicts on the street and, once again,
because of the patriarchal gender responsibilities imposed on the
female-headed households, they were often accompanied by their toddlers
and newborns when they went to crackhouses.

[images]

Graffiti art of a local crack dealer who marked his sales site with the
antidrug slogan of the 1980s. Photo by Charo Chacón-Méndez.

The spectacle of publicly addicted women is exacerbated by the misogyny
of street culture. The male-dominated ranks of the underground economy
exclude females from the more profitable, autonomous entrepreneurial
niches such as dealing, mugging, and burglarizing.¹⁷ While this is
changing, as women increasingly penetrate violent male preserves in the
street economy, women are still forced disproportionately to rely on
prostitution to finance their habits and to support what remains of
their families. The flooding of women into the sex market has
deteriorated working conditions for prostitutes, causing an epidemic of
venereal disease among young women and newborn babies in the inner
city.¹⁸ Crack addicts are also particularly vulnerable to public sexual
humiliation, as they tolerate extreme levels of verbal and physical
abuse in their pursuit of the initial sixty- to ninety-second ecstatic
rush provided by smoking the drug.

The press, academics, mainstream America, and inner-city residents
themselves enjoy speculating over the “mystery” of the feminization of
crack use. Explanations range from moralistic denunciations of the
breakdown in family values, to arbitrary theorizations around
female-specific phobias of hypodermic needles. The most prevalent
popular explanation hinges on the allegedly “aphrodisiacal” powers of
crack—cocaine, despite all the evidence indicating that most people
become sexually dysfunctional when they ingest large quantities of
cocaine. The fantasy of crack-gorged women being propelled by insatiable
sexual cravings is shared by journalists, social scientists, dealers,
and addicts themselves. The sexualized imagery effectively hides the
deeper power confrontation over gender roles and family organization
occurring throughout the larger U.S. society.¹⁹

The mothers who elbow their way into crackhouses, thereby violating male
taboos, are condemned as animals who have lost their maternal, loving
instinct. Hence, the New York Times ran editorials with subtitles like
“Mothers Turned into Monsters,” and published articles with headlines
like “The Instincts of Parenthood Become Part of Crack’s Toll". The Wall
Street Journal quoted doctors and nurses as saying, “The most remarkable
and hideous aspect of crack use seems to be the undermining of the
maternal instinct.”²⁰

During the height of the public concern over crack’s pharmacological
subversion of the mother-nurture instinct, I realized that I, too, could
be condemned as a deficient parent in my pursuit of street culture
because of what I was exposing my son to. I became aware of this while
sitting at a conference on drug use listening to an outraged
ethnographer: “They’ll risk their own flesh-and-blood babies, bringing
them to the crackhouse to camouflage their activities.” The gasps and
judgmental head-wagging of the audience reconfirmed to me the gulf
between the inner city and middle-class society. Mainstream society
simply has no concept of how “normalized” drug selling has become on
inner-city streets. It is virtually impossible not to bring one’s baby
to the crackhouse if one spends any time on the street. For example,
even if I had not been solicitous of the friendship of drug dealers, had
I simply been one of the dozens of sociable neighbors on my block who
enjoyed public space, I could not have avoided “irresponsibly” exposing
my little boy to the violence of drug dealing on a daily basis. On the
block where I lived, it was impossible to watch a sunset, to take a
walk, or to buy an ice-cream sandwich at the local bodega delicatessen
without passing a handful of street-level crack or heroin sellers. When
I walked down the block with my son in my arms, one of the local drug
dealers would usually politely mumble the traditional Puerto Rican
blessing for newborns, or maybe even compliment me effusively on the
beauty of my baby. Strolling relaxedly through these settings, mothers
and fathers who are steadfastly opposed to substance abuse sometimes
find themselves stopping or dawdling for a few moments with their babies
on a copping corner, or at the entrance to one of the crackhouses,
before they move along to finish their evening errands.²¹

My deconstruction of mainstream society’s moralistic condemnation of
families in crisis did not withstand the horror of seeing mothers inside
crackhouses dragging their infants through the agony of their desperate
searches for ecstasy. On several occasions inside the Game Room, I
begged crack-craving pregnant women to think through the potential
consequences of their urge to get high. I repeatedly argued with Ray and
Primo, accusing them of having a personal responsibility for the
traumatized lives of the neonates whose mothers they regularly sold
crack to.

At first, unaware of my righteousness on this issue, the Game Room
dealers openly joked about the surprisingly high number of expectant
customers regularly frequenting the crackhouse. Primo and his lookout
and partner Benzie, relaxing over beer and heroin in a project
stairwell, described one such customer:

Benzie: [passing a 40-ounce bottle of Olde English malt liquor, and
opening a packet of cocaine] All of a sudden Rose started screaming out
my name: “Benzie, Benzie I’m giving birff! Come help me, come help me!
Benzie, please!”

Then she said, “Oh, it’s coming out! It’s coming out! Look! Help me!”

I looked at her pussy and I saw a head. Felipe, I was shocked! As soon
as I saw that little head with blood coming out of her cunt. My whole
head went WASHHHHHT. I was like, “No! I can’t!” ’Cause I was on crack,
and I was petro, and I was like shocked out of my fuckin’ ass. I saw how
that head, that blood, was coming out of her pussy – out of her vagina.
And I was shocked.

And she was asking me, “Benzie, Benzie, help me, help me, Benzie. It’s
coming out; spread my legs; help me.”

So I ran out to the hallway, screaming to call an ambulance. [sniffing
cocaine]

Philippe: Aww man! Whatsa’ matter with you Benzie! Why didn’t you help!
Why didn’t you just pull the baby’s head? Whatsa’ matter with you
anyway, man?

Benzie: [grinning and grabbing the beer bottle back] Give me a fuckin’
break, man! Save that shit, Felipe!

I mean let me tell you, if that was you there, and she would be askin’
you for help, and that was your first time seeing the baby’s head in her
vagina, with blood that you never saw before in your life, you’d be in
shock too. You wouldn’t know what to do.

You act like you’d know what you’d want to do. I mean [imitating a
white, upper-middle-class accent and cocking his head back and forth
stiffly] “Oh yeah, sure. I’ll help you, and pull the baby’s head out.”

Later for that shit, Felipe. You wouldn’t know what the fuck to do
either. I mean it was tremendous, and I was cracked up!

[pausing to dip the tip of his house key into the packet of heroin Primo
was holding out to him, sniffing stiffly, and then speaking slowly and
seriously] In a way, I wanted to help her, but then when I saw the top
layer of the baby’s head – like the skull or whatever – with blood
coming out, I ffffflipped man! And her hole was split. She was in pain,
like screaming and begging me for help.

[perhaps noting my expression] It’s sad, but it happened in my face.

When the ambulance people came they was talking about getting hot water
and everything. There was hot water, but there was, like, no towels; no
rags; you know, none’a’ the shit they need to perform babies.

Primo: [laughing, and dipping into the heroin packet] You know what the
baby probably first swallowed when he came out? A couple of capsules,
because that was what was all around the fuckin’ floor. The baby would
have come out, like this [breathing with a gulp and blinking his eyes].
And a little crack capsule would’a’ gone in his mouth.

Benzie: [continuing in a serious tone after taking another quick sniff
of heroin] So Rose gave birff right there, and she named the kid after
the EMS driver; you know, the lady who had taken the baby out for her;
she named it after her.

But you know what bugged me out? It was like nothing, like she didn’t
give birth. Like she was ready for another blast.

They took her to the hospital and everything. But she was like, out the
next day, I think, or the next two days – on a mission. Because I was
selling at the Game Room, and she came and told me, “Benzie,” like,
“What’s up? Why didn’t you help me?”

I told her, “Man! Listen, I was in shock. I was crying and I was lifted
up; and I was snift’ed up; and I just didn’t know what to do.”

Rose was cool though; she didn’t even ask for a short [a price reduction
on a vial of crack]. She isn’t the schemish type. She was a nice crack
head.

She was smoking the whole time she was pregnant, and she never asked us
for shorts. Matter of fact, after she gave birth she was smoking again
right there. Baby was still in the hospital.

It was a crack baby, so it stayed in the hospital.

I remember this particular conversation vividly, because at the time I
had recently been told by a doctor that my own eleven-month-old son had
cerebral palsy. The first clinical studies on the effects of in utero
exposure to crack were just beginning to show that “crack babies”
sometimes display symptoms of cerebral palsy—like neuromuscular
involvement.²² Consequently, it was especially distressing to me to
think mothers might be “willingly” imposing cerebral palsy on their
progeny, and I discussed it with everyone in the crackhouses I visited.
Primo and most of the other dealers eventually stopped selling to
expectant mothers – at least in front of me. Ray, on the other hand,
never agreed formally to forbid his employees from selling to pregnant
women, despite our countless vehement arguments. Somehow, the profoundly
conservative Catholicism that convinced him that abortion is “murder”
did not inhibit his profit motive at the expense of neonatal welfare:

Ray: I don’t care Felipe! I’m just gettin’ some a’ mines. I don’t think
about none a’ that shit you talkin’ about. Besides if they don’t buy it
from me, they’ll just go around the corner, and get it from someone
else.²³

Similarly, Candy proved just as internally inconsistent in her
righteousness when I condemned her for selling to pregnant women during
the months she worked for Ray at his Social Club:

When you become pregnant, the body doesn’t belong to you. It belongs to
the baby. So, if the mother don’t give a shit, if they don’t care, why
should I?

I asked an African-American sociologist colleague, Eloise Dunlap, to
help me discuss these issues directly with pregnant addicts. She had
access to a broader range of crack-using women on the street because of
her gender and ethnicity. Our conversations with expectant mothers on
the street revealed that the expectant crack addicts were profoundly
ambivalent toward their future babies and about their roles as mothers.
Some were convinced they were “taking care of themselves” and their
fetuses by simultaneously eating snacks when they smoked crack. One
woman assured us that she was careful to smoke only during the day so as
to allow the fetus to sleep at night. Another claimed the crack was good
for her fetus because it had a tendency “to sleep a lot.” Smoking made
her “lazy baby” finally wake up and start kicking like a healthy fetus
should. Several women criticized the hypocrisy of the street culture
that condemned them while eagerly making money off them.²⁴ None of them,
however, criticized the society that refused to fund treatment centers
and support services for them. As a matter of fact, we were unable to
refer any of the desperate women we befriended to drug treatment
centers, because only two of the twenty-four state-funded programs
located in New York City at that time (1990) accepted pregnant crack
users.²⁵

It was not until I moved out of El Barrio that it occurred to me that
mothers on crack could be reinterpreted as women desperately seeking
meaning in their lives and refusing to sacrifice themselves to the
impossible task of raising healthy children in the inner city. Pregnant
crack addicts can be de-essentialized from the monstrous image of the
cruel, unfeeling mother, and be reconstructed as self-destructive
rebels. In ethnographic work among starving mothers in a Brazilian
shantytown, the medical anthropologist Nancy Scheper-Hughes critiques
the industrialized world’s bourgeois idealization of maternal bonding.
She shows how mothers struggling to survive in abject poverty, where
almost half of all children die before the age of three, learn to “let
go” of their weakest, most sickly babies in early infancy. They withhold
affection and sometimes even facilitate their infants’ deaths from
dehydration. When mothers fight these inevitable deaths and invest too
much personal anguish in each vulnerable infant, they risk destroying
their own spirit. If mothers were to dwell on the cumulative tragedies
of their sickly children, they would become consumed by grief and
anxiety. They would cease to be able to function as coherent parents and
as feeling human beings.²⁶

In postindustrial El Barrio, a lack of calories and potable water are
not killing infants. Instead, the causes are substance abuse, racism,
public sector institutional breakdown, and a restructuring of the
economy away from factory jobs. In the United States, the death and
destruction of inner-city children occurs primarily during adolescence
rather than in infancy. The statistics speak for themselves: In the
mid-1990s, young males in Harlem aged eighteen through twenty-four had a
better chance of dying violently than soldiers on active duty during
World War II.²⁷ Perhaps the addicted mothers I met in crackhouses were
simply those who had given up fighting the odds that history has
structured against them. Abandoning their children, or poisoning their
fetuses in a frantic search for personal ecstasy, accelerates the
destruction of already doomed progeny.²⁸ By destroying the so-called
mother-nurture instinct, and by disabling their children during their
tenderest ages, vulnerable mothers escape the long-term agony of having
to watch their children grow up into healthy, energetic adolescents,
only to become victims and protagonists of violence and substance abuse.

Once again, it is obviously not “feminism” or the “empowerment of women”
that is causing mothers to abandon their children or to poison their
fetuses. On the contrary, the blame lies squarely on a patriarchal
definition of “family,” and on a dysfunctional public sector that
relegates the responsibility for nurturing and supporting children
virtually exclusively to individuals – specifically to women. Not only
fathers, consequently, but also the larger society that structures
social marginalization ultimately have to share the burden and
responsibility of reproduction. Gender power relations and family
structures have been profoundly transformed over the past few
generations throughout the world. As noted at the beginning of this
chapter, contradictory processes inevitably accompany all rapid,
historical power shifts. Within the worldwide context of accelerated
change as mothers struggle for their rights, and especially for their
individual selves, on inner-city streets, children are bound to suffer
in the short term.

8 VULNERABLE FATHERS

When I think of my son, I wish I was with him. It’s hard to think about
this. It makes me wish – no, not wish, ’Cause it’s not gonna be there –
but if I was gonna wish, the wish would be that I was never broken up
with my wife, so that I could always be there, like a family thing, like
old-fashioned. Like just her, him, and me. That’s the way it was when I
was working. I didn’t want nobody else, but Sandra. I was like, “I want
to be right here, where I’m at, with my kid.”

Primo

The moralistic debates that condemn deficient child-rearing practices in
the inner city bemoan the absence of fathers in families. It is assumed
that fatherlessness destroys a child’s moral fiber, even though the
single most overwhelming problem faced by female-headed households is
poverty.¹ Based on my relationship to the fathers who worked for Ray,
public policy efforts to coax poor men back into nuclear households are
misguided. The problem is just the reverse: Too many abusive fathers are
present in nuclear households terrorizing children and mothers. If
anything, women take too long to become single mothers once they have
babies. They often tolerate inordinate amounts of abuse.²

There is a clear material basis for the failure of fathers to support
their progeny in stable, loving families: High school dropouts can no
longer find secure jobs in New York City that would allow them to
maintain conjugal households on a single income in traditional,
patriarchal style. This is clearly revealed at the national level with a
50 percent rise in the percentage of working poor families between 1979
and 1982, from 12 percent to 18 percent.³ This economic “logic,”
however, is not a simple reflection of material exigencies. There is a
powerful historico-cultural weight bearing down on sexual inequalities
that shapes the specific patterns of paternal neglect and abuse. The
historical and contemporary experience of migration and rapid political
economic change is different across genders. Specifically, the legacy of
the rural household where the omnipotent pater familias defines his
worth around the “respect” accorded to him by his wife, abundant
children, and neighbors weighs heavily on second-generation male
Nuyoricans, who find themselves flitting homeless from one sexual
relationship to another, without the protection of a family or an
economically viable community.

As noted in Chapter 2, the extended kin-based communities of
turn-of-the-century rural Puerto Rico were only minimally under the
control of the central state in San Juán. The ruggedly independent
settlers in the interior highlands turned their backs on urban elites.⁴
Instead they constructed their own hierarchies and definitions of social
order and prestige around gender, age, and kinship categories that
persist in contradictory ways on the streets of East Harlem. An
idealized jí baro identity continues to permeate, or at least to
resonate with, bits and pieces of a street culture that rejects its
marginalization by the centers of power in U.S. society. It offers an
oppositionally based sense of dignity and respect. The patriarchal,
formerly order-producing categories of this legacy, however, which
revolve around gender, age, and kin, are in flux given the disruptive
experiences of prolonged colonial dependency, migration, urbanization,
and ghettoization. This is exacerbated by the problematic material base
of street culture, namely, the entry-level labor market and the
underground economy that condemn its participants to poverty, economic
insecurity, and high levels of institutional and personal violence.

Celebrating Paternal Powerlessness

Almost all of the men in Ray’s network were fathers, but none of them
regularly provided money and love to all their progeny. On the contrary,
many were consistently violent against their loved ones, as if lashing
out against the families they were unable to support. Street culture and
the underground economy provided them with an alternative forum for
redefining their sense of masculine dignity around promiscuity,
conspicuous violence, and ecstatic substance abuse. Caesar was most
adamant in celebrating his inability to maintain a family. Unable to
reproduce the patriarchal aspirations of his grandfather’s generation
within the context of a repressive nuclear family and an extended
kin-based community, he concentrated his male energies into macho
one-upmanship and sexual belt-notching. He worked hard at exaggerating
his sexual promiscuity and hardheartedness:⁵

Caesar: It’s the same thing with us as in nature. You just go for yours,
out on your own.

We’s just like those green sea turtles that be in the Galapagos. Those
turtles get out of the shell, and they run to the sea, and they never
know who their parents was.

They go through their whole life. Then they bone somebody or they get
bone’t. They have kids and they never see them.

I don’t feel guilty about the kids I got thrown around out there,
because I have no heart Felipe. I’ll fuck anybody, anytime. Besides
these bitches is crazy nowadays.

Primo was more functional in his sexualization of male power, focusing
on discretely controlling the women in his life emotionally and
economically. Following street culture’s celebration of the gigolo
image, he converted the shame of his inability to maintain a household
into a celebration of the street art of being an economic parasite,
cacheteando [freeloading] off his girlfriends. Unable to support his
children faithfully – but repressively – as his grandfathers had done
before him, he furthered his waning sense of old-fashioned masculinity
by becoming a superstud instead. One night late at the Social Club pool
hall where we were relaxing and watching Little Pete serve his emaciated
crack clients until six o’clock in the morning, Primo pointed to three
women playing pool together – Flora, Jaycee, and Maria. Giggling, he
waved at them, and feigning an old-fashioned Puerto Rican rural accent,
he said in Spanish, “Look how well my women get along with each other
[Mira como mis mujeres se llevan bién].” The rap music was too loud for
them to hear us, even though we were only six feet away. I knew Primo
was having a simultaneous relationship with both Maria and Jaycee. I had
no idea, however, that he was also seeing Flora “on the sneak tip.”

Philippe: Hey, you’re not with Flora too, are you?

Primo: [nodding grimly] Last month. She works at Key Food [supermarket]
packing meat so she only hangs late on weekends. She was hanging with
Rosie on a Friday – you know Rosie; she used to work at the Game Room;
and now Caesar be seeing her.⁶

But tonight I’m going to be with Jaycee. This girl [pointing his thumb
at Maria] went to my house today. She called, and I told her not to
come, because I already had a weekend of screwing with this bitch
Jaycee, but she wanted to come around anyway.

I took a shower, and when I came out, she was there; and I said, “Come
on! Then Jaycee and now you?” I left it at that, and said “Nah, maybe
tomorrow.”

She’s going to call me up early tomorrow, and like [raising his eyebrows
and grinning], ‘ah’m’a’ be fucking!

Philippe: What about that phone call you’re supposed to make tomorrow to
the employment office? Remember what your probation officer said?

Primo: Oh shit, Felipe, you’re right! But you know what? What would be
good about it, is that once I see her face [jerking his head toward
Maria], I know I got to get up.

[shrugging his shoulders] Out of all these bitches hanging around, I
take that one [pointing to Maria].

This has happened to me before. One day in front of the Game Room, I saw
a legion of girls on the corner. Like a herd of girls talking to each
other. And when I looked, I said, “God damn! I had all of them.” It was
my ex-wife Sandra, Candy, Maria, Jaycee, and I think some other girl
that I don’t remember.

Philippe: How’d that make you feel – good?

Primo: No. It felted’ed weird. [noticing Caesar eavesdropping eagerly
through the blasting music] No, it felted’ed good, then weird.

I’m telling you Felipe, I got a golden dick. All my cousins be that way
[slapping Caesar five]. We all got golden dicks.

I began steering conversations onto the ethics of sexual relationships
with as many people as possible within Ray’s network. Luis’s position
could be summarized by the tone of his voice when he stood in front of
the Social Club entrance and shouted across the street at the
crack-addicted women who serviced him with oral sex in exchange for
puffs on his crack pipe, “Yo, mouf! Yo, m’ah mouf! Come here!”⁷ Others
in the crackhouse scene, especially the younger men, acknowledged the
right of women to celebrate promiscuity the way men did. This was the
perspective, for example, of eighteen-year-old Pedro, who worked as a
nurse’s aide at Mt. Sinai Hospital, and who subsequently died when some
angel dust dealers he was attempting to hold up “put ten shots in him.”
Although tempted by Pedro’s sexually egalitarian logic, Caesar took
refuge back in sexual violence to reestablish his more traditional
conception of appropriate sex roles.

Pedro: If I was a girl, I’d be a freak [nymphomaniac]; but I’d make the
niggas pay.

I’d be a ho’, but I try to jerk men though, for money, and not just to
get dicked by dirty niggas without getting paid. I want money. I want
money.

Caesar: Yeah, I would get my rocks off and live well. I would try to get
ahold of some niggas on my block who are really souped up. And if they
look like they got something, then I’ll let them …

Until I get jerked, and then I’ll learn my lesson. Because I’ll finally
get boned by somebody, and not get any money.⁸

Only Eddie, Caesar’s half-African-American cousin, formulated an
analysis of sexuality that integrated notions of class and racial
oppression – even if he did not act constructively on his insights:

Maybe it’s thyroids, or an ego thing partially or to prove to friends
how many girls I could get; but for me, it’s an escape from reality, to
make me think I’m not tied down, that I don’t got a kid, and that I
didn’t do it too early.

I mean we don’t have no money so we make up for it with women. I mean if
you going to come into a a hundred thousand dollars, you going to make
it. Your friends be envying you. Now, if you don’t got nothing, but you
going to have five women, you going to be self-satisfied. It’s just a
thing we do.

But if you have money, you don’t have to be defined through women. Or,
if you’re a millionaire, maybe you just do it more discreet.

Plus, there’s more black and Puerto Rican women than men. It’s like
three to every one man. Especially now, black men are being killed off
like this – [pointing to Primo who was making a hand-to-hand sale to a
black customer at that very moment] – with all this drug problem.

Masculinity in Historical Crisis

Ray was older than all his employees with the exception of Candy and
Luis. Their generation has a more traditional relationship to rural –
perhaps jí baro – notions of family and masculinity. In their
grandparents’ traditional agricultural economy, children contribute to
economic security: By the age of six or seven they are useful laborers
on the family farm, and in the long term they guarantee the social
security and retirement pension of their parents. Since there are no
expenses for formal education in the rural economy, and since food is
produced on the household plot, the benefits of raising numerous
children greatly outweigh their costs. Masculine respect centers on
having large families and taking full responsibility for supporting them
economically. Ray, Luis, and even Candy – who is convinced she really
wanted to have twelve children – are all in their late thirties, and are
embroiled in a historico-cultural time warp that propels them to
maximize their progeny, even though it is impossible for them to
maintain their large households economically.

In Ray’s and Luis’s cases this was illustrated by their multiple sexual
relationships with different women: They had as many children as
possible with as diverse an array of mothers as feasible. The
inconsistency of their failures to support these children was covered by
denial and hypocrisy, which usually involved condemning the mothers of
their abandoned children for transgressions that made them unworthy to
receive their economic support. Luis, for example, enjoyed bragging
about how many teenage women he had managed to impregnate during the
same nine-month period during his adolescence. He referred to them as
“holes out there.” Two decades later, in his mid-thirties, he has no
problem with the fact that he does not support emotionally or
financially seven of the twelve children he has engendered by four
different women.

Luis: Fuck it! I ain’t got nothing to give my kids, so why should I see
them?

In the beginning their mothers get angry, but like I said, you gotta
learn to handle things in life.

Ray, on the other hand, presented himself as being well-off
economically. He could not take refuge in being broke or addicted to
crack. When he was in the process of negotiating the purchase of the
Game Room from Candy following Felix’s incarceration, I had a series of
moralistic conversations with him about fatherhood. I was never
confident enough to tape record Ray, but I remember vividly his
insistence that it was possible for children to “grow up healthy” if
they “had the proper role model as a father.” At the time that he told
me this, he was still fresh out of prison and was working legally as a
security guard in a supermarket. He claimed that the only way for him to
“do good by” his half-dozen children scattered between New York,
Pennsylvania, and Puerto Rico was to switch to selling crack full time.
It was impossible for him to be a responsible father to so many
far-flung children on his $150-a-week security guard salary. He claimed
that his dream was to make enough money selling drugs to gather together
all his children under one roof in El Barrio.

Four years later, after passing through three more girlfriends and
having three new babies, Ray proved to be just as irresponsible toward
his children as the perennially broke street dealers that he employed.
The men in his network, however, saw no contradiction between his
economic success and the abject, isolated poverty of his children and
their abandoned mothers. In fact, in the same breath that they enjoyed
enumerating how many cars Ray owned, they marveled at how many babies he
had sired. A man with such diversely scattered progeny and such obvious
business acumen commanded respect. His penniless, childbearing women, on
the other hand, were consistently denigrated.

Primo: He got a Mercedes, and the green Continental that he bought a
while back. He sold the Camaro, but still has the Corvette. And his new
van only cost him six hundred dollars. I think he bought something else
new too, like a four-door Mark IV.

Philippe: He takes better care of his cars than his kids. How many does
he have?

Primo: He’s got something like nine of them now. I don’t even think he
knows how the kids look like.

I mean, maybe he would look them out if their mothers asked, like buy
them clothes and shit. He looks-out a little bit.

He just doesn’t want to be hawked. So he just forgets about them, I
guess – even if they need something.

I know he doesn’t take care of Natalie’s kid. [sniffing from a
ten-dollar heroin packet]

Caesar: Once his women fuck up, Ray just erases them off his list
completely.

Primo: I mean, take Nancy, she’s a nasty bitch. She fucked up, so he
left her. Nancy’s with a new man now. Ray told me she went into a drug
program. She’s my comai [mother of my godchild], actually.

After he had that baby from Nancy, it was like, “Fuck you!”

Now, Natalie was one of Luis’s bitches out there before. When Luis got
locked up, she ended up being Ray’s woman.

Caesar: They used to rack in them days.

Primo: But they broke up because of fights. Ray used to leave her stuck
in the house, and disappear to have his meat chewed by some dirty
crackhead out there on the street. But Natalie was doing wrong too –
dirty bitch.

He got a daughter by some other woman in the Bronx, but he never even
saw her. It was just a thing that the girl said she was pregnant, but
Ray said, “Fuck it!” And then there’s some Cuban woman in Pennsylvania
that got a kid by him too.

But the other kids got his name. Their mothers just don’t demand
support, so why should he give it?

Ray’s girls are bugged. They don’t even ask him for shit. Some of them
might even have robbed him. Ray would probably look them out, but they
would have to come around, and ask for it the right way, and these girls
don’t even have no fucking brains to do it right.

He told me one night that he has all kinds of babies by other women.

The only woman that is lucky, and that is cool, is Gloria, his current
girl; but they fight a lot, because she hawks him. She’s jealous of that
man, boy!

But she’s cool, though, and he lives with her and her four-year-old son,
Bennie.

Philippe: So how many children does Ray have out there?

Primo: Let me see … Ray’s got two daughters; then Nancy’s son and then
the one by the crackhead. That makes eight other ones if you count the
kids from before he was locked up.

Caesar: How about that other bitch … What’s her name?

Primo: You mean, Natalie?

Caesar: Yeah, but how do you count eight, if he had four, and then five,
and then one more coming up?

Primo: Oh yeah, I forgot, Gloria is pregnant – that little squirrel with
her new baby – that’ll make nine. And she be hawking him, ’Cause he
doesn’t leave her stuck in the house, like he did with Nancy, or he did
with Natalie. He listens to her.

Although younger-generation men still have a certain amount of respect
or fascination for men like Ray and Luis who have sired many children,
masculine identity no longer hinges as intensively on having children.
The weight of cultural history in defining masculinity’s relationship to
changing gender—family arrangements is clearly visible in the difference
between the reproduction-centered imperatives of Ray, Luis, and Candy’s
generation versus the sexual belt-notching of Primo, Caesar, and the
other younger crack dealers. Primo, for example, consistently urged his
girlfriends to have abortions when they became pregnant. Ray, on the
other hand, was convinced that abortion was a capital sin. Primo was
perplexed by Ray’s old-fashioned attitudes toward the value of children.

Primo: Ray was telling me I should have all the kids that I can have
now, because I’m going to get old. But that doesn’t make any sense. Why
should I have kids now? To have an army?

Youths in their early twenties, like Caesar and Primo, are one more
generation removed from the large families of their rural grandparents.
My tape recordings of their casual conversations on the household
compositions of their kin, encapsulate the historical-structural
transformations around family demographics that they are living.

Caesar: My immediate family is pretty small. My grandmother had eight
kids, but a lot of families was bigger back in the days.

Primo: That’s exactly what my grandmother has. My grandmother had
eighteen kids, and ten passed away.

Caesar: I can’t have eight kids. I’d go crazy.

Primo: That’s a lot of kids. My cousins, they all had a lot of children.
It must have been easier to support kids in those days.

Transformations in the relationship between masculine identity and
household composition also involve the loss of the kin-based,
age-graded, and gender-hierarchized community that formerly acted almost
as an extended family that socialized and controlled women and children.
The traditional definitions of masculinity with their ideal of the
large, stable household involved a slew of cultural institutions and
values buttressing the power of the patriarch. Male heads of households,
however, were obliged to provide economically for their families despite
the bitter poverty of the rural and the plantation economies of Puerto
Rico in the nineteenth through mid-twentieth centuries. This is richly
documented in Primo’s mother’s idealized childhood reminiscences.

In those days in Puerto Rico, when we were in poverty, everyone will
tell you, life was better. Life was healthier, and you could trust
people, and now you can’t trust anybody. And now, even with money in
your hand, you can’t even trust people to do a favor for you.

And what I liked best about life in Puerto Rico was that we kept all our
traditions. And in my village, everyone was either an Uncle, or an Aunt.
And when you walked by someone older, you had to ask for their blessing.
It was respect.

In those days children were respectful. There was a lot of respect in
those days. My father was very strict. When a visitor came, my father
only spoke to us with his eyes, because children were not supposed to be
in the room. He would just look at us.

So when the visitor entered, my father only had to look at us, and when
he looked at us, that meant we had to disappear; we had to go to our
room. We weren’t allowed to be in the same room as the older folks.

He just spoke to us with his eyes, and so we disappeared. And we
couldn’t come out of our room until the visitor left. Sometimes we would
try to make the person leave with a broom. You know, it’s a Santerí a
thing, where you try to make contact with the person to make them leave.

I tried to teach my children a little of what my father had taught me.

Some people have done better by coming here; but many people haven’t.
Even people from my barrio, they came trying to find a good atmosphere
[buén ambiente]. There were couples, married couples, who came here
looking for a good atmosphere, and instead, they just found disaster.
The husband ends up running off with another woman.

A man in El Barrio can no longer “speak” to his children “with his eyes”
and expect to have his commands immediately obeyed.⁹ The former
modalities of male respect are no longer achievable within the conjugal
household or the extended kin-based community. Several generations of
men caught in different phases of this fundamental cultural
transformation in family forms and gender hierarchies have been crushed.
Primo brought this issue to my attention. In his concern over the fate
of the men in his kin network, one can discern the gender-specific form
of the experience of social marginalization in the Puerto Rican
diaspora:

I tell you I gotta check myself out. ’Cause like I was telling my
mother, in my family, it goes like this: all the men are bugged.

My mother’s oldest brother is bugged. He stands in the window talking to
himself.

My mother’s oldest brother – another uncle of mine – he just walks along
like a zombie, and he don’t look at nobody. I’m his nephew and his
godson. He writes some script, it look like shorthand, but it is
absolutely no fucking shorthand. He writes in his notebook and scribble
scrabble on the notebook. But the guy has his job. He keeps his job. He
keeps his place, but he is out of his mind.

If you look at him walking down the street, he look like a bum. He just
walks straight, looking down. He’s bugged.

I remember when he wasn’t bugged. He and my mother went to Puerto Rico,
when he wasn’t bugged.

You know, I tell my mother I got a feeling that all the people in my
family, I mean all the guys, are gonna snap one day in the future. I
think about myself in the future and I’m gonna be bugged.

She said, “You’re not bugged, and your father is just a sick man.”

But for some reason, somehow, my grandfather wasn’t bugged. My
grandfather passed away, he wasn’t bugged, he just died.

I ask my mother, “What kind of day I’m looking forward to? ’Cause I’m a
good candidate to get high blood pressure and diabetes like my father?”

She said, “You’re beautiful when you’re sober.”

You see, Felipe, I’m a nervous person, I’m a tense person. I get upset
easily. If I’m working and it doesn’t work, I just wanna break what I’m
working on. I don’t want to get into nothing crazy.

When Primo’s father died toward the end of my residence in El Barrio, I
was provided with further insight into the traumatic weight of the
failed international rural—urban migration in his particular, personal
experience of masculinity in crisis. One of Primo’s sisters visited
their father on his deathbed in the small town in western Puerto Rico
where he grew up before seeking his fortune in East Harlem.

My sister said the part where my father’s from, Cabo Rojo, is like real
poor and it’s a little community … and, terrible, like … fucked up.

She says she saw the house where he was born at. He was raised there as
a kid. It was a real old house and … and uh … it was terrible. Like it’s
poor there. It’s squalor. She didn’t like it.

She told me that it looks like those people … the people there, were
just placed on that spot and left there to just …

She said it looked like they probably wake up in the morning, come out
of their little shack or house, and they only travel like probably two
blocks.

I asked her this question: “Comparing Cabo Rojo to Arroyo – where our
family from our mother’s side comes from and where I lived when I was
fourteen – which is worse?” She says, “Oh yeah, Arroyo is better. It’s
more exciting.”

I perked up at this comparison, having gone myself the previous year to
Arroyo to visit Primo’s grandmother and to see his roots on his mother’s
side of the family. The village where his grandmother, cousins, and
surviving uncles and aunts were from was a little slip of narrow land
covered by a low-rise, concrete, zinc-roofed, public housing project
painted drab gray and surrounded claustrophobically by a waving sea of
sugar cane. It was hard for me to imagine a community much more
depressing than the corner of Arroyo that Primo’s grandmother inhabited.
Nevertheless, through the shacks and squalor of Cabo Rojo, Primo’s
sister caught a glimpse of the reservoir of extended family solidarity
that somehow endures in marginal corners of rural Puerto Rico.

She told me that I got people that look like me in Cabo Rojo. She was
saying, “Primo, these guys want to meet you. They were expecting you.
Primo, they look just like you.”

They cousins, I guess. They got the same mustache, beard, face. The only
thing is that my father got dead hair, so they got long hair, the kind I
like, not kinky like mine.

My sister be braiding on one of my cousin’s heads so they could look
like me. They reminded her of me and my older sister. She was jiving me,
saying that if I had hair like them people, I would look like Jesus.

She said they drink; they act cool. They really nice people; they really
nice. They just like me. How they joke around, they goof, and the same
shit.

But there’s not too many jobs around Cabo Rojo. It’s kinda hard.

By all accounts Primo’s father was a broken man. In the months before
his father’s death, Primo discussed his memories of him. After the Game
Room closed, he would buy a fifteen-dollar vial of powder cocaine and a
ten-dollar packet of heroin to sniff speedballs on the back stairs of
the Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, the magnet high school
on 115th Street and the East River Drive.¹⁰ It was as if he were trying
to resolve his painful memories of how his father had broken the
traditional Puerto Rican taboo of being a disrespected father. For
several evenings, we were accompanied by Little Pete because the Social
Club had been sealed temporarily by New York City fire marshals for not
having a rear emergency exit door. Little Pete’s stories of his father’s
destruction were even sadder than Primo’s. Like Primo, he had never had
the option of respecting his father either. At the time, both Primo and
Little Pete were living as bachelors with their mothers, and neither of
them was contributing toward the upkeep of his children.

Primo: My father’s a sick man now. He’s got diabetes. He’s a chronic
drinker; he smokes Winstons. One time I dreamt that he was dead.

I mean, he’s a borrachón sucio [dirty ol’ drunkard]. And when he gets
drunk he gets violent. So its like he’s no fucking good, so why be with
him? That’s why my mother had to say, “Hike!” [grinning abruptly and
jerking his thumb over his shoulder like a baseball umpire calling him
out]

And every time I would see my father, once they were separated – ’Cause
they were never divorced – it was every other week. And he was just like
not correct. Always with a beer in his hand. Always drunk and crying.

He didn’t get violent with us, but he used to curse all the time. And we
used to be by ourselves, and he used to be drinking with old friends,
talking shit.

We were kids. We were thinking “Fuck you. I don’t care.”

He used to buy us candy. And we used to be chillin’ with our candy. And
then he used to come to me, and ask questions about my mother. And I
never wanted to tell on my mother’s life, because when I answered his
questions, I used to make him cry.

I wasn’t stupid. When he used to ask me something, I would just tell
him.

Like he would say, “Is your mother with anybody?” I don’t remember my
answers but I probably used to say “yes,” or whatever. He was drunk and
stupid.

Maybe he regretted the things that he did. And he could have been better
off. I don’t remember really too hard. And then he collapses, shakes. I
used to hate that.

This particular detail of Primo’s father collapsing in a shaking fit of
jealousy when his son tells him about his estranged wife’s boyfriends is
probably a depiction of the same classically Puerto Rican psychosomatic
medical condition, ataque de nervios, that overcame Candy when she shot
Felix. Significantly, these kinds of ataques, provoked by jealousy,
abuse, or failure in love, are usually confined to women. That Primo’s
father might engage in such a feminine expression of despair and
helplessness in front of his children and close friends illustrates the
sense of male impotence he must have felt as a failed migrant in the
United States. As if by clockwork in the style of a failed macho, he
would recover himself by beating up the nearest vulnerable female whose
respect he no longer commanded.

Primo: Then he used to start off fighting with my sister, the oldest
one. Later, she would hit me.

Little Pete: [interrupting] I was always scared of my father because he
was on hair-ron [heroin]. And he was always high, and I was a little
kid, you know. And they told me bad things about him. And they just drew
a bad picture about him, and I was scared. And deep down inside, my
father was a good man, you know.

When I would see him, he was all high. And then when I grew up, we used
to see him on the street, and I’d say, “Hi” to him and I’d say, “Dad,
take care of yourself; stop doing this; stop doing that.”

And he was good, man. When he was a baby, he was good. I mean, when I
was a baby, my father was a merchant marine. He was always on the boat
after I was born. It’s like, he started using that shit, from the boats.
So I was raised by another man, ever since I was six months.

After I grew up and they started telling me, “This is your father,” he
was already all fucked up. I realized that was my father, regardless.
It’s sad, though.

My father overdosed. Yeah, he died of dope, you know, heroin.

Primo: [staring out at the East River Drive] All of a sudden, my father
stopped coming around. Like I don’t even know why. I think he was too
sick. He felt ashamed to let us see him like that.

The Material Basis for the Polarization of Intimate Violence

As earlier chapters discussing Candy’s life history and the adolescent
experiences of Primo and Caesar have demonstrated, the contemporary
crisis of patriarchy manifests itself not only in individual
self-destruction but also in a polarization of domestic violence and
sexual abuse. This painful, seemingly personal pathological phenomenon
also needs to be understood within a historical, political economy
context. On the level of an individual psyche, it might appear to be
simply the result of intergenerationally transmitted patterns of family
violence. Such an individualistic psychological reductionist
understanding of pathology and failure, however, does not explain much,
and it does not offer realistic paths for breaking out of these kinds of
family “cycles.” Primo’s earliest memories of his “nasty, alcoholic
[borrachón sucio] father” are of him beating up his mother. Worse yet,
all the subsequent men in his mother’s life offered Primo similarly
brutal masculine role models.

Primo: When I was a kid I never really liked’ed nobody to be with my
mother. I didn’t like any of her men, because I didn’t like it when they
would have fits, and hit her; get wild and beat her down.

I just used to lower my head, and wanna kill them. The only one of us
kids that used to jump in between them, was my older sister. I never
used to get involved. I’m a nervous person, I can’t …

When her boyfriends would beat her up, I never used to jump in. I used
to think: The kitchen! The knife! I’m goin’ a’ kill you.”

I used to put my hands up. I remember that a coupla’ times. [slowing his
speech pensively] Because sometimes they would go over the limit, with
like, blood.

Philippe: What!

Primo: [reassuringly] But there was never no killing, or nothing like
that involved.

Like maybe, they would give her a black eye, or something like that. I
didn’t like it.

[picking up again] What I used to do, was just lock my head under the
pillow, or something, and go, “Ahhhhh, I hate my mother.”

But my sisters, they would jump on the guy, and say, “Fuck you!” Like
that [waving his arms].

And he would chill out. I think if he would have touched my sisters,
then that’s like, the end. ’Cause it’s like, my mother first; then my
sister; then that’s just the end. I think that’s what I woulda done.

[looking up at me in surprise] Matter of fact – this is getting
personal; Felipe, your mom’s always been with the same pops, right?

Philippe: Not really; you’ve heard my mother’s story. [pausing] It’s all
right man.

Primo: But it doesn’t bother me, speaking to you about this though.

There was another guy when I was still a little kid in the ‘70s, named
Luis, who was dating my mother. He would hurt her, just to hurt her.

She wouldn’t leave him alone, even my grandmother was saying, “Deja ese
sí nvergüenza [Leave that shameless good for nothing].”

I found out afterwards, through the years, that on the sneak tip, he
used to use drugs. As a matter of fact, he was a junkie.

I still see him on the street, because he works on Third Avenue, in one
of those Ay-Rab stores that sells children’s toys and other bullshit.
But I always pretend I don’t know him.

One time he got wild on my mom. The son of a bitch was arguing with my
mother, and it escalated.

My mother wanted to call the police to get him out, but he didn’t want
to leave. I was sleeping, and woke’d up.

That was the only time I got up, and came through for my mother. My
mother called the cops, and the motherfucker grabbed a knife. My heart
stopped, but I stood in between, after he had made a coupla’ swings at
my mother.

He had a big knife in his hand, and I thought he was gonna kill me, my
mother, everybody. It seemed like he was gonna do it.

But then like, he thought about it, and he just went to the other room.
We were all there screaming, and he left.

Primo reproduced this same cycle of brutality when he beat up Candy in
front of her children. As I have already noted several times, it is not
enough to understand intimate violence in psychological or
individualistic terms. For example, many of the crack dealers not only
admitted to aspiring to the ideal-type nuclear family but had actually
lived in such households for significant periods of time. This usually
occurred during their bouts of stable, legal employment. The complex
interrelationship between joblessness, personal pathology, family
instability, and structural vulnerability in the labor market, came up
frequently in the schoolyard conversations about fatherhood that I held
with Primo and Little Pete while they sniffed speedballs and drank beer
in the troubled months before Primo’s father’s death.

Primo: I was nineteen when I had my kid. He was born in ‘83, on May
twenty-something. We were teenagers going steady – me and Sandra. I had
found a job and stayed steady with her. We got a crib, and I was making
good money.

I was a good nigga’, boy. Every penny that I used to get was for my
hobby, which was radio C.B.-ing. She got pregnant. We didn’t really want
it. But then I told her, “I’m just as responsible as you are, so if you
keep it, I’ll take the consequences.” So she kept it. It’s too bad. But
that’s all right.

We weren’t married. Her parents wanted us to get married. But I knew we
were too young, and there’s a future: and I wanted more out of life –
school and work. Between us two, it was like a struggle. Let’s suffer
now, and maybe in ten years it will be all right. But it was just about
sitting back, and bullshitting. And now she knows.

The only thing I used to complain about, was work, and money, and stuff.
And I didn’t want to live in that neighborhood in the Bronx for the rest
of my life. That apartment was too small.

I’m a perfectionist. I want everything perfect. I used to tell her, “I
want you to work too, and get welfare too maybe, while I’m working.
Let’s pay a baby-sitter so we can save up money to get the hell out of
this place here.

And I wasn’t selling drugs or doing nothing. I was a goodie, goodie. I
had money in the bank, I had money in the house. Sandra never suffered.
She was big, and pregnant, and fat.

When Papito was born I was working at U.S. Litho. I was a good nigga’. I
had good hours. I was working from four to twelve at nights.

I had stopped sniffing. You know, maybe I would have an occasional beer,
but it wasn’t like now. I was a hard worker, I was into that overtime.
Whatever they give me, I gonna work. I want to bring money to the house.

I noticed my son was growing up. This is how I stopped sniffing: One
day, my son wanted to play with me. I was in the rocking chair, and I
didn’t want to play with him. It was like, “Leave-me-alone” type shit.
And I was thinking about it, and I realized it. Plus I bled one time.

One day, I even went down, and bought a dime, and threw it in the toilet
bowl. I said, “Nah, this can’t be.” This ain’t me, ’Cause I’m always
lovable with my kids, singing songs, little school songs that I learned
when I was a kid in school… .

I used to sit in a rocking chair, reading him his ABC’s and numbers,
just to keep his mind busy. You got to read to your kids when they’re
little, like even when they’re only months old, so that they always got
things in their brain.

Little Pete: [sniffing from the cocaine pile] Yeah, I used to read my
son the ABC’s even before he had a year.

Yeah, I was good with my family. I was a good nigga’. And I used to say,
“My family comes first,” and I wouldn’t hang and stuff. I was good with
my kid. You remember Primo, how I used to dress my kid?”

Primo: Then they changed my hours to two a.m. to ten a.m. I said, “I
can’t handle them hours; I have a family.”

I used to fall asleep on the job; ’Cause I had my son. And this girl,
Sandra, my son’s mother, had found work off the books. And as she was
leaving, I was coming in, and my son was on top of me. He wanted to
play. He already slept, you know, so I couldn’t sleep.

And that’s when I started fucking up. That’s when I started smoking
“woolas” [marijuana cigarettes laced with crack], and I was drinking a
little. I was staying up all day, and then I didn’t want to go to work.

I was getting high, recovering, and then going to work. Imagine, I was
working from two a.m. to ten a.m. They fucked me up, those people at
U.S. Litho. If they would have left me at my shift from four to
midnight, I would be working there to this day. I was doing good. They
fucked up my social life, man, from two a.m. to ten a.m.

Man, it’s like, oh, God! I used to come from work; I didn’t know whether
to go to sleep, or hang out and sleep later. And my son, was there, wide
awake; he was two, and wanted to play with me.

So they fired me because I was falling asleep on the job. They said, “We
have to let you go because you have a family, and I know you want to be
with your family, because you have these hours, and we can’t switch you
back to the daylight hours. We need somebody for these hours, where you
don’t seem to fit in.”

They were firing everybody; just looking for reasons. It was like
business was bad.

After that I went AWOL smoking crack.

You know, Felipe? Now my son is six years old. It gets me sad when I
think about shit like that … It’s like, I’m not there for ‘im. Just like
my father was never there for me.

And my son loved being with me. Sometimes I was always fixing something
in the apartment. So this kid, he used to grab the tools, and just start
hammering things, like, look at me, and start trying to do the same
thing. I love that shit.

That’s why I used to cry a lot when I first left my son. It was only a
couple months after they fired me at U.S. Litho.

I used to go to the bathroom and cry like a bitch. ’Cause I knew I was
leaving soon and that meant: no more kid.

My wife told me to stay and be her roommate. But, hell no! We were
sleeping separate; there was no more love.

I guess we started too young. We got tired of each other. She used to be
a bitch. She probably got tired of my dick. That’s what I figured.

I told her, “No, I don’t want to stay here.” And finally she cried. I
had to tell her, “We’re going to kill each other, so I’m going to go.”
It was hard for me, you know, but I took my maleta [suitcase], and I
went.

I moved back to my mother. My mother accepted me with open hands, you
know, like, “You’re my son.”

My son Papito was small at the time, but he noticed it. I had to tell
her not to call me, or keep in touch with me for several months, because
I couldn’t handle it. “’Cause if you call me, I’m going to feel the same
way. And I can’t handle it. Let me call you.”

Finally, after two, three months, I called. She had a new telephone,
because I had cut off the one in my name, and she put in another one. I
didn’t want anyone else – like some other man – putting bills under my
name.

Little Pete: I was twenty when we had the kid. You know why I broke up,
’Cause she was rushing me into marriage. I was trying to get it
together, so we could move out on our own, and get married, but she was
like, desperate.

To my surprise, Primo cut short Little Pete’s whining over his previous
rocky relationship, with a class analysis of family pathology.

Primo: Basically, when a woman who is poor dedicates herself with a man
who’s poor too, then something will always go wrong. When you’re poor,
things just don’t work. And when there’s a kid involved, then everything
just totally fucks up.

But there’s nothing else you can do if you’re poor. You try, but it
still fucks up. It just doesn’t work when you’re poor.

In contrast, all of Primo’s sisters – he had no brothers – were
succeeding by street culture’s standards. They all either worked full
time at stable entry-level jobs (i.e., managing a McDonald’s, managing a
clothes boutique, and working as a nurse’s aide) or were married in
long-term relationships with young children. Primo’s pride in their
success illustrates not only how rigidly women’s roles are defined, but
also, once again, how differently they are affected by the experience of
growing up poor in El Barrio.

You know my mom’s good! She raised up three beautiful daughters that
didn’t fuck up.

Maybe they got married early and bullshit, but there’s nothing about
drugs in the streets. They know what’s good and wrong. My sisters ain’t
violent. They not in the street – none a’ that.

The only one that got pregnant when she was a teenager was the middle
one, but she’s doing well. My mother threw her out when she got
pregnant, and she had to go to her boyfriend’s mother’s house until the
baby was born.

And then after the baby was born, my mother was like, “Owwww [raising
his arms in celebration]!” That was her first grandchild, and she took
it back, and my sister moved back home.

She left her guy, ’Cause he was a fuckin’ asshole. And from there, until
this day, my mother and her, they’re like this [intertwining his index
fingers]; they’re like buddies.

She’s good. She got married now with her other kid’s father. And my
other sister, she wants to be a nurse.

I’m telling you Felipe, my home life was good. My mother raised me
pretty well. She did a great job, even though she doesn’t have an
education.

Yearning for Fatherhood

On several occasions our conversations focused specifically on how
Primo’s objectively difficult economic situation was hurting his son at
that very moment. The subject catalyzed a wellspring of paternal
emotional turmoil for both Little Pete and Primo.

Philippe: Thinking about your father, how does that make you feel about
your son right now?

Little Pete: It’s a hard question, you askin’ us, Felipe, about how we
feel about our sons.

Primo: When I think of my son, I wish I was with him. Because right now,
he and I are in the same predicament. Because I came from a broken home
already.

It’s like, I’m not there for him. It’s sad and that’s why I didn’t want
my son to go through that. I wanted to grow up with my son. With me and
the family.

That’s the way it was when I was working. I’ve told you about it; I was
a goodie-goodie. I was sitting back at home. I wasn’t into street life
then.

Little Pete: Now that you ask this question, Felipe, I hate to answer
it. I lived with my wife for five years, and my son is growing up. Now
if I was drunk out of my mind [pausing to sniff from one of the
envelopes of heroin], and you asked me that question, I’d probably start
tearing. Gets me sad.

I mean look, I have a kid right now, and I have nothing! Nothing to
offer him for the future. It’s like, I’m still growing up. Still trying
to get ahead, and yet I want to give a better life to him, but I’m not
doing too well; you know, my life is hard.

I have a clear mind and a good heart but, like I said, I fell into
drugs. In this environment, it’s hard to stay awake. It’s hard; it’s
hard. You know. I know you know it. You’ve been around us for a while.

Primo: [dipping into the cocaine] My son loves me. He’s crazy about me.

Little Pete: [also sniffing cocaine] He wants to live with me, but he’s
not old enough to choose. But as soon as he’s old enough, I’ll take it
up with the court.

Primo: [switching to heroin] No, I wouldn’t take it to court, because I
have this understanding with my wife. I can go visit. It took her
husband a while for him to understand me and her.

I’ve sat him down, and I’ve talked to him. I’ve told him: “Look I don’t
want your woman; I wouldn’t diss you; I wouldn’t disrespect you; I
wouldn’t do nothing stupid. I’m only here for my son.”

But there’s still that feeling of, “Fuck you, Primo, don’t come around.”

Sandra, my ex-wife, told me that when I’m there, he just covers up, but
that afterwards, they fight.

[energized by a cocaine rush] But you know what, man! I believe in … I
believe that when you’re with someone, and you have a child, you should
make the fucking best of it, whether you’re doing good or not. You gotta
make a commitment.

It always seems like I’m full of shit when I say things like that,
’Cause I don’t support my kid, but that’s because, I … right now, I’m
not supporting my son, but …

[mellowing on a heroin ebb] Matter of fact, you know last weekend, when
we were talking one time about the last time we had cried, that’s the
last time I teared, was last weekend. I was thinking about my little
nigga’. I was supposed to keep him for the weekend, but I called too
late. I fucked up. It was a hassle.

[perking up again] Matter of fact, I remember my father once saying to
my mother that he used to cry, because he misses me, because I’m his
only son.

But I want to get Papito to come here, so he can see what I’m all about.
But I think the best thing is for him …

[mumbling confusedly] I don’t know, man. I don’t know …

Little Pete: [morosely on a heroin lull] I got two credit cards,
MasterCard, Visa, I got Citicard. I’m applying for Macy’s, but I’m not a
success. Yeah, I am, and I’m not. I mean, I got laid off at work.

But don’t you understand that I’m not together with my woman; I’m not
together with my child; and I’m not settled like I was before.

[sniffing cocaine] When I was with my woman and my kid, I had no time to
think about drugs; no time to think about hanging out. You know I just
wanted to be there with my people.

[energized] They say a woman makes a man, and a man makes a woman. My
wife helped me out a lot. She was very good to me. Very good when I was
with her. Then, when we broke up, I went through a lot of mishaps, you
know. Like I became lazy.

Primo: [still in a lull] My father was an alcoholic, and he beat down my
mom every time he got drunk. So they just got separated, you know.

[energized] But it’s like it’s okay. That didn’t really affect my
growing up.

[calm again] The only thing I could say, that could affect the family,
is the lack of true parents for a child, when there’s only one parent
there’s something missing. I really think so.

I mean, we always wondered why he wasn’t around. And I felt bad too.

Philippe: And what about what you’re doing to your son Papito now? Do
you think that you’re repeating the relationship of your father between
you and your son?

Primo: No, no, because I don’t even remember being with my father
anyway.

Philippe: Doesn’t your son miss you?

Primo: [swigging from a pint of Bacardi] Of course! My son wants to be
near me.

Like I was talking to him last Sunday and I spoke to him and I said,
“Look, I’m going to give you my phone number, get a paper and pencil. I
want you to call me Friday, when you get out of school, so you can spend
some time with me.”

He said, “Hold on, Daddy,” and he told his moms immediately after I had
told him. He said, “Hold on. Hold on.” Then he called out [covering an
invisible phone receiver, and imitating a child’s voice], “Mom, my daddy
said, that on Friday, when I get out of school, that I gotta call him,
and he’s going to come pick me up, so I can be with him in Manhattan.”

He was happy, boy! Right now he must be thinking about it, because I
wasn’t at home to get his call, and I didn’t pick him up. I didn’t want
to disappoint him, and now I can’t call, because I don’t got carfare,
and his mother’s not going to come bring him to me. She’s going to say,
“You come pick him up.” And he’s going to be, “Oh, Daddy, you told me …
HHHHHHUUU” [makes crying sound].

I cry too, when I think back to the days when I was living with my kid.
Now I feel bad, ’Cause a few days away from today, it’s Papito’s
birthday, and I’m not gonna give him anything. I don’t got the money.

Philippe: You wouldn’t rather have those twenty-five dollars you just
paid for the dope [heroin] and the perico [cocaine], to spend on your
son’s birthday present instead?

Primo: Well, if I was to have the money, if it was there, well then I
would do it. But once I’m out here on the streets, and that’s just, like
… what I have … I’ll spend it; I’ll fuck it up.

Little Pete: [interrupting] Like right now, I’m not working. But when I
was working I used to mail my wife a money order every month. My wife
gave my social security number to the court, but they didn’t have to
take the money out of my check. I used to mail it to them.

Primo: I’m not good with money, anyway. I won’t see him this weekend,
because I’m broke. I could have him every weekend if I wanted it. But I
don’t want it like that. ’Cause once I see him one weekend, I like to
have the next one for me.

Naah, I’ll definitely get him a present. I love that nigga’.

Primo never bought Papito his seven-year-old birthday present. In fact,
he did not even go visit him that week. Coincidentally, during these
same days in front of my tenement stoop, my pre-teenage neighbors, Manny
and Angel, provided me with glimpses of the flip side of the father—son
generation gap. Eyes sparkling, Angel told me proudly, “I’m going to see
my father this weekend.” His little brother Manny immediately responded
with his eyes dark and sad, “I’m not gonna see my father.” As if by
script, just moments later on the sidewalk in front of our stoop, we saw
another little boy nicknamed Papito, who was my neighbor’s
three-year-old son, shrieking with delight. A twenty-year-old man
swaggered up almost embarrassedly to hug the little boy, mumbling
affectionately “Ay mi hijo [Oh, my son],” while the mother watched
expressionlessly. Papito’s father had just been allowed out of prison
for the afternoon on a drug rehabilitation—work release arrangement. An
hour or so later, little Papito was screeching again, but this time in
pain. His father had to leave in a rush in order to report back to
prison before dusk. The superintendent of our tenement later explained
to me that Papito’s father was the person who had burglarized Papito’s
mother’s apartment two and a half years ago when Papito was only six
months old. Papito’s father had known the apartment was empty because he
was supposed to be meeting his son, Papito, in the park at the time. His
new girlfriend served as lookout while he stole the VCR and television
from his son’s apartment.

Meanwhile, a few hours past midnight, back on the steps overlooking the
East River Drive, Little Pete waxed emotional on a cocaine rush within
the roller-coaster ecstasy of the contradictory ebbs and flows of his
speedball high. He jumped up to celebrate what appeared to me, at the
time, to be a historical vestige of his parents’ idealized jí baro past:

Little Pete: If I was sixty years old right now, you know what really
make me, wanna be alive, is that I would wanna be there for my kids.

You know what really make me be there, and hang in strong? My kids. I
would want to be there for my kids. I would want to love my kids. I
would want to teach my kids. That’s the only thing. And I swear to God.
And it’s coming from my heart. That’s the only thing that would make me
stay alive, and have ánimo [spirit]; to stay around; to survive; is my
kids.

When Primo’s father finally died, Caesar and I took him, once again,
behind the local high school to help him grieve. He lifted several
scoopfuls of cocaine into his nose, using the edge of a folded matchbook
cover, and spoke to us in a sober, halting tone:

Primo: I act like nothing, but I feel sad inside. You know, I started
thinking about it, my father didn’t see none of his grandchildren. I
just felt like … like a little part of me just went away.

But my mother took it like nothing, because my father wasn’t good to my
mother, he was a nasty motherfucker; used to hit her; get drunk; and
diss the shit out of her.

Caesar: Yeah, when my grandpa died too, my grandmother didn’t care. She
said, “If he dies, fuck it! ’Cause he wasn’t really good.”

Primo: Maria was there too, when my sister called, to tell us he died.

Maria told me like this, “You, and your mother are taking it like it was
nothing.”

I told her, “What you want me to do? If I start crying right now, that’s
not going to bring him back. The only way I could keep him alive, is by
thinking about him, in my mind, you know. That’s it. And I haven’t seen
him for so long.”

If he would’ve been part of my life for all these years, I would’ve been
hysterical, but it’s been so long, you know. It’s just that I feel sad
in my heart, but not …

Caesar: Yeah, if my father was to die. It be like nothing to me, “Hey,
bury him.” I mean, I didn’t ever know him, or nothing; so I don’t have
no feelings towards him. I ain’t angry at my father. He was just an
impossible pops. And that was a long time ago, and that’s it.

Now if my step-pops passed away, I would feel for him, because he’s my
Pops to me. I grew up with him; he was around me.

I don’t see him, as much now, as I used to, but … he was a part of my
life when I was little, so I would feel for him. Because to me, he’s
always going to be my Poppy.

I call him, “Poppy,” right now, as big as I am. To me, I always say,
“Yo, there’s my Poppy.” That was my Pop, I loved that man.¹¹

But he’s wild too. I mean he never treated me bad, man. I never remember
him hitting me all that much. He only got stingy with me when I got big.

Primo: Yeah, my pa was a stingy motherfucker, but I never had nothing
against him.

Caesar: Yeah, now my Pops is like, “Get a job, already” and shit.

Primo: [morosely again] I told my sister to take pictures of our father,
like in the coffin, but she told me that she don’t want to, because it’s
sad. I told her I’d develop the roll.

Caesar: It must have been a superstition thing. That runs in my family
too.

Primo: Yeah, she flipped on me. It must have been my father’s sister
that scooped her with all her “espiritismo” [Santerí a beliefs], because
she took pictures of my mother’s side of the family, when my
great-grandmother passed away; and she took pictures of my grandfather
when he passed away; and she took pictures of my cousin …

I mean she didn’t have to take pictures in the hospital, when my father
was going to have tubes and stuff; but in the coffin, so I could see him
when they buried him, like if I was there.

I was jolted out of Primo’s mourning by a wave of panic when I saw a
half-dozen young men walking across the East River Drive coming toward
us, and I realized it was at least 3:00 a.m. and there were more of them
than us. A year earlier, a thirty-five-year-old homeless man had been
killed with baseball bats, knives, and a meat cleaver along this same
East River esplanade, and a few months later the body of a
thirteen-year-old new immigrant from Colombia was found raped,
strangled, and stabbed to death at the same spot.¹² Looking at Primo
tearing in the darkness, and Caesar hunched over glumly under a
sweatshirt hood, I realized I was probably safe. My companions
automatically inspired a reciprocal fear in anyone who might think of
mugging us at this hour of the night, in an isolated setting such as
this one. Nevertheless, I could not stop myself from muttering
nervously, “Yo, static [motioning at the oncoming youths with my chin].
You think it’s dangerous here?” Primo simply responded gently and
calmly, “No.” He and Caesar could be completely secure in their
hoodlum-like demeanor.

Accommodating Patriarchy

Most of the wives and girlfriends of Ray’s employees eventually broke
their abusive relationships and expelled their men from their
households. They usually went on, however, to fall in love with a new
man who was equally insolvent and irresponsible toward their children.
This process of serial household formation has spawned a street culture
logic that partially exonerates fathers from the responsibility of
maintaining progeny. Candy used to argue with me when I “dissed” the men
around us for failing to support their children.

Candy: You don’t understand, Felipe. Some men are just like that. It
doesn’t mean they are very bad fathers. Maybe they don’t got a job and
they don’t support their kid right now. But maybe they will support him
some other day.

And suppose the mother’s got another man. I mean, I’ll be damned, if I’m
a man, and if I’ll be giving a woman money to support another nigga’.
Just because she wants – excuse my language – sex pleasure; or just
because she wants to be with another guy.

Because let me tell you something, if your woman got kids, and you got
the woman, then you gotta take the whole package completely.

[smiling at Primo over the slang term “package,” meaning vagina] It’s a
whole package deal. Whoever wants me, gotta take my whole package deal.
All five of us. Me and my four kids.

My man better not come to me and say, “I’m not going to give you no
twenty dollars for your little girl’s shoes … That’s not my kid.” No,
no, no, you want the package [grabbing her crotch with both hands and
making us roar with laughter], you pay for the whole package deal
[pointing at two of her children, Junior who was pushing Lillian in a
baby carriage by the Game Room stoop].

I mean I haven’t gotten involved with another man lately, because people
wants everything for nothing. I don’t go like that. Meat is too
expensive. [knocking Primo’s arm into his crotch] Do you hear me? Meat
is too expensive. [giggles]

I frequently heard this kind of refrain legitimizing the formation of
serial households by both men and women. Luis, for example, righteously
berated the mothers of his children whenever they asked him for money.

I tell them, “Whoever be with you; they have better look out for my
kids. Because they ain’t going to get your pussy for free.”

Because you know, if you going out with a lady, it’s just common sense:
If she got other kids, you look out for them. Just because they ain’t
yours, doesn’t mean you got to dish [diss] them.

I went out with this lady on 104th Street for three years; she got five
kids; none of them are mine; and I used to look out for them, bro. On
school days, I used to buy them their first day of school clothes, and
all that shit. You shoulda seen me, how I was stealing car radios, like
a madman. Breaking into cars – getting three, four, five radios in one
night – just to buy them new sneakers.

Now there are some women that say, “Fuck it. As long as he loves me, he
doesn’t have to love my kids.” No way, man. I say, “Boy … if you don’t
love my kids you don’t love me. Fuck you!”

There some men that’ll hit a woman’s kids, and they ain’t even their
father!

Although many of the dealers often claimed publicly to be merely
parasites on their girlfriends’ resources – catcheteando – they in fact
often contributed significant resources during moments of crisis or
celebration. Indeed, there might be a material basis, as well as
emotional and cultural ones, for Candy’s accommodation to machismo.
Given the available men in her life, her only other alternative would be
to live in isolation as a single mother with her children. Her
interpretation is even more militant, a female-essentialist celebration
of mother love. Ultimately, her interpretation provides her with greater
autonomy over her sex life and household resources.

Candy: You don’t understand Felipe. Those are our kids, we carry them in
our stomach. Sure, I feel a father’s responsibility is to support his
kids when he’s together with his wife. But when he leaves, the mother
has to support her kids, because kids feel more towards us – their
mothers – because we are the ones having them. We get the pain; the
feeling is inside our stomach.

All the man does is – excuse my way of saying this – is just give us
sperm and that’s it. But we’re the ones really risking our lives to have
kids, because it’s not easy to have a baby. Okay? It’s painful; it’s
hard; it’s a matter of life and death.

So do you think I’m going to go through that, and just, leave the
responsibility to the father?

No! It’s my kid. I had him in there [pointing to her stomach]. It’s like
a part of my own body. You know, just taking a piece of your own body,
and putting it out there.

Candy’s celebration of motherhood is paralleled by her celebration of a
father’s patriarchal rights, even when he does not support or love his
children.

Candy: If the father leaves the kids, you know, it’s bad enough that the
kid is neglected by a father. So why do you want to teach a kid to hate
a father? It’s enough for a kid, not to have a parent, not to have a
father, right? I ain’t gonna say, “Your father’s a bastard, he’s no
good.”

You know what happens? They wind up turning against the mother. It’s
going to make them hate me, for reminding them, how bad their father is.
Let them learn on their own.

Perhaps Candy was simply realistic about the embeddedness of the male
prerogative in everyday life. Confronting patriarchy from a position of
powerlessness wreaks havoc on the psyches of children when they are
conditioned culturally to respect male authority unconditionally.
Candy’s efforts to include men in her life by accommodating male
prerogatives over children were not reciprocated, however. After Felix
was jailed, for example, Caesar cited the absence of a man in her
household as proof that her qualities as a mother were flawed. It was a
Catch-22 triumph of of old-fashioned patriarchal logic.

Caesar: Candy ain’t no fuckin’ fine example. She ain’t no
Leave-it-to-Beaver mom. She don’t know shit about raising kids. Just
’Cause she got five kids don’t mean she know how to raise them.

If Candy’s such a good parent, she’ll have a husband right? Because if
you’re really a good parent, you’re supposed to be two parents.

Why doesn’t she have a husband?

9 CONCLUSION

Ooh, Felipe! You make us sound like such sensitive crack dealers.

Caesar [commenting on the manuscript]

There is no panacea for the suffering and self-destruction of the
protagonists in these pages. Solutions to inner-city poverty and
substance abuse framed in terms of public policy often appear naive or
hopelessly idealistic. Given the dimensions of structural oppression in
the United States, it is atheoretical to expect isolated policy
initiatives, or even short-term political reforms, to remedy the plight
of the poor in U.S. urban centers in the short or medium term. Racism
and class segregation in the United States are shaped in too complex a
mesh of political-economic structural forces, historical legacies,
cultural imperatives, and individual actions to be susceptible to simple
solutions.

There are also the inevitable limits of political feasibility. For a
number of complicated historical and ideological reasons the United
States simply lacks the political will to address poverty in any
concerted manner. Nevertheless, I hope my presentation of the experience
of social marginalization in El Barrio, as seen through the struggles
for dignity and survival of Ray’s crack dealers and their families,
contributes on a concrete practical level to calling attention to the
tragedy of persistent poverty and racial segregation in the urban United
States. I cannot resign myself to the terrible irony that the richest
industrialized nation on earth, and the greatest world power in history,
confines so many of its citizens to poverty and to prison. In these
final pages, consequently, I address some of the short-term public
policy debates, even if ultimately they prove to be nothing but
sideshows for confronting long-term structural problems.¹

Confronting Racial and Class Inequality – Instead of Drugs

Substance abuse is perhaps the dimension of inner-city poverty most
susceptible to short-term policy intervention. In part, this is because
drugs are not the root of the problems presented in these pages; they
are the epiphenomenonal expression of deeper, structural dilemmas.
Self-destructive addiction is merely the medium for desperate people to
internalize their frustration, resistance, and powerlessness. In other
words, we can safely ignore the drug hysterias that periodically sweep
through the United States. Instead we should focus our ethical concerns
and political energies on the contradictions posed by the persistence of
inner-city poverty in the midst of extraordinary opulence. In the same
vein, we need to recognize and dismantle the class- and ethnic-based
apartheids that riddle the U.S. landscape.

The crack—cocaine—heroin epidemics of the late-1980s through mid-1990s,
however, have been qualitatively worse than the narcotics and alcohol
scourges of most previous generations. The contemporary exacerbation of
substance abuse within concentrated pockets of the U.S. population has
little or nothing to do with the pharmacological properties of the
particular drugs involved. Indeed, history teaches us that the effect,
or at least the meanings, of drug use are largely culturally
constructed. Most important, in the United States they articulate with
class inequalities and racial—ideological hierarchies. To reiterate: The
problem of substance abuse in the United States is worse in the 1990s
than in the recent past because of a polarization of the structural
roots that generate self-destructive behavior and criminal activity. The
economic base of the traditional working class has eroded throughout the
country. Greater proportions of the population are being socially
marginalized. The restructuring of the world economy by multinational
corporations, finance capital, and digital electronic technology, as
well as the exhaustion of social democratic models for public sector
intervention on behalf of the poor, have escalated inequalities around
class, ethnicity, and gender.²

The 1990 U.S. Census reveals sharp bifurcations in socioeconomic status
at the margins of society. This is part of a longer-term trend between
1968 and 1992, when poverty rose by one-third in the United States. More
specifically, the poorest sectors of the population during these years
experienced the greatest increment in poverty levels at the same time
that the rich increased their relative numbers by 40 percent. Children
suffered the most, with an almost 100 percent increase in the number of
children living below the official poverty line between 1968 and 1992.³
Polarization occurred at all levels, both across class and within ethnic
groups. For example, while the aggregate socioeconomic statistics for
many ethnic groups, including Puerto Ricans, improved during the 1980s,
this masked internal class, gender, and regional increases in inequality
and social suffering. The class stratification of African-Americans has
already been well documented. The same phenomenon is emerging among
Puerto Ricans living in the United States.⁴ This assumes a regional
dynamic as well. Puerto Ricans residing in New York City are
considerably poorer than Puerto Ricans in most other parts of the
mainland United States.⁵ Even within New York City there has been an
increasing polarization of social inequality among Puerto Ricans along
class, gender, and generational lines. For example, during the 1980s, at
the same time that Puerto Rican household incomes rose by 28.5 percent
in New York City, Puerto Rican female-headed households with children
lost 6.1 percent of their incomes, and elderly household incomes
decreased by 7.6 percent. Married Puerto Ricans in New York dramatically
increased their incomes by 40.6 percent to a figure that is almost 70
percent higher than the median Puerto Rican family income. Perhaps most
significantly, more than half of New York City’s Puerto Rican children
remained below the official poverty line, as did 38 percent of all
Puerto Rican New Yorkers as a whole.⁶

These secular trends in the polarization of U.S. poverty as well as the
longer-term transformations in the structure of the world economy need
to be related back to the public policy debates I promised to broach in
the opening paragraphs of this conclusion – specifically, substance
abuse. Any realistic attempt to address the “drug problem” has to alter
the economic imbalance between the rewards of the legal economy versus
those of the underground economy. In the case of narcotics retail sales
– the biggest equal opportunity employer for males in the street economy
– this requires a two-pronged attack: (1) The economic dynamism of the
drug economy must be reduced; and (2) the fragility and hostility of the
entry-level legal labor market needs to be transformed.

In terms of concrete, short-term public policy, the single cheapest and
simplest way to wipe out the material basis for the most violent and
criminal dimensions of street culture is to destroy the profitability of
narcotic trafficking by decriminalizing drugs. Experts estimate it costs
approximately $8 to $10 to produce an ounce of pure powder cocaine.⁷
This same ounce in East Harlem is worth more than $2,000, once it is
adulterated and packaged into $10 quarter-gram vials. This extraordinary
$1,990 profit represents the economic incentive for participation in the
most violent and destructive facet of the underground economy.
Ironically, therefore, decriminalization would make drugs less
accessible to youths on inner-city streets because it would no longer be
worthwhile for dealers to hawk their wares in small quantities on street
corners. Street dealers would be forced out of business by the laws of
neoclassical economics. If illicit drugs were decriminalized, youths
walking to school every day in East Harlem would no longer be bombarded
with offers of psychotropic stimulants because the retail sale of drugs
would no longer be so extraordinarily profitable. The government would
also not have to waste billions of dollars prosecuting and confining
drug users in ridiculously inefficient and expensive prisons. Violent
crime, property theft, and medical costs would be dramatically reduced
once addicts no longer had to pay exorbitant sums for their daily doses.
Dealers would also no longer have such high profits to fight over. The
alternative, of course, is to lock everyone up. Incarceration is not
only prohibitively expensive, but it cannot be accomplished without
violating individual human rights. In the 1990s, the United States
already bore the shame of having the highest per capita incarceration
rate in the world. The U.S. prison population increased threefold from
1980 through 1994.⁸

Decriminalization of drugs in a vacuum would not significantly reduce
violence and self-destruction in the inner city so long as it remains so
difficult in the United States for high school and college dropouts to
earn a dignified subsistence income by legal means. The private sector
and the free market over the past several generations have proven
themselves incapable of generating materially and emotionally rewarding
entry-level jobs. Aggressive political intervention is necessary to
promote economic opportunities for the marginal working class. Another
simpler and shorter-term solution would be to dismantle the hostile
bureaucratic maze that punishes the poor for working legally. This means
that transfer payments for obvious human needs – which are taken for
granted in almost all other industrialized nations in the world – such
as health, shelter, education, and nutrition – should not be rigidly
penalized when an impoverished household reports supplemental legal
income. Once again, dozens of concrete policy initiatives come to mind
that would help to rebalance the incentives for pursuing legal careers
instead of illegal ones – from allowing the unemployed workers to be
enrolled in educational programs while they receive their unemployment
stipends, to continuing food stamp payments, income subsidies, and
Medicaid eligibility to individuals and households that leave public
assistance and enter the labor market. In the long term this would allow
mainstream society to benefit from the immense brain drain and crushed
human potential within the cohorts of energetic, entrepreneurial
inner-city youths who choose to bank on drugs rather than on
minimum-wage jobs. The “American Dream” of upward mobility has to be
reinvented by boosting the credibility of the legal economy as an
alternative to crime. On a theoretical level, it is clear that no
society is propelled by “values” alone. From a practical perspective, it
is simply unrealistic, in the highly materialistic context of the larger
U.S. culture, to deny the straightforward economic logic of criminal
enterprise. Concrete, material alternatives have to be available to
motivated youths who live in poverty if anything is to change.

The increasing material and political powerlessness of the working poor
in the United States needs to become a central concern. The
concentration of poverty, substance abuse, and criminality within
inner-city enclaves such as East Harlem is the product of state policy
and free market forces that have inscribed spatially the rising levels
of social inequality discussed earlier. More subtly, this urban decay
expresses itself in the growing polarization around street culture in
North America, giving rise to what some observers call a “crisis in U.S.
race relations.” Middle-class society and its elites increasingly have
been able to disassociate themselves from the ethnically distinct,
urban-based working poor and unemployed who inhabit the inner city.
Budget cuts and fiscal austerity have accelerated the trend toward
public sector breakdown in impoverished urban neighborhoods, while
services improve, or at least stay the same, in Anglo-dominated, wealthy
suburban communities.

[image]

Public sector breakdown in El Barrio. Photo by Philippe Bourgois.

The psychological-reductionist and cultural-essentialist analyses of
social marginalization that pass for common sense in the United States
frame solutions to racism and poverty around short-term interventions
that target the “bad attitude” of individuals. The biggest sociological
unit for most poverty policy intervention, for example, is the nuclear
family. Job training programs emphasize attitude and personal
empowerment. Seminars designed to promote multicultural sensitivity are
fashionable in both public and private sector institutions. While these
initiatives are not harmful, and might even help superficially on the
margins, it is the institutionalized expression of racism – America’s de
facto apartheid and inner-city public sector breakdown – that government
policy and private sector philanthropy need to address if anything is
ever to change significantly in the long run.

In other words, to draw on a classic metaphor from sports, the United
States needs to level its playing field. Concretely, this means that the
garbage needs to be picked up, schools have to teach, and laws must be
enforced, as effectively in Latino/a, African-American, Asian, and
Native American communities as they are in white, middle-class suburbs.
There is nothing particularly complicated or subtle about remedying the
unequal provision of public funds and services across class and ethnic
lines. Hundreds of short-term policy and legal reforms immediately jump
to mind: from tax reform – namely, taxing the home mortgages of the
upper middle class, and exempting the federal and state transfer
benefits of the poor – to streamlining access to social welfare benefits
and democratizing educational institutions – namely, universal
affordable health care coverage, free day care, equalizing per capita
funding for schools and universities, and so on.

Hip Hop Jí baro: Toward a Politics of Mutual Respect

One message the crack dealers communicated clearly to me is that they
are not driven solely by simple economic exigency. Like most humans on
earth, in addition to material subsistence, they are also searching for
dignity and fulfillment. In the Puerto Rican context this incorporates
cultural definitions of respeto built around a personal concern for
autonomy, self-assertion, and community within constantly changing
social hierarchies of statuses based on kinship, age, and gender.
Complex cultural and social dimensions that extend far beyond material
and logistical requirements have to be addressed by poverty policies if
the socially marginal in the United States are ever going to be able to
demand, and earn, the respect that mainstream society needs to share
with them for its own good. Specifically, this means evaluating how
public policy initiatives and the more impersonal political economy
forces of the larger society interact with rapidly changing cultural
definitions of gender and family. Women, children, and the elderly
constitute most of the poor in the United States. Public policy
intervention consequently should prioritize the needs of women and
children instead of marginalizing them. Most important, poor women
should not be forced to seek desperate alliances with men in order to
stay sheltered, fed, clothed, and healthy. Current welfare policy
explicitly encourages mothers to seek men with unreported illegal
income. In this vein, the lack of safe, affordable child care in the
United States contradictorily encourages mothers to stay at home and
have more babies rather than seek careers in the legal economy, because
anything they might earn goes to pay for private baby-sitters.

Almost none of the policy recommendations I have made so far are
politically feasible in the United States in the short or medium term. I
only attempt to raise them for discussion in the hope that in the
inevitable ebbs, flows, and ruptures around popular support for new
political approaches to confronting poverty, ethnic discrimination, and
gender inequality in the coming years, some of these ideas could be
dragged into the mainstream of public debates, and that maybe bits and
pieces of them could be instituted over the coming decades in one form
or another. Once again, on a deeper level, the U.S. common sense, which
blames victims for their failures and offers only individualistic
psychologically rooted solutions to structural contradictions has to be
confronted and changed. We have to break out of the dead-end political
debates between liberal politicians, who want to flood the inner city
with psychiatric social workers or family therapists, and conservatives,
who simply want to build bigger prisons, cut social welfare spending,
and decrease taxes for big business and the wealthy. The fact that Head
Start is widely considered to be the most successful poverty
intervention program indicates the banality of policy debates in the
United States. Essentially, Head Start seeks to take inner-city
preschoolers who live in lead-painted, rat-infested tenements without
steady heat or hot water, and metamorphose them into bright-eyed,
upper-middle-class overachievers. It illustrates well the long-term
inadequacy of policy initiatives that focus on individual symptoms of
social misery, such as low self-esteem, violent persona, or deficient
academic skills, instead of addressing the material and political forces
that generate the neglect, battery, or hunger of children in
economically fragile families. The painful symptoms of inner-city
apartheid will continue to produce record numbers of substance abusers,
violent criminals, and emotionally disabled and angry youths if nothing
is done to reverse the trends in the United States since the late 1960s
around rising relative poverty rates and escalating ethnic and class
segregation.

Given the bleak perspectives for policy reform at the federal level, on
the one hand, or for political mobilization in the U.S. inner city, on
the other, my most immediate goal in this book is to humanize the public
enemies of the United States without sanitizing or glamorizing them. In
documenting the depths of personal pain that are inherent to the
experience of persistent poverty and institutional racism, I hope to
contribute to our understanding of the fundamental processes and
dynamics of oppression in the United States. More subtly, I also want to
place drug dealers and street-level criminals into their rightful
position within the mainstream of U.S. society. They are not “exotic
others” operating in an irrational netherworld. On the contrary, they
are “made in America.” Highly motivated, ambitious inner-city youths
have been attracted to the rapidly expanding, multibillion-dollar drug
economy during the 1980s and 1990s precisely because they believe in
Horatio Alger’s version of the American Dream.⁹

Like most other people in the United States, drug dealers and street
criminals are scrambling to obtain their piece of the pie as fast as
possible. In fact, in their pursuit of success they are even following
the minute details of the classical Yankee model for upward mobility.
They are aggressively pursuing careers as private entrepreneurs; they
take risks, work hard, and pray for good luck. They are the ultimate
rugged individualists braving an unpredictable frontier where fortune,
fame, and destruction are all just around the corner, and where the
enemy is ruthlessly hunted down and shot. In the specifically Puerto
Rican context, resistance to mainstream society’s domination and pride
in street culture identity resonates with a reinvented vision of the
defiant jí baro who refused to succumb to elite society’s denigration
under Spanish and U.S. colonialism. The hyper-urban reconstruction of a
hip-hop version of the rural jí baro represents the triumph of a newly
constituted Puerto Rican cultural assertion among the most marginalized
members of the Puerto Rican diaspora. The tragedy is that the material
base for this determined search for cultural respect is confined to the
street economy.

At the same time, there is nothing exotically Puerto Rican about the
triumphs and failures of the protagonists of this book. On the contrary,
“mainstream America” should be able to see itself in the characters
presented on these pages and recognize the linkages. The inner city
represents the United States’ greatest domestic failing, hanging like a
Damocles sword over the larger society. Ironically, the only force
preventing this suspended sword from falling is that drug dealers,
addicts, and street criminals internalize their rage and desperation.
They direct their brutality against themselves and their immediate
community rather than against their structural oppressors. From a
comparative perspective, and in a historical context, the painful and
prolonged self-destruction of people like Primo, Caesar, Candy, and
their children is cruel and unnecessary. There is no technocratic
solution. Any long-term paths out of the quagmire will have to address
the structural and political economic roots, as well as the ideological
and cultural roots of social marginalization. The first step out of the
impasse, however, requires a fundamental ethical and political
reevaluation of basic socioeconomic models and human values.

EPILOGUE

Sometimes at night I stand in front of my son. I just look at him, and I
cry. I be thinking: “I don’t deserve such a good little nigga’. And
besides Felipe, what’s gonna happen to him? I’m twenty-six years old
already. I mean, I don’t know what the fuck I’m doing in life. I don’t
got no direction. You gotta help me Felipe – please!

Caesar

I returned to New York City during the spring and part of the summer and
fall of 1994 to make the final revisions on this manuscript and prepare
this epilogue. As it goes to press:

Primo has not sold drugs for more than three years and has cut his ties
to Ray. He no longer sniffs cocaine or even drinks alcohol. As a matter
of fact, on one occasion when an acquaintance from the Game Room
insisted on buying him a beer, he discreetly poured it into the gutter.

For the third summer in a row, Primo has found a temporary job, earning
$500 a week before taxes, as a night porter in a luxury high-rise
condominium building on the Upper East Side. He is replacing the
full-time, unionized night porters who go on vacation during the summer
months. Primo missed several days of work when he was hospitalized for a
week because of an asthma attack precipitated by an allergic reaction to
debris he cleaned up in the condominium building’s maintenance—repair
facility. Primo persuaded his doctors not to “write him up for asthma,”
because he fears that management will not hire him on a full-time basis,
due to his medical condition.

Primo’s only outstanding legal problem is caused by a collection agency
attempting to recover the money he borrowed to pay for the tuition of
the maintenance-engineer vocational training institute that went
bankrupt and never issued him a graduation certificate. The interest on
his original $2,400 loan has raised his debt to more than $4,000. The
collection agency seized $1,700, the full amount of his 1994 income tax
refund.

Maria asked Primo to move out of her household because of his sexual
involvement with another woman. Primo now lives in his mother’s
high-rise housing project apartment along with his oldest sister.
Despite breaking up with Maria, Primo visits her regularly and has a
close, warm relationship with his youngest son, three-year-old Primo
Jr., whom he frequently takes out for walks.

Primo’s fifty-nine-year-old mother has AIDS and is suffering from
dementia. He wonders if the fact that her brain has been affected is
related to a battering she received several years ago from a boyfriend
who beat her unconscious with a New York City police lock, “you know
those long metal bars that come up from the floor and lean against the
middle of a door to keep it from getting bashed in – that’s what he hit
her with.” She suffered a serious concussion and the doctors warned her
at that time of possible long-term neurological complications.

New York City Housing Authority inspectors took advantage of Primo’s
mother’s mental vulnerability and arranged to interview her in private
in order to document the amount of her son’s income and his dates of
residence in her apartment. They are threatening to institute collection
procedures for several thousand dollars in recalculated back rent to
reflect Primo’s undeclared legal income.

Primo also worries about the safety and welfare of his eleven-year-old
son, Papito, who failed fifth grade in a parochial school in the South
Bronx, where he lives with his mother and his three half brothers and
sisters. For four months, Papito’s mother, Sandra, forbade Primo from
seeing Papito after Primo’s mother reported her to the Bureau for Child
Welfare (BCW) when Papito took shelter in her apartment following a
beating by Sandra’s newest boyfriend, the father of her fourth child.
This tension, however, defused sufficiently for Papito to spend six
weeks at Primo’s mother’s apartment during the summer.

Maria lost her subsidized apartment and was forced to move back with her
young son into her alcoholic mother’s project apartment. She is
determinedly looking for her own, independent place, but has not been
able to save enough money to pay for the security deposit for an
apartment in a private tenement building. After several attempts at
working at fast-food restaurants – including at a McDonald’s managed by
Primo’s oldest sister – Maria continues to receive welfare and food
stamps. Primo voluntarily provides her with child support payments when
he is working legally, but this does not change her economic situation
significantly as his cash contributions are monitored by New York City’s
Family Court and are deducted from the payments Maria receives for food
stamps and from Aid to Families with Dependent Children. Although Maria
hopes eventually to be reunited with Primo in a conjugal household, she
refuses to let him live with her until he commits himself to long-term
sexual fidelity.

Caesar no longer sells drugs. He continues to receive a monthly SSI
check and lives with Carmen, their three-and-a-half-year-old son, Caesar
Jr., Carmen’s seven-year-old son, Papo, and her nine-year-old daughter,
Ruby, in his grandmother’s former project apartment opposite the Game
Room. Caesar’s grandmother, who is now in the advanced stages of
Alzheimer’s disease, left the old-age home where she had been interned
and moved into her younger sister’s nearby tenement apartment.

Caesar continues to smoke most of his SSI checks during once-a-month
crack binges. He also sniffs heroin regularly. Carmen supplements her
welfare check by selling Avon products. The household was recently
visited by an inspector from the BCW when a public school teacher
reported Carmen’s eldest daughter, Ruby, for exhibiting signs of
psychological and physical abuse. Apparently Ruby is deeply depressed
and never talks in class. Carmen periodically takes refuge at her sister
Maria’s house with her children to escape Caesar’s beatings.

When my wife and I visited Caesar and Carmen, their youngest son, Caesar
Jr., joined us in the living room and exhibited the vitality of a
healthy, happy three-year-old. His older brother and sister, however,
were “visiting their father’s grandmother in Florida.” This was in early
June when school was still in session, so they may be shifting their
permanent household to their father’s kin because of their stepfather’s
abuse.

Caesar came to a Father’s Day party at Maria’s project apartment. He
arrived with Carmen and their son, Caesar Jr., who had a fresh bruise on
his right cheekbone that Caesar and Carmen say comes from falling off of
a bed. Caesar left the party early when he became angry at Primo for
refusing to lend him money to buy heroin. In May, Carmen placed Caesar
on a waiting list for admittance to a drug treatment program run by
Phoenix House. Caesar agreed to intern himself in the facility, but when
treatment spaces had still not been made available by August, Carmen
finally threw Caesar out of the household after he sold their television
set. His aunt paid for his train ticket to visit another aunt in Ocala,
Florida, hoping this will keep him away from crack.

Candy no longer sells drugs or works. She suffered a grave
disappointment upon graduating from her court-ordered nurse’s aide
training course when the downtown podiatry office where she found a job
proved to be “a bunch of scandalous, conniving schemers.” They
specialized in diagnosing fictitious ailments and operating needlessly
on people’s feet. This enabled them to submit padded bills to Medicaid
and other, private, insurance companies. Candy lasted almost a year
before becoming too disgusted to continue with her employer’s illegal
antics. She did not, however, miss any welfare payments as she had been
working under her false social security number.

Candy continues to live with her husband, Felix, and four of their five
children in the same high-rise project apartment. Both Candy and Felix
drink and use cocaine on weekends, but Felix supposedly no longer beats
Candy. According to Primo, “No way! Felix don’t hit Candy. That nigga’
learned his lesson, boy.” Candy also became the foster parent for two of
Luis and Wanda’s four children when they were seized by BCW following
Luis’s incarceration and Wanda’s full-time addiction to crack three
years earlier.

Felix continues to work in demolition and window renovation. His
$200-per-week salary is off the books, however, and does not jeopardize
his family’s welfare payments or its Medicaid eligibility. He recently
renovated the windows of the apartment of the television star Joan
Rivers. He claims she gave him a gold-plated pin and served lunch to the
entire construction crew.

Felix and Candy’s twenty-year-old son, Junior, has fathered two children
by two different teenage girls. According to Primo, “Junior is an idiot
out there.” He dropped out of high school at fifteen when his mother was
hired at the podiatry center, so that he could baby-sit his little
sister, Lillian, during the day. Candy helped him evade New York’s
truancy by promising the authorities that he would join the Conservation
Corps upon turning sixteen. He subsequently dropped out of the
Conservation Corps after only two months because “them niggas was too
wild.” In the years since then, he has been smoking marijuana every day.
He passed through a period of robbing from everyone around him until he
was finally arrested for his second felony offense, selling crack to an
undercover police officer. He spent a year and a half in prison, where
by coincidence he served time on Riker’s Island with his Uncle Luis.
Primo told me that Luis tried to give Junior a weapon, “you know, like,
a pencil or something sharp so he could stab somebody in the eye. You
know, like, just to defend himself, in case somebody tries to mess with
him.” Junior refused his uncle’s weapon, and according to Primo, “He
started tearing instead.” Junior consequently had to be placed in “P.C.,
that’s protective custody, where they lock up the feeble niggas, in
solitary confinement.”

After his release from prison, Junior worked briefly as a cable
television installer. According to Primo, he is now “in-and-out of
selling drugs – but he’s scared of prison boy!” He continues to live
with his mother, father, and younger sisters in their project apartment.
I ran into Junior at the entrance to his mother’s building at 1:00 a.m.
I would not have recognized him had he not called out to me. He was
sporting a scruffy beard, had a blue bandanna wrapped, gang-style,
around his head, and had lost all his baby fat. In fact, he appeared
almost emaciated. I invited him to come to a baptism party that Tony was
hosting for his six-month-old baby, but he declined with embarrassment.
I politely left the scene when a crack addict approached him, as I had
suddenly realized he did not want to have to admit to me that he was
working the late-night shift for Carlos, the same stairwell crack dealer
who sometimes pays Candy to let him use her kitchen to prepare his
product.

Junior keeps in touch with his younger cousin, Angelo, who also dropped
out of school to become a pothead. Angelo lives with his grandmother, as
both his parents are heavy drug users, and are constantly “in-and-out of
jail.”

Candy’s oldest daughter, Tabatha, still lives in her own separate
project apartment in Brooklyn and just gave birth to her second child.
She broke up with the child’s father, but according to Primo she is
doing well. The new boyfriend she lives with has adopted the baby,
treating it as his own. She works legally, but off the books in a
boutique in Brooklyn. Jackie is now seventeen years old and has
successfully completed tenth grade at an alternative public school
downtown. Her boyfriend was recently incarcerated in a federal prison.

Candy’s brother has full-blown AIDS and receives welfare. I saw him
walking fast down the street, well past midnight, toward an active
crack-copping corner.

Benzie continued to work in food preparation at a downtown health club
until June 1994. He kept his job for more than five years and was
earning $320 a week before taxes. I visited him with Primo in
Metropolitan Hospital where he was having seven screws and a metal plate
removed from his calcaneus bone (heel), which he shattered into five
pieces last year in a drunken midnight car accident in El Barrio with
Caesar and Primo. He continues to live in a tenement in Brooklyn with
his girlfriend from four years ago. She works as a radio dispatcher for
a taxi service in El Barrio. Upon his release from the hospital, Benzie
“invested” the $1,500 he won in a lawsuit over the car accident by
hiring two friends to open a new marijuana sales spot, three blocks
uptown from the Game Room.

Willie married an African-American woman and lives in Virginia, where
his older brother found him “a paperwork job in the military.” On his
last visit to El Barrio he went on a crack binge, but apparently managed
to return to his job and family in Virginia once his money ran out.

Tony manages a heroin-copping corner in the neighborhood. Before that,
he had quit working for Ray to manage a crack sales point in his
mother’s building. He continues to live with his three-year-old daughter
and his twenty-one-year-old wife, Clara, who recently had a new baby.
The size of the baptism party he organized for his newborn in a local
housing project community center rivaled any of the parties Ray
sponsored when the Game Room and the Social Club were still in business.

Ray is occasionally seen in the neighborhood, “driving around in an
Excalibur – always with a different woman.” According to Caesar, “looks
to me like he’s a retired drug kingpin,” but Primo says “he’s scrambling
somewhere up in the Bronx,” where he lives with his wife, Gloria, and
their two children in one of the buildings he bought at a police
auction. When Primo asked Ray why he never visited, Ray answered
aggressively that he had his own friends in the Bronx and did not have
the time or the need to come to El Barrio anymore.

Little Pete is in prison on a felony count of crack sales to an
undercover officer. Six months before his incarceration he was shot six
times in a phone booth in the Bronx, where he was trying to open up an
independent crack sales point with an African-American partner. At the
time he was living with his mother, whose heroin-addicted husband
(Little Pete’s stepfather) had just died of AIDS.

Nestor is serving an extended prison sentence for shooting a Mexican
immigrant he was trying to mug. New-immigrant Mexicans continue to move
into El Barrio despite the violence against them. In the mid-1990s, half
of all the foreign-born children in the school district came from
Mexico. Their proportion of the officially censused population of El
Barrio grew by 332.9 percent in the 1980s – more than twice the rate for
Mexicans in the rest of New York City, who increased by 159.8 percent.¹
Tensions are palpable, as Primo explained to me while pointing to a
young Mexican man crossing the street ahead of us. “Makes me feel like
shit when I see them, ’Cause I know they work for cheaper than me.”

Luis was given a two-and-a-half-year prison sentence for selling crack.
He enrolled in a drug treatment program while incarcerated and was
promoted to peer counselor. This granted him an early release from
prison on a four-month probationary drug treatment furlough. He lives
with a sister in his former housing project and has been looking – so
far unsuccessfully – for space in a residential treatment facility.
Instead, he receives acupuncture as an outpatient from a downtown
hospital. He admits to intense cravings for crack whenever “I got money
in my pocket,” but he anticipates being able to remain clean until his
early-release probationary period formally ends and he will no longer be
subject to weekly urine tests. Currently, if he “gives a dirty urine,”
he will be returned to prison to finish the remainder of his sentence.

According to Primo, “Luis even said he was willing to work.” Luis’s
wife, Wanda, is living with a lover in her same project apartment after
recovering from being a sex-for-crack prostitute on upper Park Avenue.
She has filed for divorce papers and has placed a legal order of
protection on Luis. Luis claims she enjoys taunting him by
affectionately embracing her new lover when she passes him on the
street. Luis is obsessed by Wanda’s new boyfriend and promises to beat
both of them up once he completes his probation and parole. All four of
Luis and Wanda’s children have been split up among three different
foster parents. Their oldest boy is thirteen but has already dropped out
of school. Their oldest daughter, who became HIV positive after
receiving a tainted blood transfusion at Metropolitan Hospital, was
placed in foster care with Candy. She died in February 1995 at the age
of twelve. Primo commends Luis for seeking out all of his other
children, “those he had by outside women,” to “take them out on walks”
and express his affection.

Primo’s former girlfriend, Jaycee, still drinks and sniffs cocaine. She
moves back and forth with her twelve-year-old son between her mother’s
project apartment in El Barrio and the West Side home of a new Colombian
boyfriend, who sells drugs and frequently beats her up.

Angel and Manny still live with their mother, Iris, in her tenement
apartment, which is also used by her new boyfriend as a base for storing
the crack that he sells downstairs on the stoop of their building. Their
mother continues to work as bartender at an after-hours club, and Manny
serves as a runner in her boyfriend’s crack operation. Angel used to
sell crack for one of the companies operating in the housing projects
opposite their tenement: “I worked for a moreno [African-American]
company even though I used to hang out with the boricuas [Puerto Ricans]
– and that was a problem.” He and a lookout used to each earn ten
dollars for every bundle (fifty vials at three dollars each) they sold.
He claims they could sell fifty vials in approximately forty-five
minutes on a good night, earning about a hundred dollars during a
typical eight-hour shift. He recently quit selling drugs, however, when
a judge sentenced him to five years probation on a felony plea bargain
for “reckless endangerment.” The police had arrested Angel after he shot
at a cabdriver in a bungled holdup. He managed to convince the police
that he was merely drunk and had been shooting aimlessly in the air. In
fact, as he explained to me, “I was mad, and aimed right into the back
of the cab, but the driver just drove away.” His best friend, Lestor,
who also used to visit museums with us and drew crayon pictures in my
apartment, is currently serving a ten-year sentence for shooting a
member of a rival project stairway youth crew—gang. Angel currently
works off the books cleaning a restaurant downtown and his little
brother, Manny, sometimes helps him. His girlfriend moved in with him
following the birth of their son in April 1994. She receives SSI.

Caesar’s cousin Eddie (who spent time in reform school with Caesar as a
youth) continues to work as a New York City Transit Authority bus driver
and he has fathered several new children by different women.

Abraham, Primo’s adopted grandfather, passed away in 1994 from old age
and alcoholism. He was living in a housing project for the elderly with
one of Candy’s sisters and her three daughters. Candy’s sister’s family
was evicted by the Housing Authority following Abraham’s death. A
substitute apartment was eventually found for Candy’s sister’s family in
a nearby set of projects a few blocks from the Game Room. In the
process, however, Candy’s sister had a nervous breakdown and had to be
hospitalized for her depression. Her boyfriend was allowed to keep
custody of her three teenage daughters during the interim and they were
not placed in foster care. Nevertheless, two of her daughters became
pregnant during the transitional months.

Primo’s oldest sister no longer manages a McDonald’s downtown; she
reduced her hours to half time so she could look for a better job. She
is one of the 120 individuals who buy the Sunday New York Times on La
Farmacia’s corner. Primo says, “She buys it for the want ads, and sends
out hundreds of resumes every week.” I helped her rewrite her
standardized cover letter and resume, and learned that she had no other
work experience besides McDonald’s, despite being almost thirty years
old. She refused my suggestion of constructing an “exaggerated” work
history, and hopes nevertheless to find an “office job” through the want
ads. She recently bought a new Jeep Cherokee on credit. She parks it in
front of their housing project but it has never been vandalized or
burglarized because, as Primo explains, “people know her, and respect
her, I guess.”

Primo’s middle sister recently moved out of her project apartment in El
Barrio to a private apartment complex in New Jersey. She has separated
from her husband because of his “verbal abuse.” He continues to work as
a porter in an office building on Wall Street and pays child support.
Primo’s sister is looking for an affordable day-care arrangement for her
three young children so she can return to work as a nurse’s aide at Beth
Israel Hospital in downtown Manhattan.

Primo’s youngest sister just moved from the South Bronx to Poughkeepsie,
New York, where she bought a $170,000 house with her husband, who
qualified for a “veteran’s loan.” Her husband continues to drive a
United Parcel Service delivery truck, but she had to leave her job at a
small department store in El Barrio. She is pregnant with their second
child.

The block where I lived has not changed appreciably, despite the closing
of the Game Room in 1992. The Game Room’s premises were renovated and it
is currently occupied by a legal video movie—rental outlet. There are
two new crack sales spots on the block: One operates out of a formerly
legal hairdressing salon; the other is on the stoop of Angel and Manny’s
building. Both of the teenage-run, discount crack-selling spots, located
in separate project stairways, are still in business. The bogus botanica
that sells powder cocaine on the block is also still in operation. A new
and apparently well-run and completely legal bodega opened on the block.
One of the abandoned tenements opposite the housing projects was
renovated with public funds and it houses formerly homeless families.
The tenement where Manny and Angel live, however, has fallen into grave
disrepair since the death of its elderly Italian landlord, and is on the
verge of becoming uninhabitable.

La Farmacia’s corner has also not changed significantly despite the
permanent closing of Ray’s social club. The Palestinian-run grocery
store that subsequently occupied the social club’s former premises is
closed, following a major fire that also damaged the abandoned building
above it. The other Palestinian—Yemeni-owned corner grocery store still
sells 120 copies of the New York Times every Sunday, and has even begun
stocking 65 copies of the newspaper for sale each weekday. Emaciated
addicts and dealers continue to congregate at La Farmacia’s corner,
twenty-four hours a day, hawking a wide array of illicit drugs.

I saw one of the formerly pregnant women who used to frequent the Game
Room, hanging out on the curb in front of the new hairdressing salon
crackhouse. She is pregnant once again. Caesar claims she has had a
total of four babies since she started smoking crack, and that none of
her children live with her. Witnessing her situation, and seeing several
other incidents with parents abusing their children during the few weeks
that I spent back in El Barrio in the spring and early summer of 1994
made me realize I had lost the defense mechanisms that allow people on
the street to “normalize” personal suffering and violence. For example,
I still cannot forget the expression in the terrified, helpless eyes of
the five-year-old boy who was watching his mother argue with a cocaine
dealer at 2:00 a.m. in the stairway of a tenement where Primo and I had
taken shelter from a thunder shower on my second night back in the
neighborhood. Primo shrugged when I tried to discuss the plight of the
child with him, “Yeah, Felipe, I know, I hate seeing that shit too. It’s
wack.”

EPILOGUE 2003

I have maintained a warm friendship with Primo since publishing the
first edition of this book. I visit him at least once a year, usually
over a period of several weeks each summer. He tells me how everyone who
used to sell crack for Ray is doing, and we try to visit as many of our
old friends and acquaintances from the block as possible. As of my last
visit during the summer of 2002:

Primo’s mother died and Primo was evicted from her housing project
apartment on the one-strike-you’re-out ruling for an outstanding charge
of heroin possession (not sale!). For five years he lived in the project
apartment of Candy’s sister, Esperanza. He has maintained a stable
relationship with her daughter, Jasmine, who worked as a cashier in a
discount store for three years and then switched to becoming a teller
with full benefits at a neighborhood bank in the South Bronx. Primo
continues to refrain from drug dealing and from consuming alcohol or
cocaine. An undocumented Senegalese street vendor of bootleg videotapes
converted him to the Muslim religion and he no longer eats pork. He
does, however, occasionally sniff heroin and claims to still enjoy the
high despite being on a new semiexperimental heroin treatment medicine
derived from a longer-acting version of methadone,
levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol (LAAM). He developed a full-blown addiction
to heroin when he was working during the summers as a night porter in a
luxury high-rise building (Bourgois, 2000). Primo now works off the
books in construction for a small-time, unlicensed contractor who
specializes in renovating kitchens and bathrooms for a gay clientele.
His boss smokes marijuana chronically all day long and is disorganized:
He owns few tools, often runs out of money, and forgets to order
materials and equipment on time. Consequently, Primo is trying to break
away to become an independent contractor on his own. The last time I saw
Primo, he was taking a call on his new cell phone to negotiate the price
of a sub-subcontract for retiling thirteen bathrooms in a publicly owned
tenement that was under renovation.

A few days later he called me in California, disappointed. He had been
awarded the subcontract but was unable to accept the project because he
could not find experienced workers whom he could trust to help him.
Primo’s fifteen-year-old son, Papo, who dropped out of high school in
ninth grade and has run away from his mother’s home in Florida, is
especially disappointed by this because Primo had promised to move him
back up to New York and hire him to help on this large renovation
contract. Papo’s mother is moving with a new boyfriend back to New York,
and she has told Primo that she is not going to make any effort to bring
his son Papo back up with her: “He’s good for nothing, running wild on
the streets.” Primo confided to me that he feels deeply ashamed over not
being able to help his son who is “living wrong” in Florida.

In January, 2001, I invited Primo to my grandmother’s funeral. She used
to visit the Game Room, and most of the dealers took pride in having a
respectful conversation with an elderly grandmother. After extending
condolences to me, bursting with pride and anticipation Primo asks me to
guess his good news. I guessed correctly on the first try: “Jasmine’s
pregnant?”

“Yeah! Finally! Isn’t that great? And, you know, it’s like her body was
just waiting for her to get that good job at the bank with health
benefits and everything. Yeah! She’s feeling great.”

Primo’s youngest son, Primo Jr., is now seven years old and living with
his mother Maria and a stepfather in Connecticut who was recently
released from prison. They were evicted from their New York City Housing
Authority apartment because of the stepfather’s felony record. Her
sister Carmen was also evicted by the same law when she allowed Caesar
to remain in her household following his release from jail for beating
Carmen’s twelve-year-old daughter Diamond. Carmen did not press charges
against Caesar at the time, but the neighbors called the police because
of the girl’s screams, and a new mandatory domestic violence enforcement
law caused him to serve a three-month jail sentence. Following his
release, Caesar went to Florida to live with relatives and attempt drug
rehabilitation. Carmen followed him to Florida with her children to try
to rebuild the relationship together. They are now all staying in
Maria’s living room in Connecticut. On his last crack binge, Caesar sold
the Gameboy and bicycle that Primo had given Primo Jr. for his birthday.
Primo has vowed to stop giving Maria any money to help with Primo Jr.
until she evicts Caesar.

Candy, who was working as a home-care attendant for the elderly, slipped
a disk in her spinal column lifting a patient. She is now homebound in
chronic pain. She cannot “even lift the phonebook” and has grown
physically addicted to her pain medication. Primo reports that she is
severely depressed and angry at the world. Her husband Felix continues
to work legally in demolition and window renovation. He sniffs cocaine
only on Fridays because he does not work on Saturdays. He cleans out his
body and mind by Sunday, ready for work on Monday morning. Everyone
insists that Felix has never again beaten Candy since the day she shot
him during her ataqué de nervios. Their son Junior is back in prison for
selling crack. For several years Candy’s household increased its income
by taking in several foster care children. There was a rumor that two of
the older boys (actually Luis’s sons who had been entrusted to her as
foster children by the courts when their mother fell into crack
addiction during Luis’s imprisonment) were sexually molesting little
girl twins that the Bureau of Child Welfare (BCW) had entrusted to the
family. The foster care system investigated and ceased making further
placements in Candy’s household.

To everyone’s surprise, Luis has remained drug free since his release
and has settled down to live with an African American girlfriend. He did
not regain custody of his five children, who had been placed in three
different foster care families, but he has two new babies with his new
companion. They both receive SSI disability checks, but he supplements
their income by working off the books for Primo’s contractor. In fact,
Luis is the one who is urging Primo to attempt more aggressively to
establish himself independently so that they can make more money
together more stably. He is also “into computers now. He is always
opening his computer apart: constantly souping it up. You know, adding
memory chips and shit like that.”

Tony no longer sells drugs. He is working as a unionized doorman and has
moved back into his mother’s house following a difficult breakup with
his girlfriend Clara, who graduated from community college. She evicted
Tony so as not to be subject to the loss of her subsidized apartment
because of his pending felony case for sale of heroin to an undercover
officer. He has not forgiven her and refuses to provide child support.

Little Pete and his brother Nestor are still in prison.

Angel and Manny moved with their mother to a new project apartment on
the West Side and are reported to be “up to no good, but still
friendly.”

All of Primo’s sisters have moved to the suburbs of New York City and
are employed, the eldest as a secretary for a trade newspaper. The two
younger sisters are hospital workers, and one goes to night school part
time to become a registered nurse.

Benzie still works as a cook’s aide in a downtown health club and
continues to live in Brooklyn with his girlfriend, who also continues to
be stably employed as a taxi dispatcher.

Ray no longer visits East Harlem. Primo thinks that he has completely
retired from drug selling and instead supports himself and his family by
collecting rents in formerly semiabandoned buildings that he renovated
with his drug profits. He bought the buildings for almost nothing at a
police auction of property confiscated from drug dealers.

Each time I revisit El Barrio, I am forced to confront the everyday
violence against children that is routinized into the fabric of U.S.
inner-city social suffering. Hence my second-to-last set of fieldwork
notes:

[July, 2000]
Esperanza’s grandson, Briancito, is now five years old and his learning
disability has become much more noticeable. Esperanza tells me that he
did not talk until he was three and that he flies into rages. Last
month, he hit one of his special education teachers with a chair. She is
worried that he has his father’s anger. Photographs of his father, Brian
Sr. (Esperanza’s only son), who is in federal prison cover the walls of
the apartment. He was condemned to life without parole for multiple
drug-and-gang-related murders. In the photos he is dressed incongruously
in white tennis clothes, looking like a harmless chubby nerd. Only the
solid cement gray wall backdrop in the photograph suggests anything out
of the ordinary. Esperanza avoids the subject, but apparently, he killed
his victims with automatic weapons over drug debts. Esperanza has legal
custody of Briancito and dotes on him. Her eyes well up with tears when
she says, “I have to bless God – when they took away my baby [Brian
Senior] they gave me a new one [hugging Briancito].”

Esperanza is worried over the welfare of the three other grandchildren
who live with her. She says she can no longer do much for their mothers
– her two youngest daughters. When I ask Esperanza what she thinks of
this book, she abruptly shifts the conversation to talk about the way
her neighbors treat their children badly. One mother on the floor below
has a fourteen-year-old son, a five-year-old son, and a nine-year-old
daughter whom she hits publicly. The mother screams especially viciously
at her daughter while they wait for the elevator, telling her she has a
big head, that she’s ugly, stupid, etc. Primo interrupts, “Oh, man, but
that little girl is cute.” He shakes his head slowly from side to side:
“I know that little girl. That’s wrong; that’s just wrong.” Then he
smashes his fist into his palm. Esperanza replies that the little girl
drops her head and stares at the ground ashamedly while they are waiting
for the elevator, peeking up every now and then to see who might have
heard her mother berating her. The five-year-old boy in that same family
had a tumor on his head that was operated on last year. The mother is
angry at her fourteen-year-old son who is telling everyone in the
building that she caused the tumor by hitting the five-year-old too hard
in the head too often in the exact same spot. Esperanza claims the
mother continues to hit the child on the head even since the operation.
Someone finally called the Bureau of Child Welfare, but the social
workers did not confiscate any of the children because there were “no
signs of abuse.” Esperanza throws her arms up in the air: “What can you
do?” She says the mother now brags that she is not afraid of “BCW”
because she doesn’t even care if they take away her children. Almost as
a non sequitur, Esperanza sighs that she thinks mothers should only do
coke when their kids are asleep and when “their head is good, you know,
in the right place…. Otherwise, they should just have abortions. Do you
believe in abortion, Felipe?”

Esperanza also complains about the violence of her immediate neighbors
in the apartment next door. Recently, their ten-year-old daughter
screamed so loudly for help when they beat her that Esperanza called the
Bureau of Child Welfare. She says, “I don’t like turning parents in, but
I would have felt bad if that child had been killed with me hearing her
HELP! calls coming right through the wall. They were loud. I’m telling
you.” She condemns child abuse – using that word – and says she is
trying to break the cycle of violence in her grandson, Briancito. Every
time he does anything wrong, however, she can’t refrain from shouting,
“Stop that! You want me to hit you?” And I have to keep myself from
startling noticeably because when Esperanza screams she is LOUD.

Esperanza is sad that she had to throw her twenty-one-year-old daughter
out of the apartment, but she has a one-strike-you’re-out felony for
aggravated assault and drug possession, and the Housing Authority began
inspecting Esperanza’s apartment to ensure that her daughter is no
longer living on the premises. The evicted daughter’s cute
eighteen-month-old little girl still lives with Esperanza and appears to
be everyone’s favorite. The tiny girl gets a lot of love and attention
and bosses everyone about – even me – as only a confident toddler can.

An angry-faced, 6′5″ young man walks in with a message for Esperanza’s
middle nineteen-year-old daughter Sandra who is unemployed and still
lives here in Esperanza’s apartment with her six-year-old daughter. I am
worried about the child because I have never seen her smile or even
interact with anyone and she is the only person in the family who is
seriously overweight. Sandra’s new boyfriend works at the post office
sorting mail at night and he gives her money for partying.

The angry young man is on his way to collect money owed to him by
someone on the floor below. He has a bunch of gold chains on his chest
and impressive biceps covered in tattoos, one of which is a scorpion
decorated with the Puerto Rican flag. He is carrying a baseball bat in
his left hand as if it were a toothpick and stands with his feet apart
even more toughly than I ever remembered being possible. He makes me
feel old and square … not to mention thankful that we are meeting safely
inside Esperanza’s apartment and not out on the street in the middle of
the night. Primo asks the guy who he was going to play baseball with. He
giggles, “Nigga’s heads,” and fakes a swing at Briancito’s head who also
giggles from in front of the television where he spends most of his
time. Once again I fail to contain my startle reflex, which makes
everyone else think that the simulated baseball bat beating to
five-year-old Briancito’s head is even funnier. The big guy, who by now
no longer looks angry to me, starts bragging about how well his boxing
training is going and how, on his trainer’s orders, he has quit smoking
pot and drinking anything artificial with sugar in it. Primo discusses
some technical boxing stuff with him that I cannot follow, but we all
watch as he demonstrates new positions and punches that he has just
learned at the gym using Primo as an imaginary opponent. With a
mischievous wink, he tells us not to tell his trainer, but that he is
trying to build up his strength and punch with enough force and
precision to break someone’s neck with one punch. He shows us with a
slow-motion swing where the would-be magic disabling spot is located on
Primo’s neck.

Primo finally introduces me to the marijuana-selling, wannabe boxer who
no longer looks angry at all, and it turns out that he is Luis’s oldest
son. He is now nineteen, and I tell him that I have a fading Polaroid
family portrait of him as a ten-year-old child in a blue windbreaker
with his father and three of his little brothers and sisters when they
were at a New Year’s Eve party at Primo’s mother’s apartment. They were
clutching their father, whom they did not want to leave and go “on a
mission [smoke crack],” I do not tell him that my last fieldwork note
referring to him six years back describes him at 2:00 in the morning
standing on top of a bus shelter: “June 1994. What is going to happen to
him? His father Luis has just been jailed and his mother is exchanging
sex for crack under the elevated railroad tracks on Park Avenue.” He now
has three young children of his own. Primo assures me that he is a “good
homebody… gives his money to the mother – at least some of it.” Luis’s
son mumbles politely that he remembers me and, turning into the awkward
little kid I remember from the past, he shakes my hand with touching
formality.

Heading home just before midnight, I share the elevator going down from
Esperanza’s eighteenth-floor apartment with a harried mother of three
children, pushing a baby carriage. The biggest of her kids, less than
three years old, drops his jacket across a puddle of urine in the corner
of the elevator by mistake. His mother explodes, choking her voice into
a hiss as if losing total control over herself and raising her arms to
pummel him. The child cowers, but his mother lowers her fists at the
last moment. I suddenly realize that she had only feigned her fury in
order to make her little boy cower appropriately. Instead, she shouts at
him, chopping him up into a million pieces with the tone of her voice.
He hangs his head, staring at the puddle of urine on the elevator floor.

The subway breaks down at the 116th Street stop on the way home. I have
a chance to study my fellow passengers closely. Nobody in the subway car
seems to find it unusual that there are so many underweight children out
at midnight, tagging along after distracted and emaciated mothers who
are obviously on crack missions. Several of the skinniest mothers are
pushing baby carriages. Two well-dressed women sitting next to me do not
appear to be involved with drugs. They are heading downtown to go
dancing at a new club, chitchatting relaxedly about their boyfriends,
one of whom “just got outta jail.”

My last extended set of fieldwork notes spanning visits and telephone
conversations in 2001–02 focuses more on the institutional violence of
the new panopticon that enforces “quality-of-life crimes” on El Barrio’s
streets. The notes begin with a description of me leaving my
grandmother’s memorial service to visit my old block. I proceed
uneventfully to walk around the neighborhood looking up old friends and
acquaintances. I find out my former landlord recently died and the
superintendent of a neighboring building tells me what has happened to
the children I used to take to the museum in the old days. The notes
describe appreciatively the increased working class visibility and
energy along my old block. Toward the end of the afternoon, however, I
commit the quality-of-life crime of buying a fifty-cent sixteen-ounce
can of El Coqui malt liquor – named after the frog on the endangered
species list that lives only in Puerto Rico. The notes end abruptly with
undercover police officers issuing me a citation for a misdemeanor
offense for drinking in public and warning me to leave the neighborhood
right away in yet another example of the micropractices that enforce
U.S. apartheid:

Who the fuck do y’a think you’re bullshitin’! We know what you’re up
here for. We’ve been following you; watchin’ every move you’ve been
making. We seen you lookin’ all over the place; talkin’ to people;
waving. So who you lookin’ for – huh? Who? Huh!

Awright, awright, go ahead play dumb. Don’t tell us nothin’. But don’t
think you can get away with shit up here. You’re just lucky we’re not
rookies or we’d be searchin’ you more strictly – not just giving you a
ticket. It don’t bother us ’Cause you’re just gonna get picked up a half
block further down by some other undercovers right down there on the
next corner – this neighborhood is hot now buddy.

And don’t think you can just skip the court date on this ticket just
’Cause you’re from California. They’ll issue a bench warrant and the
next time you get stopped for anything, you’ll come right up on the
computer and bingo! They’ll haul your ass right in – I don’t care if
you’re in California or Hawaii [laughing].

Two months later, heeding the police officer’s warning, I returned to
New York to appear in court:

My fine is only $10, but it takes four hours to be processed through the
misdemeanor court system, which is much less organized than I expect.
The courts seem to be run more by the charisma of the guards and police
officers, who shuttle scared, confused, and sometimes angry
quality-of-life criminals from one courtroom doorway to another. They
call out to passing clerks and colleagues – sometimes even whistling to
get their attention from all the way down the hallway – “Yo! Do me a
favor? Put this guy on your waiting list.” Or “How many ya’ got left to
go? Can you take one more?”

We spend most of our time waiting in hallways while the guards try to
figure out which courtroom is not too crowded to take us. A friendly
African American police officer waiting for his turn outside one of the
courtrooms advises me in a loud voice so that the woman waiting next to
me also hears him: “Just deny it. Just deny it. The officer who ticketed
you won’t be there and the judge will have to let you go.” I thank him
and he succeeds in shifting the conversation onto the situation of the
woman next to me.

I finally make it into one of the courtrooms, but only after telling the
clerk who is doing me the favor of squeezing me onto his docket before
lunch that I am “just gonna plead guilty – I promise.” He squints at me,
waves me to a bench and hisses, “OK … But remember just say you’re
guilty.” I nod my head several times, eagerly and ironically thankful,
and take my seat. The first five cases before me are all for marijuana
possession, and each one is immediately dismissed with no discussion
whatsoever. The de facto decriminalization of marijuana in New York City
is one of the many unintended consequences of Mayor Guiliani’s campaign
against quality-of-life crimes. I learn this from the bored guard in the
back of the courtroom who is preventing us from reading the newspaper or
from falling asleep. He notices my surprised expression at each rapid
marijuana dismissal and whispers, “The judges hafta’ dismiss all the
marijuana cases. It’s too expensive to have marijuana tested. So all’s a
defendant’s gotta do is say it ain’t marijuana and then he walks.”

In contrast, a young African American man who is called up right before
me is issued a $35 fine for spitting. Out in the hallway he had
explained to me that the police caught him on a Saturday night with an
empty paper cup in his hand: “They wanted to ticket me. But I had
already finished my Hennessey and I know my rights. They can’t do
nothin’ to you for no empty cup. So I cursed the motherfucker when he
hassled me and I spit on the ground. He told me there was a law against
spitting on the street. So, I spit again, but this time on the side of
his van. I’m telling you, I’m moving to Florida. You can’t even walk
sideways anymore in New York City without getting arrested.”

When I am finally called up before the judge, they make me sign a
semilegible photocopied waiver expressing my willingness to be heard by
a retiree who has been recalled to service in an effort to ease the
crowding caused by the increase in misdemeanor arrests. The two-minute
interaction ends with me pleading “guilty with an explanation” and with
the judge issuing me a $10 fine, but also expressing his condolences for
my grandmother’s death.

After another forty-five minute wait outside in the hallway, a police
officer finally takes us to the cashier line to pay our fines. I make
friends with a young Puerto Rican man in front of me in the line who has
been issued the exact same public drinking fine. We commiserate about
how strict the cops have become. When it is his turn to pay, he has to
plead with the cashier to give him a special temporary voucher in order
to be let out of the courthouse: “I’m broke. I’m tellin’ you I’m broke.
I don’t got the money. I’m fuckin’ broke.” He looks embarrassed and
depressed. It feels natural for me to offer to pay his $10 fine after
his second “I’m broke,” but I do not dare because he might think I will
demand a sexual favor in repayment.

After court, I go uptown and see Esperanza in her housing project
courtyard waiting alongside a half dozen other mothers for the special
education school bus to bring their children home. Esperanza’s daughter,
Sandra, who is very pregnant, is also waiting for her six-year-old. She
tells me “you’re going to live long, Felipe, because I was just talking
about the dream I had about you earlier today.”

Esperanza is feeling much better. Her son, Brian Sr., was finally moved
to a prison in Pennsylvania that is closer and easier to visit. The
children pour off the bus with that overflowing energy unique to kids
who have just been released from school on a sunny afternoon. Several of
the mothers threaten violence to their children as they climb into the
fenced-off grassy areas that are sandwiched between the housing
project’s cement walkways. The kids do not seem to be very worried about
their mothers’ threats and romp in the tiny patches of forbidden green
grass.

I called Primo shortly after the September 11, 2001, World Trade Center
disaster in New York City to tell him I am going to be visiting:

Primo advises me against traveling by airplane and tells me that he does
not dare take the subway downtown anymore to his methadone maintenance
program out of fear of terrorism. He is trying to persuade the nurse to
ask the doctor to give him take-home doses so that he does not have to
face the risk of public transportation. I hear his baby, Primo Jr.,
fussing in the background, and Primo tells me he has to put down the
phone to fix his bottle: “I’m the one who takes care of him because
Jasmine went back to work.” When she tried to take her maternity leave,
the bank told her they would promote her to supervisor if she kept
coming to work. She complied, but now, five months later they still have
not promoted her. Primo’s oldest son, Papito, is doing better. He moved
out to the suburbs to live with one of Primo’s sisters and works at a
Subway Sandwich Shop.

Primo’s contractor is trying to persuade Primo to come back to work, but
there is no one to take care of the new baby: “At least that
motherfucker finally paid me most of the money he owes me and he has
offered to raise my pay. He’s respecting me a little more now, but I’m
still gonna just make him wait a little more. I might be broke, but I’m
not a slave. And I want to be there for my kid. He’s four months old now
and he needs me.” Primo is most excited by the fact that he is down to
only 30 milligrams of LAAM per day. Apparently, they have discovered
that LAAM cause “serious cardiac arrhythmia” and they are taking
everyone off that drug. He is hoping to be completely clean soon. When
he occasionally sniffs a little heroin, he always makes sure to carry a
vial of clean urine from Jasmine or his son Papito in case they do a
random drug test. He has not come up dirty in over a year.

Several months later Primo leaves an urgent message on my answering
machine. Esperanza sent a copy of my book to Brian in prison and the
prison officials “confiscated your book. They told him they wanna
investigate the author, and like figure out who’s who.” They think the
book will reveal the identities of the other individuals who committed
the multiple murders with Brian. They are threatening Brian that he
should now give up all the names because it is all going to come out
anyhow now that they got your book. I immediately called Esperanza to
reassure her that there is nothing about Brian or his fellow murderers
in the book. He was less than six years old at the time of the
fieldwork. I also remind her that a Federal Certificate of
Confidentiality legally prevents my research data from being used in a
court of law.

Just to be safe, however, I sent a copy of this epilogue to a lawyer
friend who specializes in federal drug and murder cases. She confirmed
that there was nothing particularly incriminating in this epilogue, but
advised me to delete all references to drug dealing inside the housing
projects: “The Feds are just so crazy now. All they care about is
drugs.”

When I visited Esperanza on my last trip to New York, she is in a great
mood:

Esperanza’s son Brian filed a lawsuit claiming the interrogation they
subjected him to when they confiscated my book was harassment. They
threatened to transfer him back to Texas if he did not drop the suit. He
dropped the suit and now they are transferring him to an even closer
prison on the Hudson River. Jasmine was promoted to head teller at the
bank: “She’s marching straight A!” They even offered another promotion
but she turned it down because she does not want to supervise people.
The county hospital assigned Esperanza a new Latina psychiatrist, who
has told her that her mental health treatment for the past dozen years
was botched: “She is going to fix me up with better meds and more
intensive therapy.” Esperanza is hopeful. She says she was even able to
handle the death of her mother three months ago:

We were all there. All her kids and even my daughters. Everyone was
there except my brother Felix. It was a Friday and that’s the nights
that Felix gets lifted – you know, sniffs his little bit of coke.

I had called my son Brian in prison and left a message for him to try to
get permission to come visit his grandmother in the hospital. Instead
they gave him an extra phone call. He called, but her eyes were already
closed and she wasn’t talking no more. Just breathing real slowly.

The phone line couldn’t reach her so he asked me over the phone to ask
his grandmother to bless him. And when I called out across the room,
“Mama, Brian pide bendición,” it was like that was all she was waiting
for. She opened her eyes, made a little noise, and died right then.

We went back to Candy’s and Felix was there. He could tell something was
wrong, but we didn’t want to tell him because he was lifted. He kept
asking all night how our mother was. He could tell something was wrong,
but we just played it off and cooked some food.

The next day I told him and he thanked me for not telling him when he
was lifted. He couldn’t have handled it. Felix used to visit our mother
every day. But now he comes over and visits me instead – every day.

I ask Esperanza about the little girl in the apartment next door who
calls for help when her parents beat her. She stops smiling. “I don’t
know, Felipe, the City finally came and took her away.” I promise to
include the little girl in this epilogue.

San Francisco, April 2002

NOTES

Introduction

1.In New York the term “barrio” is not used generically to delineate a
working-class Latino neighborhood as it does in the West or Southwest of
the United States. El Barrio in New York City refers specifically to
East Harlem.

2.Crack is processed from powder cocaine (cocaine hydrochloride) by
dissolving the cocaine in hot water, adding baking soda, and letting the
concoction cool into a hard, smokeble pellet that burns evenly, making a
“crackling” sound when a flame is applied to it. In New York City, crack
is smoked in 5-inch-long glass cylinders, with a circumference of about
1 inch, known as “stems.” These distinctive pipes are sold
surreptitiously at corner grocery stores for one dollar. The crack is
placed on a crumpled wire mesh screen that is pushed about an inch
inside one end of the stem, which is tilted upward. Immediately upon
inhalation, crack provides an intense, minute-and-a-half “rush”
comparable – but allegedly superior – to the one obtained by injecting a
powder cocaine solution directly into a main vein. Hardcore users are
capable of binging nonstop on crack with no food or sleep for “missions”
that can last several days and nights (Williams 1992). Similarly,
cocaine injectors are capable of “shooting up” dozens of times in a
single session, converting their bodies into needle-pricked, bloody, and
bruised messes.

3.Violent crime (murder, rape, and assault-and-robbery) increased 41
percent between 1984 and 1988 in my neighborhood’s police precinct
(#25). In Manhattan, only Hell’s Kitchen (around Times Square on 42nd
Street), and occasionally Washington Heights, had higher violent crime
rates than East Harlem (New York Daily News, January 23, 1989, 18).

4.See New York Times, August 8, 1993:A1, A18. In 1991, shortly before I
left New York City, two of the crack spots I studied were converted into
heroin-copping corners. The standard street price for heroin was $10 for
a 1.5-by-.75-inch glassine, postage-stamp-style envelope containing a
pinch of white powder resembling confectioner’s sugar. In 1994, one
heroin company in El Barrio discounted their product to $5 per packet
and virtually all of them increased the purity of their heroin. The
shift in the mid-1990s from selling crack cocaine to heroin had few
organizational implications for the underground economy. It merely
represented a shift from selling one profitable illegal substance to
selling another.

5.I calculated the poverty figures for my microneighborhood by combining
two census tracts in the 1990 Census of Population and Housing. I also
used figures from New York City Department of City Planning, 1993
(March).

6.In 1989 in El Barrio, approximately 37 percent of all residents
received some combination of public assistance, Supplemental Social
Security income, and Medicaid benefits (New York City Department of City
Planning, 1990 [September]: 221, and New York City Department of City
Planning 1993 [March]).

7.The dramatic booms in the late 1980s and 1990s of coca production in
South America and of opium in Asia testify to the explosive expansion of
the international drug economy (cf. Rensselaer W. Lee III 1991; New York
Times, August 8, 1993:A1, A18).

8.Angel dust, known as PCP or “zootie,” is an animal tranquilizer that
is sprinkled on mint leaves, which are then smoked. Angel dust was the
drug scourge of the mid-1970s, and it continues to have a limited
popularity in El Barrio.

9.The official unemployment rate in New York City was 10 percent for
males and 5.7 percent for women (Department of City Planning, March
1993). According to the New York Times, of all major cities in the
United States, only Detroit had a lower labor force participation rate
than New York City. Of New York City’s working-age population, 55
percent was employed in 1994, compared to 66 percent at the national
level (New York Times, February 18, 1994:A1, A12).

10.Many of the women who were outside the labor force, of course, were
taking care of young children, and some were in school.

Statistics calculated from: 1990 Census of Population and Housing
disaggregated by tract; 1990 Census of Economic Development Indicators
disaggregated by tract; and New York City Department of City Planning,
March 1993.

11.Cf. Bourgois 1990, and Robinson and Passel 1987.

12.Personal communication, Kevin Kearny, Assistant Director of Research,
NYCHA; see also New York City Housing Authority, Department of Research
and Policy Development 1988.

13.Starobin 1994.

14.Economic Development Indicators, 1990 Census, disagregated by census
tract. See Edin 1991 for a discussion of household strategies for
supplementing public assistance income in Chicago.

15.Jazz is a good example of a cultural form created by segregated
street culture but subsequently appropriated by highbrow culture.

16.A symbolic marker of the presence of a “mainstream-oriented”
population on even the most active drug-copping corners of East Harlem
is that all through the height of the crack epidemic, the
Palestinian-owned grocery store on 110th Street and Lexington sold 120
copies of the Sunday edition of the New York Times.

17.Rodriguez 1995.

18.Benmayor, Torruelas, and Juarbe 1992; Katz 1986; Rainwater 1994;
Stansell 1987; and Ward 1989.

19.As the anthropologist Nancy Scheper-Hughes (1992: 172) notes in her
ethnography of a Brazilian shantytown:

For anthropologists to deny, because it implies a privileged position
(i.e., the power of the outsider to name an ill or a wrong) and because
it is not pretty, the extent to which dominated people come to play the
role … of their own executioners is to collaborate with the relations of
power and silence that allow the destruction to continue.

20.See Behar 1993; Portelli 1991; Rosaldo 1980. Tape recordings are
always difficult to edit, especially when they are in street idiom whose
grammar and vocabulary differ from that of the academic mainstream. One
of my biggest problems in editing, however, is the impossibility of
rendering into print the performance dimension of street speech. Without
the complex, stylized punctuation provided by body language, facial
expression, and intonation, many of the transcribed narratives of crack
dealers appear flat, and sometimes even inarticulate, on the written
page. Consequently, I often deleted redundancies, dangling phrases,
incomplete thoughts, and sometimes even entire passages in order to
recover the articulate – often poetic – effect the same passage conveyed
in its original oral performance. To clarify meanings, I sometimes added
additional words, and even subjects and verbs, to sentence fragments. I
also occasionally combined conversations of the same events, or on the
same themes, to make them appear to have occurred during a single
session within the text, even though they sometimes took place over a
period of several months or several years. In a few rare instances of
minor characters in the book, I conflated more than one person for
brevity’s sake.

Having said all this, I tried as much as I could to maintain the
grammatical form, the expressive vocabulary, and the transliterated
Spanish forms that compose the rich language of New York-born Puerto
Ricans who participate in El Barrio’s street culture. Most important, I
hope I have respected their message. Our conversations where usually in
English with occasional Spanish words interspersed as a way of affirming
Puerto Rican identity. Whenever a conversation, or a portion of a
sentence was in Spanish, I have noted that fact in the text.

21.Rodriguez 1995, citing G. Lewis 1963.

22.Harvey 1993; Katz 1986; O. Lewis 1966; Moynihan 1965; Rainwater and
Yancey 1967; Wilson 1987.

23.To name just a few examples of cultural production theorists and
critical ethnographers of education, see Bourdieu 1980; Devine 1996;
Foley 1990; Fordham 1988; Gibson and Ogbu 1991; MacLeod 1987; Willis
1977.

24.In fact, I did exclude a number of conversations and observations I
thought projected an overly negative portrayal of the crack dealers and
their families out of context. Much of my “censoring” occurred around
descriptions of sexual activities. In several cases, I felt the passages
might be considered straightforward pornography. I also wanted to avoid
excessively invading the privacy of the major characters in the book,
and I discussed these issues at length with all of them. Only one person
actually asked me to delete some material from the epilogue, which, of
course, I did. The problems of selection, editing, and censorship have
tremendous political, ethical, and personal ramifications that
ethnographers must continually confront, without ever being confident of
resolving them.

25.Scheper-Hughes 1992:25; Wolf 1990.

26.Nader 1972.

1. Violating Apartheid in the United States

1.The corner of 110th Street and Lexington is featured periodically in
the national and local press as “A Devil’s Playground” or as “the worst
and druggiest corner” in the city. In 1990 alone, it boasted photo
spreads in National Geographic (Van Dyk, May 1990), The American Lawyer
(Frankel and Freeland, March 1990), and the New York Daily News (October
19, 1990:1). When I looked up the legal real estate records for Ray’s
Social Club, I found that the City of New York had seized it from its
original Italian owner for tax default and donated it to Operation Open
City, a nonprofit affordable housing coalition. Budget cuts prevented
the nonprofit organization from developing the site. Instead, Ray
continued paying rent for the space to the elderly Italian landlord who
no longer legally owned the property.

2.May 4, 1989:4.

3.Ironically, the only real survivors of the holocaust on La Farmacia’s
corner are the two Palestinian refugee families that own the bodegas
catty-corner to Ray’s social club—crackhouse. These Middle Eastern
exiles have even expanded into local real estate, buying the few still
standing tenements along the avenue. They do a brisk business in beer,
candy, and drug paraphernalia – including glass crack-pipe stems, and
plastic crack and cocaine vials.

4.“Cheeba” is a New York term for marijuana.

5.La Mafia Boba is difficult to translate. Literally, boba or bobo means
“slow-witted,” but Primo’s gang used the term ironically to convey their
ability to prey on people unawares:

Like they think we’re bobos but we’re guapos [aggressive, streetwise].
We know what we’re doing. Ray used to start shouting “la Mafia boba a
botellazo [to the bottles]!” And we start grabbing bottles and throwing
them at whoever – like if we used to see a faggot, or a punk, or
whatever – someone we just didn’t like.

6.In New York City, a “bundle” refers to an established quantity of
prepackaged drugs ready for individual retail sale. The number of
packets in a bundle changes depending on the drug and its cost, i.e., a
bundle of heroin is ten $10 glassine envelopes, whereas a bundle of
crack is twenty-five vials when they cost $5 each and fifty-five vials
when they are worth $3 each. Payments to street sellers are usually made
as a percentage of the profit on each bundle sold. For example, in the
housing projects opposite the Game Room the lookout and the server who
sold crack at $3 a vial shared $20 for every bundle of fifty-five vials
they sold.

7.See Bourgois 1989b. When the Jamaican owner of a gold pawnshop that
sold powder cocaine around the corner from the Game Room shot one of his
employees in the kneecaps for skimming from a night’s receipts, Primo
told me, “Jamaicans don’t fuck around – they’re not like Puerto Ricans.”
Indeed, on the street Jamaican drug dealers enjoyed a reputation for
extreme brutality (cf. Gunst 1995).

8.It is part of an immense swath of uninterrupted housing projects that
covers a thirty-two-square-block perimeter, extending from East Harlem
through Central Harlem, with an approximate population of 17,800.

9.It was not until two years later that I finally gained full access to
that particular crack corner by befriending the owner, Tito, a
twenty-one-year-old who shot his older brother in the spine and
paralyzed him for life in a struggle over control of the block. Tito was
an extraordinarily talented graffiti artist. He covered the six
bricked-up abandoned tenements on his block with huge spray-painted
murals depicting his glory in the drug-dealing world – including comic
character self-portraits of himself covered in gold chains (see photos
on pages 10, 157, and 279). He lived in one of the abandoned buildings
with his grandmother. His father had been killed and Tito introduced me
to his cocaine-addicted mother, who happened to be visiting on one
occasion. She nervously tried to hide the needle-mark scabs covering the
top of her hands. With the warm encouragement of Tito’s grandmother I
tried to connect Tito to downtown art galleries. We encountered only a
cold reception in the New York City art world, and halfway through the
process Tito lost control of his block and disappeared in a cloud of
angel dust.

10.I moved to El Barrio in March 1985, and we moved out in September
1990. Economic constraints forced us to spend several academic semesters
outside New York City, so our actual length of physical residence in the
neighborhood was a total of 3.5 years – two of which (1988–90) were
uninterrupted. During the first year after moving out of El Barrio, from
September 1990 to August 1991, we lived nearby in West Harlem (along
Morningside Park) and I continued to spend at least two nights a week
with Ray’s crack dealers. Since moving to San Francisco in late 1991, I
have maintained telephone contact with several of the dealers, and I
never visit New York City without seeing Primo. During the spring and
part of the summer of 1994, I spent almost two months in New York City,
visiting Primo and other East Harlem friends regularly.

11.Bensonhurst is a working-class Italian-American neighborhood in
Brooklyn. On August 23, 1989, a group of young white men in the
neighborhood killed Yusuf Hawkins, a sixteen-year-old African-American
who had come to Bensonhurst to buy a used car advertised in the local
newspapers. They thought he was dating an Italian-American woman who
lived on the block (New York Times, August 25, 1989:A1, B2).

12.The Puerto Rican faction of the Mafia eventually wrested control of
East Harlem’s numbers racket from the Genovese crime family. The new
Puerto Rican director of this $30 million gambling empire was eventually
arrested in 1994 (New York Times, April 21, 1994:A13).

13.In one case, a stray bullet ricocheted off the curb next to us while
we lounged in front of the Game Room. I hesitated including this
particular incident for fear of oversensationalizing my experience of
neighborhood violence in a self-celebratory macho manner. In fact, we
did not feel as if we were in imminent danger of getting shot. At the
same time, the transcriptions of my tape recordings are frequently
punctuated by gunshots. In my original round of editing, I was so close
to the material that I did not transcribe the sound of gunshots,
treating them instead like static interference or traffic noises.

14.Taussig 1987.

15.Based on his research on Chicago’s Southside, the French sociologist
Loïc Wacquant (1993a) calls this “the depacification of everyday life.”
He links it to structural economic as well as political factors, such as
the breakdown of state-provided infrastructure and social services in
the wake of deindustrialization.

See also John Devine’s (1996) discussion of the culture of violence in
New York’s “lower tier,” inner-city high schools.

16.My childhood census tract was listed as the richest in all of New
York City in the 1990 census. Its average household income ($249,556)
was more than eleven times higher than the average household income
(just over $21,000) of my census tracts in El Barrio and its median
household income was more than thirteen times higher (New York Times,
March 20, 1994:A6; 1990 Census of Population and Housing Block
Statistics).

17.Al Sharpton is an African-American inner-city reverend in New York
City who caught the attention of the media for his flamboyant
denunciations of racism and his community-level mobilizations in the
early 1990s.

18.See, for example, New York Times, March 23, 1990:A1, B4.

19.New York Times, November 16, 1988:A1, B5. The TNT strategy was
declared a failure and discontinued in early 1994.

20.Caesar was acutely aware of the hype and hypocrisy driving the
anti-drug hysteria that swept the United States in the late 1980s and
early 1990s along with the “family values” and abortion debates.

I could be some dumb scumbag ho’ that have a lot of money to push my
campaign. And all I gotta say is “Drugs!” and they’ll elect me
immediately.

Abortion and drugs is the best thing for politicians in America, man.

Why you think they gettin’ elected? Look at Idaho with all them
bureaucrat delegates making all these promises about stopping abortion
and all that.

Over here in New York they got a drug problem, and all you gotta say is
“I’m gonna stop the flow of drugs. Hire more police!” and you got the
job, man. In the mid-1990s, the words “violent crime,” “unwed welfare
mothers,” or “illegal immigrants” could be substituted verbatim for
“drugs” in Caesar’s harangue.

21.That particular year, the neighboring housing projects where Maria
lived had the highest murder rates of all the Housing Authority projects
in Manhattan.

22.See Rodrí guez 1989:chap. 3 for a discussion of race relations among
Puerto Ricans.

2. A Street History of El Barrio

1.Marsh 1932:362.

2.Meléndez 1993:43–44. Only 40 percent of the population actually
received food assistance because the eligibility requirements in Puerto
Rico are stricter (General Accounting Office 1992; personal
communication, Ann Gariazzo, Food and Nutrition Service, U.S.
Government).

3.Quintero-Rivera 1984:5–12.

4.I am grateful to Eric Wolf for his conversations with me about
changing jí baro images and categories.

5.Cf. Bonilla and Campos. 1986; Dietz 1986; Centro de Estudios
Puertorriqueños, History Task Force, 1979.

6.New York Times 1995:A4.

7.Robinson and Passel 1987.

8.Rodrí guez 1989.

9.Romo and Schwartz 1993.

10.Caribbean Business, November 29, 1990, cited in Caban 1993:note 21.
Vertically integrated multinational companies are able to shift profits
from production plants located in other countries with higher tax rates
to their Puerto Rican subsidiaries through a practice known as “transfer
pricing.” They accomplish this legally by having their non—Puerto Rican
subsidiaries purchase the inputs produced at their Puerto Rican
subsidiary at artificially inflated prices (see Meléndez and Meléndez
1993:8, and Dietz and Pantojas-Garcí a 1993:114).

“In 1988, U.S. firms in Puerto Rico realized profits of $8.9 billion, or
about 19.7 percent of their declared global profits attributable to
direct foreign investment activity” (Cabán 1993:29).

11.Rodrí guez 1995. The use of Spanish above the fifth-grade level in
Puerto Rican schools was forbidden by the U.S. government until 1934.

12.Rosenberg 1990. See also Institute for Puerto Rican Policy 1992;
Lemann 1991; Moore and Pinderhughes 1993:xix; New York City Department
of City Planning, December 6, 1993; Rivera-Batiz 1994; Rivera-Batiz and
Santiago 1994.

The family income figures from the housing project across the street
from the Game Room confirmed the national statistics on Puerto Rican
poverty. According to the 1989 Housing Authority census – which, of
course, is grossly inaccurate because rents are calculated as a
percentage of income – African-American households earned, on average,
over $3,000 more per year than Puerto Rican households ($12,557 versus
$9,301) (New York City Housing Authority, Department of Research and
Policy Development, January 1, 1989). This official income gap was
reduced to approximately $2,000 ($13,803 versus $11,489) in 1993 (New
York City Housing Authority, Department of Research and Policy
Development, January 1993).

13.Giachello 1991; Institute for Puerto Rican Policy 1994; Rosenwaike
1983.

14.Hell Gate Bay’s inauspicious name comes from the whirlpools and
sinkholes in the East River at this point in its course (Bolton 1922).

15.Bolton 1922:68–74; Janvier 1903:79–81.

16.Rubinson 1989; see also New York Times, May 3, 1931:14.

17.Fischler 1976; Rubinson 1989; Tilley 1935.

18.Cf. Concistre 1943:16; Corsi 1925:90–92; Marsh 1932:50; and Tilley
1935;32.

19.Tilley 1935:32, citing Corsi 1925:90. According to the 1920 Census
there were a total of 276,641 residents in East Harlem. This included
43,642 Russians, 41,879 Italians, 8,791 African-Americans, 8,088
Austrians, 6,769 Irish, 6,117 Poles, 4,367 Germans, 3,706 Hungarians,
and 1,382 Finns. (Statistics facilitated by Frank Vardi of the New York
City Department of City Planning.)

20.Tilley 1935:199.

21.Cordasco and Galatioto 1970:31:309–10, citing Mayor’s Committee
1937:16; Meyer 1989:7.

22.Orsi 1985:14.

23.Marsh 1932:186.

24.Orsi 1985:54. The Italians got revenge on the racist Irish and German
parishioners by importing from southern Italy a Renaissance-era
jewel-encrusted statue of the Virgin Mary that had been personally
blessed by the pope. This ancient, sacred statue converted their church
into an official holy sanctuary with healing powers. Once a year a
pilgrimage, attracting hundreds of believers from all over New York,
arrives at the church to accompany the ancient statue on a parade
through East Harlem’s streets.

I witnessed the latest phase in the cycle of ethnic conflict at the
church when I brought my one-year-old son to be baptized by the resident
Italian-American priest. Puerto Ricans were glaringly absent from any of
the baptism training sessions. A coterie of elderly Italian-American
women complained loudly to one another about the crude manners of the
Puerto Rican parishioners. They were especially furious over the most
recent “invasion” of Haitian pilgrims, who had arrived from Brooklyn to
adore their Renaissance-era southern Italian statue. They claimed to be
worried for the statue’s safety, and discussed restricting Haitian
access to the nave area of the church.

25.Kisseloff 1989:343. In 1990 the final two blocks of Pleasant Avenue,
just upwind from my tenement, were sealed off due to the discovery of
toxic waste that had been dumped illegally in an abandoned wire factory
following a protracted racketeering redevelopment scandal that involved
a lawsuit between Proctor and Gamble and a local Italian-American Mafia
contractor (New York Daily News, October 18, 1989:37; New York Daily
News, July 10, 1990:22; New York City Department of Environmental
Protection 1990; New York Times, June 15, 1986:8:6). A group of homeless
crack addicts took over the immense factory site, converting it into
their personal crack parlor. Not unlike the original 1900 inhabitants
who had “collected all this garbage and junk and would sell it all
bundled up in newspaper” (Kisseloff 1989:343), the contemporary crack
addicts were ripping the decayed factory’s plumbing system out of its
asbestos-lined walls to sell as scrap metal.

26.Orsi 1985:160.

27.New York Times, May 16, 1893:9.

28.Marsh 1932:65, 64, 49.

29.Thrasher 1936:74

30.Orsi 1985:161, citing Covello 1958:43.

31.Cordasco and Galatioto 1970:307. Ironically, the parents of these
racist, class-conscious Jews had not only been socialists but had also
precipitated white flight because of their own “racial impurity” less
than one generation earlier. “The Germans … have all moved away, all but
twelve. They have moved to the Bronx … and elsewhere. The reason given
for this was the undesirable conditions created in the neighborhood, due
to the moving in of Jews and Italians” (Marsh 1932:356).

32.Archives of the New York City Department of City Planning,
facilitated by Frank Vardi.

33.Marsh 1932:49, 62.

34.Time Magazine November 4, 1946:24–25. For accounts of race riots see
Meyer 1989:123–24; Covello 1958:237–43.

35.Schepses 1949:56, citing Chenault 1938:123.

36.After the 1898 invasion, the United States formally changed the
spelling of Puerto Rico to Porto Rico to reflect an anglicized
pronunciation.

37.Marsh 1932:55.

38.Cimilluca 1931:30.

39.Tilley 1935:38, citing Leonard 1930:9.

40.Schepses 1949:57, citing Armstrong, Achilles, and Sacks 1935:57.

41.Lait and Mortimer 1958:126–27.

42.Tilley 1935:34, 48–49.

43.Marsh 1932:49.

44.New York Herald Tribune, December 15, 1946:36.

45.Marsh 1932:421–22.

46.Thrasher 1927, 1932, 1936. See also the extensive bibliography on
Italian Harlem provided by Meyer 1989:292–94.

47.King 1961; Levitt 1965; Levitt, Loeb, and Agee 1952.

48.Cf. Rivera 1983; Rodriguez 1992; Thomas 1967. See also the
discussions by Acosta-Belén 1992; Flores 1993; and Rodriguez 1995.

49.Tilley 1935:192, 32.

50.New York Times, March 18, 1957:A1, 29, 30.

51.Camilo Vergara (1991a; 1991b) has documented how New York’s poverty
programs deliberately reconcentrated poor households in the South Bronx
during the late 1980s. See also Wacquant 1995.

52.Community Service Society 1956.

53.Community Service Society 1956:11–12.

54.Concistre 1943:74.

55.Marsh 1932:61.

56.Reed 1932:18.

57.Marsh 1932:61–62.

58.Tilley 1935:32–33, citing Cimilluca 1931: n.p.; Durk 1976.

59.Reinarman and Levine 1989.

60.Frankel and Freeland 1990; Van Dyck 1990. See Chapter 1, note 1.

61.Dumpson 1951:42, 43.

62.New York Daily News, October 19, 1990:A1.

63.Ibid.

64.Dumpson 1951:40.

65.Concistre 1943:66, citing Thrasher 1936.

66.Reed 1932:32.

67.New York Times, May 16, 1893:9.

68.New York Times, January 29, 1947:A4.

69.Reed 1932:32.

70.New York Herald Tribune, December 15, 1946:36.

71.Marsh 1932:354–55; see also Kisseloff 1989:367.

72.A Puerto Rican eventually wrested control of numbers rackets in the
neighborhood from Fat Tony. See note 12 on page 344, and the New York
Times, April 21, 1994:A13.

73.New York Daily News, October 18, 1989:A1. The ease with which “Fat
Tony” paid his $2 million bail prompted the U.S. Supreme Court to change
the federal bail statute to allow for the preventive detention of
dangerous criminals without bail (New York Times, May 28, 1987:A22).

74.Vince Rao made front-page headlines in the New York Times in the
1950s for his half-dozen homicide and grand larceny arrests, for which
he was never convicted (New York Times, November 18, 1952:A1).

75.O’Brien and Kurins 1991; New York Times, March 21, 1987:A31; New York
Times, April 30, 1988:34; New York Times, October 14, 1988:B3; New York
Times, January 23, 1990:B3; New York Times, March 5, 1990:B1; New York
Times, January 21, 1991:B3.

76.O’Brien and Kurins 1991:335.

77.Drug Enforcement Administration 1988. Francis Hall, the founder of
the Tactical Narcotics Team (TNT) and a thirty-five-year veteran in the
New York City Police Force’s Narcotics Division, told students at a
forum on drugs at the State University of New York, Westbury, in May
1990: Despite these press conferences that you’ve seen – and I’ve
participated in a number of them – there’s more cocaine in the streets
of New York today than ever before in its history; no question about it.

Last August, 5,000 pounds of cocaine seized in an apartment house in
Forest Hills in Queens, an absolutely mind boggling amount of cocaine.
Did that seizure of 5,000 pounds have any effect, any impact at all on
the availability of cocaine on the street? None, whatsoever. Not at all.
And as we’re standing at the press conference in police headquarters,
within walking distance of the building, people were selling cocaine on
the street.

There is even reason to believe that the South Florida Task Force that
was established by President Reagan in 1981 under the direction of then
vice-president Bush, that task force actually resulted in more cocaine
coming into the United States rather than less. And I say that because
the marijuana dealers got out of the marijuana business because of the
incredible bulk of transporting marijuana into south Florida. They got
out of the marijuana business and they got into the cocaine business. A
kilo of cocaine, that’s 2.2 pounds – about half the size of a five pound
bag of sugar.

3. Crackhouse Management

1.“007” is the brand name of a large folding knife with a wooden handle.

2.Later, Candy explained to me that the woman “Felix was fooling around
with” was her sister, and that his ankle was not damaged by his jump
but, rather, was cut by the knife she threw at him.

3.See discussion of compadrazgo and rural labor relations in Wolf 1956.

4.Moreno literally means dark-skinned, but it is used to denote black
skin or, in this case, to differentiate African-Americans from black
Puerto Ricans.

5.In private, Caesar admitted to being intimidated by violence on the
streets. In fact, he even showed some evidence of post-traumatic stress
disorder:

Caesar: People gets wilder when the temperature gets hotter and I’m
scared to go out in the street sometimes.

Word! I was thinking of not coming down today because it’s wild out
there. I don’t want to get hit by a stray bullet when I’m on my way to
buy a bag of potato chips.

Word up! I threw myself on the floor the other day when I just heard an
ash can [firecracker] go off. I was just strolling along with my girl
Carmen and BOOM! And I went, “Oh shit!” I was petro; that shit had my
nerves wrecked and I jumped to the floor.

And I seen them niggas get shot in front of me. It don’t look correct.
It don’t look like you could defend yourself no way!

And I know because I seen it one time when I was walking with my girl in
Jefferson Park. We was crossing this little bridge to get to the other
side of the FDR Drive so we could walk along the water and cross over to
Ward’s Island. You know that bridge where they chopped that homeless
dude up with a meat cleaver last Halloween. [New York Times November 4,
1990:A39]

Philippe: Oh yeah, where they found that little Colombian girl
strangled, stabbed, and raped last month? [New York Times January 26,
1991:A27]

Caesar: Yeah. We were crossing that bridge ’Cause I was going to make
sex to her, right?

So there were these three guys walking in front of us, like about
fifteen feet.

And they talking; and I’m talking at my girl; and all of a sudden, the
tallest of the three dudes pulled out a gun and handed it to the
shortest guy – ’Cause there was two short guys and one taller guy. And
the little guy just shot the third dude in the head.

And me and my girl, we was scared. We was so scared that we didn’t run
or nothing. We was petrified.

So then when the middle dude fell on the floor, he shot him twice in the
head again.

And me and my girl were like, “Oh, shit!” You know, I was like, “Oh,
shit!” My girl started crying and I told her to, “Shut up, man. Don’t
say nothing.”

So they started walking my way; so I was figuring that this was the end
of my life and shit. You know what I’m saying? And I was hugging my
girl. I was scared.

But they walked by me – just walked away. They didn’t run or nothing;
just kept going.

And I be seeing the nigga’ every day now. He’s a real crackhead! He’s
just walking around like nothing happened.

6.Before being able to return to El Barrio, Benzie had to negotiate with
Ray, through an intermediary, a payment plan for his “debts.”

7.Unfortunately, Abraham dropped the replacement glass eye that the
hospital had made for him into a vat of soup he was preparing in the
hospital cafeteria. Medicaid subsequently refused to pay for a second
replacement glass eye.

8.This arson occurred in January 1990 at the Happy Land social
club—dance hall, which was frequented primarily by Honduran immigrants.
A heroin company operating around my block renamed its brand “Happy
Land” shortly after the fire.

9.The intermittent pattern of arrests of corrupt New York City police
officers in inner-city precincts in the late 1980s through the mid-1990s
illustrates the prevalent, but fundamentally haphazard, nature of police
corruption around narcotics at the street-dealer level. Officers are so
alienated from the communities they patrol that rather than take
payoffs, they specialize in orchestrating fake raids and pocketing the
drugs and money they confiscate (cf. New York Times, May 8, 1990:A1,
B10; New York Times, July 7, 1994:B2). Until mid-1994, New York City
police officers were specifically discouraged from arresting drug
dealers because of the inherent temptations for petty corruption (New
York Times, July 7, 1994:B2). Narcotics arrests were supposed to be
handled exclusively by specially trained elite units.

10.To illustrate the incompetence of the local police force: When I went
to the precinct to report the burglary of my apartment in midwinter, I
noticed graffiti scrawled on the blackboard in the main office, saying
“No more arrests till we get heat.”

11.For accounts of how overwhelmed the New York City courts became in
1989 at the height of the “War on Drugs,” see New York Times, May 31,
1989:B1.

4. “Goin’ Legit”

1.New York City Department of City Planning 1993 (January): 37, Table 6.
In 1950, factory work provided 30 percent of New York City’s jobs; by
the early 1990s it provided only 10 percent. In contrast, in 1950
service jobs accounted for 15 percent of employment; by 1992 service
work represented well over 30 percent of all city jobs. Just in the
1980s alone, manufacturing decreased 31 percent, whereas “producer
services” increased 61 percent and “all services” rose by 16 percent
(Romo and Schwartz 1993:358–59; New York City Department of City
Planning Population Division 1993.)

2.New York Times, February 13, 1991:D1; New York Times, September 6,
1990:D17.

3.In contrast to that of men, the labor force participation rates of
Puerto Rican women rose from 34 percent in 1980 to 42 percent in 1990
(New York City Department of City Planning 1993 [December]: Table 6–1).

4.New York Daily News, October 30, 1990:1.

5.“Fight the Power” was a best-selling rap song in 1990 by the
African-American group Public Enemy.

6.Salal would be spelled salar – literally “to salt” – in standard
Spanish. Puerto Rican Spanish, however, converts certain “r’s” into
“l’s.”

7.Romo and Schwartz 1993.

8.cf. Colburn 1989; Scott 1985.

9.Becker 1963; Hebdige 1979.

10.According to the 1990 Census of New York City, 22.6 percent of all
Latinos were employed in construction compared to 13.5 percent for
whites and 8.8 percent for African-Americans. Between the 1980 Census
and the 1990 Census, construction jobs in New York City increased as a
proportion of total employment from 2.3 percent to 3.2 percent (New York
City Department of City Planning 1993 [January]: Table 6).

11.New York Daily News, August 13, 1991; New York Times, July 28,
1991:A29; New York Times, March 5 1990:B1; New York Times, April 30,
1988:A34.

12.Exceptionally, the head orchestrator of this particular
multimillion-dollar round of window bid-rigging contracts was indicted
(cf. New York Daily News, August 13, 1991:20; New York Times, July 28,
1991:29). He was none other than Fat Tony Salerno, the don of the
Genovese crime family traditionally headquartered in East Harlem. Little
Pete’s union subcontractor, however, was much too far down in the chain
of corruption to be affected by the indictments.

13.Bourgois 1989a.

14.Covello 1958:223.

15.Berlin 1991:10.

16.See Smith 1992. Sassen-Koob 1986. Undocumented new-immigrants are so
crucial to New York City’s economy that its politicians, both Republican
and Democrat, publicly embraced the right of the undocumented to live
and work in the city during the same years (mid-1990s) when the rest of
the United States, especially California, was in the throes of an
anti-immigrant hysteria (New York Times, June 10, 1994:A1, B4).

17.Smith 1992.

5. School Days

1.Abdelmalek Sayad (1991) developed this idea of “the first delinquency”
in his analysis of the cultural limbo of second-generation Algerians in
France.

2.The Nuyorican poet Tato Laviera (1985:53) expresses this poignantly in
his poem “Nuyorican.”

3.I visited Caesar on one of the occasions he was interned in the
violent wing of the psychiatric ward at Metropolitan Hospital. He told
me he wanted to “stay locked up” at the end of the mandatory four-week
observation period established for suicide attempts. He also complained
that the psychiatrists would not listen to his pleas for stronger
medication.

Upon his subsequent release, however, Caesar made light of his
vulnerable mental condition.

Yeah. I was in a high-security mental ward. It was like a Freddy Krueger
scene. I was in there for a while. And it was wild man. I was scared
there. I thought that somebody was going to murder me at night, one of
those nuts. I became a nut. [hunching his shoulder] I started going
around everywhere, around the other people that was crazy from drugs.

And there was one man there that he was Jewish, and I used to call him
Woody Allen. And he was there, like for two years, boy. You know Woody
Allen? He’s a famous Jewish guy. This guy talked just like Woody Allen –
a fuckin corny ass Jew. I wanted to kill him. When I came out of the
warehouse, I was into killing, boy!

4.Caesar enjoyed infusing his social critiques with irony when I was
tape-recording. He understood fully my theoretical orientation, which
strives to uncover the linkages between individual pathology and
social-structural oppression. Perhaps he was taunting me for being so
concerned with the issues of social marginalization and racism.

5.Cf. Bourgois and Dunlap 1992.

6.See discussion of gang rape in the college fraternity context by
Sanday 1990.

7.By the time I knew him, Luis was in his mid-thirties and was the
father of several daughters. He used to complain righteously of the
sexual irresponsibility of young men, even though he himself still
reveled in promiscuity and publicly flaunted his addiction to crack.

Luis: I told my daughter, “I don’t want some guy to take you, and do
what he gotta do, and then throw you out. I don’t want him to be calling
you a hole, and shit like that, man.”

Things are more wild today. There’s a whole new generation of assholes
out there. Back in the days, there wasn’t no crack, or nothing like
that.

But now! Now, forget it man. Nowadays, these guys on the streets, just
want to destroy a girl’s life, you know. And these girls got a future in
front of them, but these guys will come, and fuck her up. These young
guys, that’s what they’re all about now. They take a girl; they screw
her, and then when they come downstairs, they be saying, “Ah … I fucked
that bitch. I had that bitch.”

6. Redrawing the Gender Line on the Street

1.Jaggar 1983; Hooks 1994.

2.For a cinematographic representation of many of the themes around
masculinity, family structure, women’s rights, and inner city street
culture, see the Nuyorican film I Like It Like That. In a more
caricatural and tragic manner the polarization of domestic violence was
illustrated in a nearby housing project with the brutal serial murder of
a six-person family by the jealous former boyfriend of the mother who
headed the household. The killer was an unemployed factory worker who
hacked everyone to death with a butcher knife following several months
of feuding with his ex-girlfriend and her children over whom he could no
longer impose his former autocratic control (New York Times, May 4,
1993:B1, B3).

Conversely, as one anthropological study of machismo and family life in
rural Mexico from the 1960s claims, the successful patriarch, secure in
his machismo and omnipotent at home, does not need to engage in overt
physical violence against the members of his household (Hunt 1971:116).

3.The hood of the maroon Renault Alliance that we were sitting on was
pocked with shotgun bullet holes from a blast that had killed the mother
of a three-year-old child earlier that summer. It had occurred directly
in front of my apartment window, only moments after I had parked my car
and carried my sleeping baby to my second-floor walkup. Candy had
dismissed the murdered mother as deserving her fate for having smoked
the consignment of crack she was supposed to sell.

4.In her historical analysis of the Cuban family, Verena Martinez-Alier
(1974:135) treats elopement as an assertion of individual freedom of
choice. She demonstrates how romantic elopement can be understood as a
form of individualistic resistance to the institutional racism of Cuban
society.

5.One night I actually saw Candy’s father at a corner grocery store near
La Farmacia’s corner. Primo nonchalantly pointed out a shabbily dressed,
fragile old man who was rolling humbly on the balls of his feet drinking
a Budweiser by the beer cooler that we were reaching into. He was
standing bleary-eyed in the background, careful to keep himself out of
the way of customers. Primo whispered to me, “That’s Candy’s father.” I
could hardly believe that this broken-down, humble alcoholic was the
violent patriarch who had traumatized Candy’s childhood. He was so
lonely and decrepit-looking – like a fish out of water blinking and
gasping for breath – that it would not have surprised me had he started
drooling or babbling incoherently. Primo giggled at my shocked
expression, adding a somewhat sad “Yeah, can you fucking believe it?”
Had this dislocated, failed immigrant remained in his natal fishing
village of Isabela instead of coming to New York in search of factory
work, he might still have been an alcoholic, and he probably would have
beaten Candy as a child. The consequences, however, would most certainly
not have been so devastating.

6.For examples of how individuals internalize wider social structural
contradictions see the literature in the field of critical medical
anthropology (Davila 1987; Scheper-Hughes 1992; Singer 1986; Singer et
al. 1992).

7.This was the incident that forced Felix to hire Primo as temporary
manager of the Game Room. To minimize the humiliation of having been
stabbed by his wife for being caught in bed with her sister, Felix had
pretended he had sprained his ankle jumping off the motel balcony – at
least that is the way Primo originally told me the story. (See Chapter
3, note 2.)

8.Guarnaccia, De la Cancela, and Carrillo 1989; Lewis-Fernandez 1992.

9.Literally, a “towel for tears.”

10.Cf. New York Daily News, October 19, 1990:1.

11.Fatal Attraction was an Academy Award—winning Hollywood movie in 1987
about a woman who terrorizes her ex-lover and his family.

12.Caesar vehemently disliked Tabatha because they had been lovers
several years earlier. Tabatha made a point of periodically
demonstrating in public her enduring distaste for Caesar. Some three
weeks before this conversation – as Primo enjoyed reminding all of us in
Caesar’s presence – Tabatha “knocked Caesar flat on his ass, in the
middle of the street, right in front of the Game Room.” Worse yet, she
did this on the night Ray had rented the social club two doors down from
the Game Room in order to celebrate the simultaneous two-year-old and
four-year-old birthdays of two of his sons by different mothers. I
missed witnessing Tabatha’s legendary diss of Caesar, as I was inside
the club at the time supervising my own one-and-a-half-year-old son, who
was mesmerized on the dance floor by the rap/disco/salsa music
combinations, and the multigenerational potpourri of celebrators,
ranging from newborns to great-grandparents.

13.See the discussion on changing motherhood gender roles in a small
plantation community by Seda Bonilla 1964.

14.See the discussion by researchers at the Centro de Estudios
Puertorriqueños of the struggle for what the authors call “cultural
citizenship” on the part of poor Puerto Rican women (Benmayor,
Torruellas, and Juarbe 1992). See also the critique of “white, middle
class feminism” by Hooks (1994), and of “liberal feminism” by Jaggar
(1983). See also discussions by Acosta-Bélen (1993), and Mohanty (1984).

15.Katz 1986. See also Rainwater 1984.

16.Even Caesar was forced to express grudging admiration for Candy’s
resourcefulness at hustling welfare:

Primo: Candy used to clock when she worked in the bus for retarded
children, because she had two social security cards. She worked with one
social security card, and at the same time she’s collecting welfare on
another social security card, and then she has Abraham’s money – his SSI
– every month.

She was getting paid well, boy!

Caesar: Yeah, then she used to do those tax things.

Primo: Oh yeah, and then at the same time she used to work right there
[motioning next door to the Game Room], where the beauty salon is at. It
used to be an insurance place that filled out tax forms.

Caesar: That lady is an animal.

Primo: It was like, for just a few hours, because she had just enough
time to go back to her bus job before the kids get out, and then later,
after dropping off the kids, she’d go back to the tax place.

Caesar: Hey, that lady was scam, a Jew scam, boy!

Primo: Hell yeah! That lady always had a bank. She had her money in a
bank account. I remember when a few years ago I had some income tax
money that came in, and I told her to hold it for me in her bank.

She’s good, man, she never took out money.

Caesar: I remember she did my income tax one year, and she got me a
thousand five hundred, man. I didn’t even think I was going to get five
dollars.

It was the first time I did income tax, and I got paid, boy. She didn’t
charge me nothing, either.

Primo: She did my taxes for me too.

Caesar: She’s stupid. She shoulda stood working in that retarded bus
thing. That’s a good job; it’s with the City; that’s a good pension, and
it’s union.

17.Surveys reveal that routine termination from welfare rolls owing to
the failure of heads of households to fulfill the bureaucratic
requirements of recertification is the single most frequent cause of
family homelessness in New York City. The cost of emergency housing and
social services for homeless, terminated families far exceeds the amount
of money the city would have been penalized by the federal government’s
matching fund program for maintaining inaccurate files (Berlin 1991;
Dehavenon 1989–90).

A survey of welfare recipients in Chicago in 1988 revealed that none of
a snowball sample of twenty-five welfare-receiving families complied
fully with the Department of Social Services’ income requirements. Every
single household had an outside source of income. They simply could not
have stayed sheltered, fed, and clothed on the amount of money they
officially received from welfare (Edin 1991). In New York City the real
dollar value of welfare benefits dropped 30 percent between 1970 and
1992 (New York Times, August 30, 1994:A14).

18.Disrespect from welfare social workers and clerks was a frequent
theme of conversation on the street, especially among women.
Confrontations with welfare investigators over supplementary sources of
income constitute some of Primo’s earliest childhood memories. His
mother’s resistance to the bureaucracy was not as aggressive as Candy’s,
although the final outcome was not significantly different. She
successfully supplemented her below-subsistence-level family allotment
with outside income from the underground economy.

Primo: After my father left we had to go on public support. She had a
hard time with four kids by herself. My little sister who is twenty-five
now, used to still be in a crib.

My mother used to have perfumes that she was selling, and when the
welfare investigators would come, she used to have to hide the little
bullshit perfumes’ models, in my sister’s crib.

I was a little kid, and I used to wonder who these people were? I hated
them. They used to knock and my mother used to say, “Wait a minute.”
Then she’d be running all over the house [waving his arms in mock
frenzy] hiding the perfumes in the baby’s crib.

I used to wonder why, because I was a kid, and I didn’t know what the
hell it was. But my mother used to always say, “Investigadores!” She
used to say [waving his arms again, knotting his brow, and shrieking in
a high pitch], “Los investigadores! Los investigadores!”

It was wack because the house was poor. We didn’t used to have too much
things in the house, but they used to come, and investigate. But still
she used to have to hide her little bullshit things.

That was like in ‘69 or 1970, or ‘68, when they used to come and
investigate.

Nowadays they don’t. When I lived with Sandra no one used to come and
investigate her house. No one. I was living with her from day one and I
always had her on welfare. [chuckle]

I think they don’t got the funds no more to be sending investigators
out.

19.Candy’s talk with Carlos proved ineffective because a half-dozen
teenagers in her projects were struck by automatic gunfire over the
following three-month period. Luckily, no one was killed, and the feud
eventually ended. Before it was over, however, on three separate
occasions I stumbled right onto the edge of the shoot-outs. The first
time I was with my wife on our way to have dinner at a local restaurant.
The shots stopped us from being able to take a shortcut through the
project courtyard, forcing us to walk around the block to reach our
final destination.

20.The ultimate fragility of Candy’s support system is illustrated by
Ray’s having to send her two siblings, together, to pay her bail. He
could not trust either one individually to deliver the cash safely.
Candy’s younger brother was an HIV-positive crack-cum-heroin
speedballer, and her youngest sister was a welfare-dependent single
mother with a compulsive taste for powder cocaine and alcohol.

21.New York Post, April 11, 1989:5, 30–31; New York Times, April 17,
1989:A1, A16; New York Times, July 3, 1994:E3.

7. Families and Children in Pain

1.Farrington 1991

2.During the 1980s, child abuse statistics in New York City escalated
almost 700 percent. From 1985 to 1994 they increased 232 percent (cf.
New York Daily News, November 19, 1990:5, 10; New York Times, December
28, 1988:B3; New York Times, December 19, 1989:B1). It is impossible to
know how much of this increase reflects a real increase or is the result
of improved reporting procedures and changing social definitions of
child abuse.

3.Marsh 1932:361.

4.Community Service Society 1956:25.

5.For more examples of the destruction of children, see the life
scenarios of Manny, Angel, Lestor, Junior, and Angelo in the epilogue.

6.Marsh 1932:48.

7.Coincidentally, a few years later, I noticed a photograph of this same
corner in the New York Times depicting a shrine of flowers commemorating
the murder of a fifty-two-year-old woman caught in crossfire while
accompanying her five-year-old grandson home from school (December 1,
1993:A20).

8.I found out the next day in the New York Times that the victim was
forty-four years old (New York Times, November 16, 1989:B2).

9.I grew up seven blocks from the border between Manhattan’s Upper East
Side and El Barrio. As noted in Chapter 1, note 16, the median household
income of my childhood neighborhood was more than thirteen times higher
than that of the two census tracts surrounding my apartment on the Game
Room’s block. Less than 1 percent of the residents in my childhood
neighborhood lived below the poverty line in 1990, compared to
approximately 47 percent in the two census tracts surrounding my
tenement in El Barrio. Only three Puerto Ricans lived in my childhood
census tract in 1989 despite its being a five-minute walk from the
neighborhood with one of the highest densities of Puerto Rican residents
in the entire United States (1990 Census of Population and Housing Block
Statistics).

10.In Puerto Rican Spanish, javaO’ refers pejoratively to someone with
African features and “white” skin.

11.I significantly edited or, rather, censored these excerpts of Maria’s
poetry for fear of portraying decontextualized racist and sexist
material as well as excessively private perspectives.

12.In 1991, there were as many people waiting for public housing
(189,000 families) in New York City, as there were living in public
housing (approximately 600,000 individuals) (The Christian Science
Monitor, August 19, 1991:14).

13.Caesar confided to Primo that he sometimes grabbed the toddler by his
feet as he lay sleeping and spun him in the air over his head. When
Carmen would come running to the bedroom, Caesar pretended he was
comforting Papo, who had just woken up, shrieking, from a nightmare. On
another occasion, Papo had to be taken to the municipal hospital’s
emergency room when Caesar ripped his foreskin while bathing him.

I began fretting over whether or not I should file a child abuse report
against Caesar, but simultaneously the New York Times began running
exposés on how overwhelmed the foster child system had become with
45,000 children flooding into its care in 1990 alone. According to one
reporter, children were sleeping on the desks of the intake officers at
the Bureau of Child Welfare headquarters. Brothers and sisters seized by
the foster care program were routinely split apart (cf. New York Times,
July 3, 1989:B21–22; New York Times, October 23, 1989:A1, B4; New York
Times, December 19, 1989:B1, B4; New York Times, March 29, 1992:A1, A20;
New York Times, February 9, 1989:A1, B9; New York Times, October 19,
1990:B3).

I also wondered how to interpret the shrieks of crying children that
regularly rose through the heating pipes in my tenement. Was I
ethnocentrically misreading the expressively aggressive child-rearing
practices of inner-city families, or should I go downstairs and
intervene?

Someone else eventually reported Caesar for child abuse, but the
investigator took no action; on the contrary, she provided Caesar with
enough information to be able to figure out who had reported him,
leading to a long-lasting enmity.

14.See again, New York Daily News, November 19, 1990:5, 10; New York
Times, December 28, 1988:B3; New York Times, February 9, 1989:A1, B9;
New York Times, October 23, 1989:A1, B4; New York Times, December 19,
1989:B1; New York Times, March 17, 1990:A8; New York Times, October 19,
1990:B3; New York Times, March 29, 1992:A1, A20.

15.See the critique of the sexualization of crack by Bourgois and Dunlap
1992. For a prime example of an editorial in a major newspaper that
fully succumbed to the drug hysteria, see New York Times, May 28,
1989:A14. See also the critique by Reinarman and Levine 1989.

16.Morgan 1981:89–101, 139–140. In this century’s first decade, a U.S.
doctor assured the general public in a footnote in a respected medical
journal that the violent transformation of African-Americans under the
influence of cocaine had been “verify[ed] clinically [through]
experimental observations made in 1897 … in a series of experiments on
cocaine administered hypodermically.” This same doctor told his readers
that after ingesting cocaine,

sexual desires are increased and perverted, peaceful negroes become
quarrelsome, and timid negroes develop a degree of “Dutch courage” that
is sometimes almost incredible. A large proportion of the wholesale
killings in the South during recent years have been the direct result of
cocaine, and frequently the perpetrators of these crimes have been
hitherto inoffensive, law-abiding negroes. Moreover, the negro who has
once formed the habit, seems absolutely beyond redemption.

… A very few experimental sniffs of the drug make him an habitué – he is
a constant menace to his community until he is eliminated (Williams
1914:247).

17.For example, only two of the more than thirty dealers who worked for
Ray while I lived in El Barrio were women.

18.Althaus 1991; Bourgois and Dunlap 1992.

19.Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1989:A1, A6; Bowser 1988.

20.New York Times, May 28, 1989:A14; New York Times, March 17, 1990:A8;
Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1989:A6.

21.To illustrate the “normalcy” of hanging out at crackhouses, I have
several photographs of my wife posing with my son in front of the Game
Room, despite the fact that she disapproved of drug use and drug
dealing.

22.New York Times, May 25, 1990:A1, B5. In fact, the medical literature
on the effects of intrauterine alcohol and narcotics use is very
confusing. Studies show uneven results, and doctors do not have a
coherent explanation for why some babies are severely damaged and others
are born completely healthy (cf. Koren et al. 1989). Follow-up studies
in the mid-1990s suggested that most crack-exposed infants recover fully
if they are provided with adequate social support and treatment during
childhood (Day and Richardson 1993).

23.Ceasar defused a heated argument I was having with Ray over the
hypocrisy of his Catholic dogmatism on abortion versus his greediness
for selling to pregnant addicts by supporting Ray, and attacking the
larger hypocritical logic of the U.S. military-industrial complex:

Caesar: I ain’t into abortion neither, Felipe. Abortion is whack, it
ain’t right. Besides it’s a cardinal sin.

It’s better that you just put all these scum to war when they get older.
That’s why you have a war, once in a while – every four years. That’s
better than killing it before the child has a chance. Just have a war
every four years and get rid of some of the population.

War is a big business, man. It’s the most powerful business. These
fuckin’ [aircraft] carriers be costing billions and billions. Drug
dealers [pointing at Ray] don’t have billions, yet [general laughter] –
maybe millions and millions, but not billions. Drug dealers don’t have
more than the military. They don’t make more than the military.

24.We befriended a pregnant crack addict who we saw in midwinter opening
her coat widely to display her distended belly on a well-known
prostitute stroll a dozen blocks from the Game Room. She explained that
her pregnancy increased her business: “They [her customers] like
pregnant pussy. They say pregnant pussy the best for them” (Bourgois and
Dunlap 1993).

25.New York Times February 9, 1987; Newsday, October 29, 1990:8, 30;
Village Voice, April 3, 1990:11–12.

26.Scheper-Hughes 1992.

27.Majors and Billson 1992.

28.In his moving personal account of adopting a Sioux baby, the Native
American anthropologist Michael Dorris (1989) notes that fetal alcohol
syndrome has increased among Native American children as traditional
gender relations on reservations have changed, and as women increasingly
have the right, or at least the option, to drink publicly. See also the
critical review by Pollitt (1990:416), which argues that Dorris failed
to contextualize adequately the structural oppression of Native
Americans. She accuses him of falling unaware into a reactionary “fetal
rights” trap. Cook-Lynn (1989), herself a member of the Sioux Nation,
attacks Dorris for imposing a middle-class, Anglo distortion on his
child’s tragedy. She also notes long-term Sioux struggles to address the
problem of alcoholism holistically through cultural revitalization and
healing.

8. Vulnerable Fathers

1.In the two census tracts surrounding my tenement, slightly more than
70 percent of the female headed households with young children were
below the poverty line, compared to approximately 47 percent of all
families in the same micro-neighborhood (1990 Census of Population and
Housing Block Statistics).

2.In a book of essays, the sociologist Herbert Gans (1991:291) notes, “A
family headed by a capable if unmarried mother may thus be healthier
than a two parent family in which the father is a marginal appendage.”

3.New York Times, March 31, 1994:A18. Family poverty rates rose even
faster for young workers. The proportion of workers between the ages of
eighteen and twenty-four who had wages that were too low to keep a
family of four over the poverty line (defined as $6.50 per hour)
increased from 23 percent in 1979 to 47 percent in 1992.

4.Quintero-Rivera 1984.

5.See De la Cancela’s analysis of the relationship between machismo and
capitalism in the Puerto Rican experience (1986). See also the critique
of Anglo stereotypes of machismo by Paredes (1971). Ramirez (1993)
offers a detailed analysis of Puerto Rican masculinity.

6.Rosie worked for Ray for about six months until she saved enough money
for the down payment on a Section-8 subsidized rental apartment. She had
just had a baby and was desperate to move out of her mother’s crowded
project apartment. At the Game Room she spent most of her time knitting
a pink security blanket for her newborn, whom she had left at home with
her mother.

7.Luis insisted on using his own “stem” when he shared a five-dollar
pipeful of crack with sex-for-crack prostitutes, so as to benefit from
the additional buildup of resin. (See Bourgois and Dunlap 1992.)

8.A Puerto Rican friend who grew up on the Game Room’s block and who
works as a secretary in a local job-training program, complained to me
that some of her childhood friends tell her to “stop acting white” when
she criticizes them for being promiscuous.

9.In his discussion of machismo in a Mexican village, Hunt (1971) notes
that contrary to the stereotype of macho men being driven to violent
promiscuity and substance abuse by deep inferiority complexes, the “real
machos” are completely confident in their total domination and can be
“highly puritanical, and often deeply committed to what they call
progress, honesty, and justice. They are the pluperfect example of what
by their cultural norms the perfect father ought to be: tolerant, wise,
just, honest” (p. 116). See also note 2 on page 354.

10.Some six months later a man was apprehended for raping his three
year-old niece in broad daylight at this exact same spot (New York
Times, July 17, 1991:B1).

11.I had witnessed Caesar’s uncharacteristic submission to his
stepfather a few months earlier, on a hot Saturday night when we ran
into his “Poppy” drinking with a few friends. They were sitting on a
bench around a cooler full of beer in the courtyard of a neighboring
housing project. A short, overweight man in his mid-forties, Caesar’s
stepfather grabbed him by the crotch and, with a big grin, called over
his friends slumped on the play-ground bench. “Yo, look at the size of
my boy. This is my son and he’s got a big one.” Caesar cracked a serious
smile, but, to my surprise, remained subdued. Normally he would not have
tolerated such physical disrespect. It struck me that maybe he was
grateful that a male figure would publicly take genetic responsibility
for his existence and lay patriarchal claim to it. In contrast, Primo
never had a stable stepfather figure in his life. Perhaps this explains
the gentleness of his relationship to his “adopted grandfather,”
Abraham, who sometimes collected the quarters from the video machines in
the Game Room. Primo watched over Abraham “like a hawk,” making sure he
did not have more than three 16-ounce cans of malt liquor on the nights
that he visited. Primo also always escorted Abraham back to his
high-rise project apartment. On the nights when Abraham managed to drink
extra beers “on the sneak tip,” Primo would have to support him in a
stumbling bear hug all the way through the project courtyards to keep
him from falling down.

Primo respected Abraham despite his decrepitude.

Primo: Abraham was cool. When he use to live with Luí s’ mother, he
didn’t use to beat the kids. If anything, he got beat down. Word! Eva
used to beat Abraham down, and play him dirty to his fucking face. She
used to beat the shit out of Abraham because of his severe alcohol
problem.

12.New York Times, November 4, 1990:A39; New York Times, January 26,
1991:A27.

9. Conclusion

1.See Devine’s (in press) call – despite his postmodernism – for policy
engagement in the field of critical, inner-city education.

2.Cf. Phillips 1990; Sassen 1991; Wacquant 1993; Wilson 1987.

3.Rainwater 1994; Business Week, August 15, 1994:78–83. See also note 3
on page 362.

4.Cf. Collins 1983; Wilson 1987; New York City Department of City
Planning 1993 (March).

5.Rivera-Batiz 1994.

6.New York City Department of City Planning 1993 (March).

7.Blachman and Sharpe 1989–90:154.

8.Smolowe 1994:58; New York Times, July 9, 1994:A19. In 1993, Russia
surpassed the United States, which had surpassed South Africa in 1992,
to have the highest per capita incarceration rate in the world (New York
Times, September 13, 1994:A8).

9.Robert Merton (1994) made this point in the 1930s with respect to
Chicago street criminals when he developed his analysis of “social
structure and anomie.”

Epilogue

1.New York City Department of City Planning 1993 (March). School
district statistic courtesy of Robert Smith.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Acosta-Belén, Edna. 1992. “Beyond Island Boundaries: Ethnicity, Gender,
and Cultural Revitalization in Nuyorican Literature.” Callaloo 15(4):
979–98.

Acosta-Belén, Edna. 1993. “Defining a Common Ground: The Theoretical
Meeting of Women’s, Ethnic, and Area Studies.” In Edna Acosta-Belén and
Christine E. Bose, eds., Researching Women in Latin America and the
Caribbean, pp. 175–86. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Althaus, F. 1991. “As Incidence of Syphilis Rises Sharply in the U.S.,
Racial Differentials Grow.” Family Planning Perspectives 23(1): 43–44.

Armstrong, C. P., E. M. Achilles, and M. J. Sacks. 1935. “A Study on
Reactions of Puerto Rican Children in New York City to Psychological
Tests.” Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York.

Becker, Howard S. 1963. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance.
New York: Free Press.

Behar, Ruth. 1993. Translated Woman: Crossing the Border with
Esperanza’s Story. Boston: Beacon Press.

Benmayor, Rina, Rosa Torruellas, and Anna Juarbe. 1992. “Responses to
Poverty Among Puerto Rican Women: Identity, Community, and Cultural
Citizenship.” New York: Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños, Hunter
College. Report to the Joint Committee for Public Policy Research on
Contemporary Hispanic Issues of the Inter-University Program for Latino
Research and the Social Science Research Council.

Berlin, Gordon. 1991. “The Poverty Among Families: A Service
Decategorization Response.” New York: Manpower Demonstration Research
Corporation. Photocopied report.

Blachman, Morris J., and Kenneth E. Sharpe. 1989–90 (Winter). “The War
on Drugs: American Democracy under Assault.” World Policy Journal 7(1):
135–63.

Blumstein, Alfred, and Joel Wallman. 2000. “The Recent Rise and Fall of
American Violence.” In Alfred Blumstein and Joel Wallman, eds., The
Crime Drop in America, pp. 1–12. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bolton, Reginald P. 1922. Indian Paths of the Great Metropolis. New
York: Museum of the American Indian Heye Foundation.

Bonilla, Frank, and Ricardo Campos. 1986. Industry and Idleness. New
York: Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños, Hunter College.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1980. The Logic of Practice. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press.

Bourgois, Philippe. 1989a. “In Search of Horatio Alger: Culture and
Ideology in the Crack Economy.” Contemporary Drug Problems 16(4):
619–49.

Bourgois, Philippe. 1989b. Ethnicity at Work: Divided Labor on a Central
American Banana Plantation. Studies in Atlantic History and Culture
Series. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Bourgois, Philippe. 1990. “Hypotheses and Ethnographic Analysis of
Concealment in the Underground Economy: The Economic and Ideological
Dynamics of the Census Undercount.” Ethnographic Exploratory Research
Report #6. Washington D.C.: Bureau of the Census, Center for Survey
Methods Research.

Bourgois, Philippe. 2000. “Disciplining Addictions: The Bio-politics of
Methadone and Heroin in the United States.” Culture, Medicine, and
Psychiatry 24(2): 165–95.

Bourgois, Philippe, and Eloise Dunlap. 1993. “Exorcising Sex-for-Crack
Prostitution: An Ethnographic Perspective from Harlem.” In Mitchell
Ratner, ed., Crack Pipe as Pimp: An Eight-City Ethnographic Study of the
Sex-for-Crack Phenomenon, pp. 97–132. Lexington Mass.: Lexington Books.

Bowser, Benjamin. 1988. “Crack and AIDS: An Ethnographic Impression.”
MIRA, Multicultural Inquiry and Research on AIDS (Spring), 2(2): 1–2.

Business Week. 1994 (August 15). “Inequality: How the Gap Between Rich
and Poor Hurts the Economy,” pp. 78–83, by Aaron Bernstein.

Cabán, Pedro. 1993. “Redefining Puerto Rico’s Political Status.” In
Edwin Meléndez and Edgardo Meléndez, eds., Colonial Dilemma: Critical
Perspectives on Contemporary Puerto Rico, pp. 19–40. Boston: South End
Press.

Camp, Camille Graham, and George M. Camp. 1998. The Corrections Yearbook
1998, pp. 246, 248. Middletown,: Criminal Justice Institute.

Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños, History Task Force, Hunter College.
1979. Labor Migration Under Capitalism: The Puerto Rican Experience. New
York: Monthly Review Press.

CESAR FAX. 2001. “Current Cocaine-Positive Rates Among Male Arrestees
Remain Dramatically Lower than Historic Peaks,” no. 10: 39.

Chenault, Lawrence. 1938. The Puerto Rican Migrant in New York City. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Christian Science Monitor. 1991 (August 19). “New York City’s Oases of
Safety,” p. 14, by Lucia Mount.

Cimilluca, Salvatore. 1931. “The Natural History of East Harlem from
1880 to the Present.” Master’s thesis, New York University.

Colburn, Forrest, ed. 1989. Everyday Forms of Resistance. Armonk, N.Y.:
M. E. Sharpe.

Collins, Sharon M. 1983. “The Making of the Black Middle Class.” Social
Problems 30(4): 369–82.

Community Service Society. 1956 (September 20). “Interim Report on
Jefferson Site Service Pilot Project.” Manuscript. File in Box 347 of
the Community Service Society Archives, Butler Library, Columbia
University.

Concistre, Marie J. 1943. “A Study of a Decade in the Life and Education
of the Adult Immigrant Community in East Harlem.” Ph.D. dissertation,
New York University.

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. 1989. “(Review) The Broken Cord.” Wicazo Sa 5(2):
42–45.

Cordasco, Francesco, and Rocco G. Galatioto. 1970. “Ethnic Displacement
in the Interstitial Community: The East Harlem Experience.” Phylon: The
Atlanta Review of Race and Culture 31: 302–12.

Corsi, Edward. 1925 (September 16). “My Neighborhood.” The Outlook, pp.
90–92.

Covello, Leonard, with Guido D’Agostino. 1958. The Heart Is the Teacher.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Davila, Richard D. 1987. “The History of Puerto Rican Drinking
Patterns.” In Merrill Singer, Lani Davison, and Fuat Yalin, eds.,
Conference Proceedings: Alcohol Use and Abuse Among Hispanic
Adolescents. Hartford, Conn.: Hispanic Health Council.

Day, N. L., and G. A. Richarson. 1993 (September 1). “Cocaine Use and
Crack Babies: Science, Media, and Miscommunication.” Neurotoxicology and
Teratology 15(5): 293–334.

Dehavenon, Anna Lou. 1989–90. “Charles Dickens Meets Franz Kafka: The
Maladministration of New York City’s Public Assistance Programs.” New
York University Review of Law and Social Change 17(2): 231–54.

De la Cancela, Ví ctor. 1986. “A Critical Analysis of Puerto Rican
Machismo: Implications for Clinical Practice.” Psychotherapy 23(2):
291–96.

Devine, John. The New Panopticon: The Construction of Violence in Inner
City High Schools. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dí az Valcarcel, Emilio. 1978. Harlem todos los dias: Novela. First
edition. San Juán: Ediciones Huracán.

Dietz, James L. 1986. Economic History of Puerto Rico: Institutional
Change and Capitalist Development. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.

Dietz, James L., and Emilio Pantojas-Garcí a. 1993. “Puerto Rico’s New
Role in the Caribbean: The High-Finance/Maquiladora Strategy.” In Edwin
Meléndez and Edgardo Meléndez, eds., Colonial Dilemma: Critical
Perspectives on Contemporary Puerto Rico. pp. 103–18. Boston: South End
Press.

Dorris, Michael. 1989. The Broken Cord: A Family’s Ongoing Struggle with
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. New York: Harper & Row.

Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). 1988. “Crack Cocaine Availability
and Trafficking in the United States.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department
of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, Cocaine Investigations
Section.

Dumpson, James. 1951. “The Menace of Narcotics to the Children of New
York: A Plan to Eradicate the Evil.” New York: Welfare Council of New
York. (Manuscript report, in Narcotics file, Box 370, Community Service
Society Archives, Columbia Rare Books, p. 43.)

Durk, David, with Arlene Durk and Ira Silverman. 1976. The Pleasant
Avenue Connection. New York: Harper & Row.

Edin, Kathryn. 1991. “Surviving the Welfare System: How AFDC Recipients
Make Ends Meet in Chicago.” Social Problems 38(4): 462–74.

Farrington, David. 1991. “Childhood Aggression and Adult Violence: Early
Precursors and Later-Life Outcomes.” In Debra Pepler and Kenneth Rubin,
eds., The Development and Treatment of Childhood Aggression, pp. 5–29.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Fischler, Stan. 1976. Uptown Downtown: A Trip Through Time on New York’s
Subways. New York: Hawthorn/Dutton.

Flores, Juán. 1993. Divided Borders: Essays on Puerto Rican Identity.
Houston, Tex.: Arte Publico Press.

Foley, Douglas. 1990. Learning Capitalist Culture: Deep in the Heart of
Tejas. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Fordham, Signithia. 1988. “Racelessness as a Factor in Black Students’
School Success: Pragmatic Strategy or Pyrrhic Victory?” Harvard
Educational Review 53(257): 293.

Frankel, Alison, and Lisa Freeland. 1990 (March). “Is Street-Level
Enforcement a Bust?” The American Lawyer, pp. 100–9.

Gans, Herbert J. 1991. People, Plans, and Policies: Essays on Poverty,
Racism, and Other National Urban Problems. New York: Columbia University
Press and Russell Sage Foundation.

General Accounting Office. 1992 (July). “Food Assistance Nutritional
Conditions and Program Alternatives in Puerto Rico.” Washington D.C.:
United States General Accounting Office Report to Congressional
Committees, GAO/RCED-92-114.

Giachello, Aida L. 1991 (March). “Selected Health Characteristics of
Hispanic Children and Adults in the United States.” Fact sheet presented
to the Inter-University Program for Latino Research and the Social
Science Research Council Grantee meetings, Miami.

Gibson, Margaret, and John Ogbu, eds. 1991. Minority Status and
Schooling: A Comparative Study of Immigrant and Involuntary Minorities.
New York and London: Garland Publishing.

Golub, Andrew, and Bruce Johnson. 1999. “Cohort Changes in Illegal Drug
Use among Arrestees in Manhattan: From the Heroin Injection Generation
to the Blunts Generation.” Substance Use and Misuse 34(13): 1733–63.

Guarnaccia, Peter J., Ví ctor De la Cancela, and Emilio Carrillo. 1989.
“The Multiple Meaning of Ataques de Nervios in the Latino Community.”
Medical Anthropology 11: 47–62.

Gunst, Laurie. 1995. Born Fi’ Dead: A Journey Through the Jamaican Posse
Underworld. New York: Holt.

Harvey, David L. 1993. Potter Addition: Poverty, Family, and Kinship in
a Heartland Community. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

Hebdige, Dick. 1979. Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London: Methuen.

Hooks, Bell. 1984. Feminist Theory from Margin to Center. Boston: South
End Press.

Hunt, Robert C. 1971. “Components of Relationships in the Family: A
Mexican Village.” In Francis L. K. Hsu, ed., Kinship and Culture, pp.
106–43. Chicago: Aldine.

I Like It Like That. 1994. Directed by Darnell Martin. 35 mm, 105
minutes. New York: Columbia Tristar.

Institute for Puerto Rican Policy. 1992. “Puerto Ricans and Other
Latinos in New York City Today: A Statistical Profile.” Pamphlet.

Institute for Puerto Rican Policy. 1994 (June). “Puerto Ricans and Other
Latinos in the United States: March 1993.” IPR Datanote 16: 1–2.

Jaggar, Alison. 1983. Feminist Politics and Human Nature. Totowa, N.J.:
Rowman & Allanheld.

Janvier, Thomas A. 1903. The Dutch Founding of New York. New York:
Harper & Brothers.

Katz, Michael. 1986. In the Shadow of the Poorhouse: A Social History of
Welfare in America. New York: Basic Books.

Kelling, George, and Catherine Coles. 1996. Fixing Broken Windows:
Restoring Order and Reducing Crime in Our Communities. New York: Free
Press.

King, Ben E. 1961. Ben E. King’s Greatest Hits. New York: Atco.

Kisseloff, Jeff. 1989. You Must Remember This. New York: Schocken Books.

Koren, Gideon, Karen Graham, Heather Shear, and Tom Einarson. 1989
(December 16). “Bias Against the Null Hypothesis: The Reproductive
Hazards of Cocaine.” Lancet 2(8677): 1440–42.

Lait, Jack, and Lee Mortimer. 1948. New York: Confidential. New York:
Crown.

Laviera, Tato. 1985. AmeRican. Houston, Tex.: Arte Publico Press.

Lee III, Rensselaer W. 1991. The White Labyrinth: Cocaine and Political
Power. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers.

Lemann, Nicholas. 1991. “The Other Underclass.” The Atlantic 268(6):
96–110.

Leonard, Caroline. 1930. “A Descriptive Study of Social Settlements of
East Harlem.” Unpublished manuscript, New York University.

Levitt, Helen. 1965. A Way of Seeing: Photographs of New York, with an
essay by James Agee. New York: Viking Press.

Levitt, Helen, Janice Loeb, and James Agee. 1952. In the Street (motion
picture). New York: Museum of Modern Art.

Lewis, Gordon K. 1963. Puerto Rico: Freedom and Power in the Caribbean.
New York: Monthly Review Press.

Lewis, Oscar. 1966. La Vida: A Puerto Rican Family in the Culture of
Poverty – San Juan and New York. New York: Random House.

Lewis-Fernández, Robert. 1992 (December 2). “Ataques de Nervios or Panic
Attacks: An Embodied Contestation of Puerto Rican Ethnicity.” Paper
prepared for AAA session on “Healing, Bodily Practices, and Caribbean
Ethnicity,” San Francisco.

Macallair, Dan, and Khaled Taqi-Eddin. 1999. “Shattering ‘Broken
Windows’: An Analysis of San Francisco’s Alternative Crime Policies.”
San Francisco: The Justice Policy Institute.

MacLeod, Jay. 1987. Ain’t No Makin’ It: Leveled Aspirations in a
Low-Income Neighborhood. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

Majors, Richard, and Janet M. Billson. 1992. Cool Pose: The Dilemmas of
Black Manhood in America. New York: Lexington Books.

Marsh, May Case. 1932. “The Life and Work of the Churches in an
Interstitial Area.” Ph.D. dissertation, New York University.

Martinez-Alier, Verena. 1974. Marriage, Class, and Color in Nineteenth
Century Cuba: A Study of Racial Attitudes and Sexual Values in a Slave
Society. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Mayor’s Committee on City Planning. 1937. “East Harlem Community Study.”
New York: East Harlem Council of Social Agencies.

Meléndez, Edgardo. 1993. “Colonialism, Citizenship, and Contemporary
Statehood.” In Edwin Meléndez and Edgardo Meléndez, eds., Colonial
Dilemma: Critical Perspectives on Contemporary Puerto Rico, pp. 41–52.
Boston: South End Press.

Meléndez, Edwin, and Edgardo Meléndez, eds. 1993. “Introduction.” In
Colonial Dilemma: Critical Perspectives on Contemporary Puerto Rico, pp.
1–18. Boston: South End Press.

Merton, Robert K. 1994. “Opportunity Structure: The Emergence,
Diffusion, and Differentiation of a Sociological Concept, 1930s–1950s.”
In Fred Adler and William S. Laufer, eds., The Legacy of Anomie Theory;
vol. 6 of Advances in Criminological Theory, pp. 3–78. New Brunswick,
N.J.: Transaction Books.

Meyer, Gerald. 1989. Vito Marcantonio: Radical Politician 1902–1954.
Albany: State University of New York Press.

Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 1984 (Spring/Fall). “Under Western Eyes:
Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses.” Boundary 2, 12(3)/13(1):
333–58.

Moore, Joan, and Raquel Pinderhughes. 1993. “Introduction.” In Joan
Moore and Raquel Pinderhughes, eds., In the Barrios: Latinos and the
Underclass Debate, pp. xi–xxxix. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Morgan, H. Wayne. 1981. Drugs in America: A Social History, 1800–1980.
New York: Syracuse University Press.

Moynihan, Daniel P. 1965. “The Negro Family: The Case for National
Action.” Washington D.C.: Office of Policy Planning and Research, U.S.
Department of Labor.

Nader, Laura. 1972. “Up the Anthropologist – Perspectives Gained from
Studying Up.” In Dell Hymes, ed., Reinventing Anthropology, pp. 284–311.
New York: Pantheon.

Newsday. 1990 (October 29). “Pregnant Addicts, Aborted Funds,” pp. 8,
30.

New York City Department of City Planning. 1985 (December). “The Puerto
Rican New Yorkers: Part II – Socioeconomic Characteristics and Trends
1970–1980.” New York: Department of City Planning.

New York City Department of City Planning. 1990 (September). “Community
District Needs.” New York: Department of City Planning.

New York City Department of City Planning. 1993 (January). “Citywide
Industry Study: Labor Force Technical Report.” New York: Department of
City Planning.

New York City Department of City Planning. 1993 (March). “Socioeconomic
Profiles: A Portrait of New York City’s Community Districts from the
1980 & 1990 Censuses of Population and Housing.” New York: Department of
City Planning.

New York City Department of City Planning. 1993 (December). “Puerto
Rican New Yorkers in 1990.” New York: Department of City Planning.

New York City Department of City Planning, Population Division. 1992
(August 26). “1990 Census: Economic Development Indicators (Poverty
Status, Unemployment Rate and Per Capita Income). New York City,
Boroughs and Census Tracts. (Summary Tape File 3A).” New York:
Department of City Planning. Photocopied Report.

New York City Department of City Planning, Population Division. 1993
(February). “1990 Census: Industry Classifications of Employed Persons
16 Years and Over. New York City, Boroughs and Census Tracts. (Summary
Tape File 3A).” New York: Department of City Planning. Photocopied
Report.

New York City Department of Environmental Protection. Files obtained
through the Freedom of Information Act on October 15, 1990, concerning
the former Washburn Wire Company factory site.

New York City Housing Authority, Department of Research and Policy
Development. 1988 (December 28). “Summary of Overcrowding in Authority
Apartments.” Photocopied manuscript.

New York City Housing Authority, Department of Research and Policy
Development. 1989 (January 1). “Special Tabulation of Tenant
Characteristics.” Photocopied pages.

New York City Housing Authority, Department of Research and Policy
Development. 1993 (January 1). “Special Tabulation of Tenant
Characteristics.” Photocopied pages.

New York Daily News. 1989 (January 23). “Violent Crime in the City:
1984–1988,” p. 18.

New York Daily News. 1989 (September 8). “Mob Boss Up to 175 Years,” p.
1.

New York Daily News. 1989 (October 18). “TV Center Finds Life Taxing,”
p. 37.

New York Daily News. 1990 (July 10). “Toxic Cleanup Will Have to Wait,”
p. 22.

New York Daily News. 1990 (October 19). “Devil’s Playgrounds,” p. 1.

New York Daily News. 1990 (October 30). “Child’s View of Hell Devil’s
Playgrounds,” pp. 1, 3.

New York Daily News. 1990 (November 19). “’she Had Sad Eyes’: Abused,
and Dead at 5,” pp. 5, 10.

New York Daily News. 1991 (August 13). “N.J. Corpse is ‘Windows’
Witness,” pp. 1–5.

New York Herald Tribune. 1946 (December 15). “Inquiry Focuses Spotlight
on Ills of East Harlem,” p. 36.

New York Post. 1989 (April 11). “Babies Who Spend Their First Year in
Jail,” pp. 5, 30–31.

New York Post. 1989 (May 4). “Calm After the Storm,” p. 4.

New York Times. 1893 (May 16). “Mafia’s Code in New York: Italians Who
Avenge Their Own Grievance in Blood,” p. 9.

New York Times. 1931 (May 3). “The East Side is Awakening to Its Glory
of Olden Days,” p. 14, by R. L. Duffus.

New York Times. 1947 (January 29). “Marcantonio May Sue Wallander to Bar
‘Harassing’ Harlem Clubs,” A4.

New York Times. 1957 (March 18). “Housing Projects Make Bitter D.P.’s,”
A1, by Charles Grutzner.

New York Times. 1957 (November 18). “Rao, Lanza Knew Public Officials,”
A1, by Emanuel Perlmutter.

New York Times. 1986 (June 15). “East Harlem TV Deal Unraveling,” sec.
8, p. 6, by Anthony De Palma.

New York Times. 1987 (February 9). “Crack Addiction: The Tragic Toll on
Women and Their Children,” B1, B2.

New York Times. 1987 (March 21). “Major Mafia Leader Turns Informer,”
A31, by Arnold Lubasch.

New York Times. 1987 (May 28). “Dangerous Until Proved Innocent,” A22,
editorial.

New York Times. 1988 (April 30). “Mob Role in New York Construction
Depicted,” A34.

New York Times. 1988 (October 14). “Salerno, Now 100 Years, Gets 70 More
in Bid-Rigging Case,” B3.

New York Times. 1988 (November 16). “Crackdown on Drug Sellers Is
Expanded to East Harlem,” A1, B5, by George James.

New York Times. 1988 (December 28). “Domestic Violence Arrests Quadruple
in New York City,” B3, by Celestine Bohlen.

New York Times. 1989 (February 9). “Destroyer of Families, Crack
Besieges a Court,” A1, B9, by Felicia R. Lee.

New York Times. 1989 (April 17). “Number of Mothers in Jail Surges with
Drug Arrests,” A1, A16, by Celestine Bohlen.

New York Times. 1989 (May 28). “Crack: A Disaster of Historical
Dimension, Still Growing,” A14, editorial.

New York Times. 1989 (May 31). “Attack on Crack: More Arrests, Fewer
Long Sentences,” B1, B3, by Felicia R. Lee.

New York Times. 1989 (July 3). “For Child Welfare Agency, Small Gains
and Big Flaws,” L21, L22, by Suzanne Daley.

New York Times. 1989 (August 11). “Link to Mafia Is Investigated in
Union Deaths,” B2.

New York Times. 1989 (August 25). “Black Youth Is Killed by Whites;
Brooklyn Attack Is Called Racial,” A1, B2.

New York Times. 1989 (September 29). “For Pregnant Addicts, A Clinic of
Hope,” B1, B2, by Howard W. French.

New York Times. 1989 (October 23). “Treating Kin Like Foster Parents
Strains a New York Child Agency,” A1, B4, by Suzanne Daley.

New York Times. 1989 (November 1). “Bush and Congress Reach Accord
Raising Minimum Wage to $4.25,” A1.

New York Times. 1989 (November 16). “Police Kill Harlem Gunman; Drug
Suspect Shot in Bronx,” B2, by John T. McQuiston.

New York Times. 1989 (December 19). “New York’s Sinking Child-Care
System Awaits Help,” B1, B4, by Suzanne Daley.

New York Times. 1990 (January 23). “Organized-Crime Turncoat Testifies
in Gotti Prosecution,” B3.

New York Times. 1990 (March 5). “New York City’s Biggest Concrete
Supplier Facing U.S. Inquiry,” B1, by Selwyn Raab.

New York Times. 1990 (March 17). “The Instincts of Parenthood Become
Part of Crack’s Toll,” A8, by Michael deCourcy Hinds.

New York Times. 1990 (March 23). “Trapped in the Terror of New York’s
Holding Pens,” A1, B4, by William Glaberson.

New York Times. 1990 (May 8). “He Wore a Badge, Then He Sold It for
Crack,” A1, B10.

New York Times. 1990 (May 25). “Crack Babies Turn 5, and Schools Brace,”
A1, B5, by Susan Chira.

New York Times. 1990 (June 15). “AIDS Travels New York—Puerto Rico ‘Air
Bridge,’ B1, B4, by Bruce Lambert.

New York Times. 1990 (September 6). “Dollar Off in Heavy Selling on Talk
of Fed Rate Move,” D17.

New York Times. 1990 (October 19). “Addicted Parents’ Children Pose
Foster Care Challenge,” B3, by Thomas Morgan.

New York Times. 1990 (November 4). “Youths Are Sought in Killing of a
Homeless Man,” A39, by James C. McKinley, Jr.

New York Times. 1991 (January 21). “Unions at Javits Center Are Accused
of Abuses,” B3, by Selwyn Raab.

New York Times. 1991 (January 26). “Girl, 13, Is Raped and Killed on Way
Home from School,” A27, by James C. McKinley, Jr.

New York Times. 1991 (February 13). “Bush View Upbeat on Economy:
Recovery Expected to Begin in Summer in Economic Report,” D1, by David
E. Rosenbaum.

New York Times. 1991 (July 17). “Man Seized in Rape of 3-Year-Old in
Public,” B1, B4, by Lee A. Daniels.

New York Times. 1991 (July 28). “Informer Insists Bid-Rigging Testimony
Was Truth,” A29, by Arnold H. Lubasch.

New York Times. 1992 (March 29). “Collapse of Inner-City Families
Creates America’s New Orphans,” A1, A20, by Linda Gross.

New York Times. 1993 (May 4). “6 Are Found Slain in a Harlem Home That
Was Set Afire,” B1, B3, by Ian Fisher.

New York Times. 1993 (August 8). “With Supply and Purity Up, Heroin Use
Expands,” A1, A18, by Joseph Treaster.

New York Times. 1993 (December 1). “Woman Lives, and Dies, for Her
Family in East Harlem,” A20.

New York Times. 1994 (February 18). “An Evolution in an Economy: Jobs in
Thinking, Not Making,” A1, A12, by Tom Redburn.

New York Times. 1994 (March 20). “Two Census Tracts, at the Extremes,”
A6, by Sam Roberts.

New York Times. 1994 (March 31). “Sharp Increase Along the Borders of
Poverty,” A8, by Jason DeParle.

New York Times. 1994 (April 21). “Using Fax Spells Arrest for Numbers
Ring,” A13, by Selwyn Raab.

New York Times. 1994 (June 10). “New York Officials Welcome Immigrants,
Legal or Illegal,” A1, B4, by Deborah Sontag.

New York Times. 1994 (July 3). “Women Doing Crime, Women Doing Time,”
E3, by Clifford Crauss.

New York Times. 1994 (July 7). “Excerpts of What the Commission Found:
Loyalty over Integrity,” B2.

New York Times. 1994 (July 7). “Giuliani Announces Assault on
Quality-of-Life Crimes,” B3.

New York Times. 1994 (July 9). “Billions for New Prisons? Wait a
Minute,” A19, by Philip B. Heymann.

New York Times. 1994 (August 30). “Researchers Find a Diverse Face on
New York’s Poverty,” A14, by Celia W. Dugger.

New York Times. 1994 (September 13). “More Inmates in the U.S. Than Ever
Before,” A8, Associated Press item.

New York Times. 1995 (February 20). “The Irish Revisit the Terrible
1840’s,” A4, by James F. Clarity.

New York Times. 2000 (January 19). “Widest Income Gap is Found in New
York,” B5, by Nina Bernstein.

New York Times. 2000 (September 28). “Effect of Prison Building on Crime
Is Weighed,” A16, by Fox Butterfield.

New York Times. 2001 (September 26). “Poverty Rates Fell in 2000, But
Income Was Stagnant,” A12, by Katharine Q. Seelye.

New York Times. 2002 (March 27). “Justices Rule Drug-Eviction Law Is
Fair,” A20, by Linda Greenhouse.

O’Brien, Joseph, and Andris Kurins. 1991. Boss of Bosses: The FBI and
Paul Castellano. New York: Island Books.

Orsi, Robert A. 1985. The Madonna of 115th St: Faith and Community in
Italian Harlem, 1880–1950. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Paredes, Américo. 1971. “The United States, Mexico, and Machismo.”
Journal of the Folklore Institute 8(1): 17–37.

Phillips, Kevin. 1990. Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan
Aftermath. New York: Random House.

Pollitt, Katha. 1990 (March 26). “A New Assault on Feminism.” The
Nation, pp. 408–17.

Portelli, Alessandro. 1991. “Introduction.” In The Death of Luigi
Trastulli and Other Stories, pp. vii–xvi. New York: State University of
New York Press.

Quintero-Rivera, Angel. 1984 (August 28–September 1). “Stratification
and Social Class in the Hispanic Caribbean with Special Emphasis on
Puerto Rico.” Paper presented at the Conference “New Perspectives on
Caribbean Studies: Towards the 21st Century,” New York, Research
Institute for the Study of Man and the City University of New York.

Rainwater, Lee. 1994. “A Primer on U.S. Poverty: 1945–1992.” New York:
Russell Sage Foundation Working Paper #53.

Rainwater, Lee, and William L. Yancey, eds. 1967. The Moynihan Report
and the Politics of Controversy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Ramí rez, Rafael. 1993. Dime Capitán: Reflexiones sobre la masculinidad.
San Juán: Ediciones Huracán.

Reed, Dorothy. 1932. “Leisure Time of Girls in a ‘Little Italy,’”
Portland, Ore.: Published by author. (Copy available in the library of
the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.)

Reinarman, Craig, and Harry L. Levine. 1989. “Crack in Context: Politics
and Media in the Making of a Drug Scene. Contemporary Drug Problems
14(4): 535–77.

Rivera, Edward. 1983. Family Installments: Memories of Growing Up
Hispanic. New York: Penguin Books.

Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L. 1994 (April 22). “Education and the Economic
Status of Women in Puerto Rico, 1980–1990.” Paper presented at a
conference held at the Consejo General de Educacion, Hato Rey, Puerto
Rico.

Rivera-Batiz, Francisco L., and Carlos Santiago. 1994 (April). “The
Labor Market and Socioeconomic Performance of the Puerto Rican
Population in the United States 1980–1990.” Monograph prepared for the
National Puerto Rican Coalition, Washington, D.C.

Robinson, Gregory J., and Jeffrey S. Passel. 1987 (April 30–May 2).
“Evaluation of Coverage of the 1980 Census of Puerto Rico Based on
Demographic Analysis.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the
Population Association of America, Chicago. (Available from the
Population Division of the U. S. Bureau of the Census.)

Rodrí guez, Clara E. 1989. Puerto Ricans: Born in the U.S.A. Winchester,
Mass.: Unwin Hyman.

Rodrí guez, Clara E. 1995. “Puerto Ricans in Historical and Social
Science Research.” In James A. Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks, eds.,
Handbook of Research on Multicultural Education, pp. 223–44. New York:
Simon & Schuster and Macmillan.

Rodrí guez, Victor. 1992. Eldorado in East Harlem. Houston, Tex.: Arte
Publico Press.

Romo, Frank, and Michael Schwartz. 1993. “The Coming of Post-Industrial
Society Revisited: Manufacturing and the Prospects for a Service-Based
Economy.” In Richard Swedberg, ed., Explorations in Economic Sociology,
pp. 335–73. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Rosaldo, Renato. 1980. “Doing Oral History.” Social Analysis 4: 89–99.

Rosenberg, Terry J. 1987. “Poverty in New York City: 1980–1985.” New
York: Community Service Society, Department of Research, Policy and
Program Development.

Rosenberg, Terry J. 1990. “Changes in Household Composition and Income
Strategies of Poor Women in New York City.” Madison: Institute for
Research on Poverty Discussion Paper #924–90, University of Wisconsin.

Rosenwaike, Ira. 1983 (March). “Morality Among the Puerto Rican Born in
New York City.” Social Science Quarterly 64(7): 375–85.

Rubinson, Karen. 1989. “Stage IA Documentary Study for the New York City
Landmarks Preservation Committee, CEQR #89-048M, Police Service Area #5
of the New York City Housing Authority.” New York: Key Perspectives.
Manuscript.

S., Tina, and Jamie Pastor Bolnick. 2000. Living at the Edge of the
World: A Teenager’s Survival in the Tunnels of Grand Central Station.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Sanday, Peggy R. 1990. Fraternity Gang Rape: Sex, Brotherhood, and
Privilege on Campus. New York: New York University Press.

Sassen, Saskia. 1991. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Sassen-Koob, Saskia. 1986. “New York City: Economic Restructuring and
Immigration.” Development and Change 17: 85–119.

Sayad, Abdelmalek. 1991. L’immigration ou les paradoxes de l’altérité.
Paris: Editions Universitaires and De Boeck Université.

Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. 1992. Death Without Weeping: The Violence of
Everyday Life in Brazil. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Schepses, Erwin. 1949. “Puerto Rican Delinquent Boys in New York City.”
Social Service Review 23(1): 51–61.

Scott, James C. 1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant
Resistance. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

Seda Bonilla, Edwin. 1964. Interacción social y personalidad en una
comunidad de Puerto Rico. San Juán: Ediciones Juán Ponce de León.

Singer, Merrill. 1986. “Toward a Political-Economy of Alcoholism: The
Missing Link in the Anthropology of Drinking.” Social Science Medicine
73(2): 113–30.

Singer, Merrill, Freddie Valentin, Hans Baer, and Zhongke Jia. 1992.
“Why Does Juán Garcia Have a Drinking Problem? The Perspective of
Critical Medical Anthropology.” Medical Anthropology 14: 77–108.

Smolowe, Jill. 1994 (February 7). “… And Throw Away the Key.” Time, pp.
55–59.

Smith, Robert. 1992 (April). “Mexican Immigrant Women in New York City’s
Informal Economy.” Conference Paper #69. New York: Columbia—New York
University Consortium, Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies.

Stansell, Christine. 1987 [1982]. City of Women: Sex and Class in New
York 1789–1860. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Starobin, Paul. 1994 (June 18). “The Economy You Can’t See.” National
Journal, pp. 1407–10.

Stringer, Lee. 1998. Grand Central Winter: Stories from the Street.
Berkeley, Calif.: Seven Stories Press.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2000. Summary
of Findings from the 1999 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
Rockville, Md.: Department of Health and Human Services.

Taussig, Michael. 1987. Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man: A
Study in Terror and Healing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Thomas, Piri. 1967. Down These Mean Streets. New York: Knopf.

Thrasher, Frederic M. 1927. The Gang. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Thrasher, Frederic M. 1932 (December). “Ecological Aspects of the Boys’
Club Study.” Journal of Educational Sociology 6(1): 52–58.

Thrasher, Frederic M. 1936. “The Boys’ Club and Juvenile Delinquency.”
American Journal of Sociology 42(1): 66–80.

Tilley, Margaret Campbell. 1935. “The Boy Scout Movement in East
Harlem.” Ph.D. dissertation, New York University.

Tilton, Edgar. 1910. The Reformed Low Dutch Church of Harlem, Organized
1660: Historical Sketch. New York: The Consistory.

Time. 1946 (November 4). “Veto Vito?,” pp. 24–25.

U.S. Census Bureau. (1990). 1990 Census of Population and Housing Block
Statistics (Summary Tape File 1B). CD-Rom. Washington D.C.: U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Data User Services
Division.

U.S. Census Bureau. (2001). Money Income in the United States, 2000
Current Population Reports, P60-213, by Carmen DeNavas-Walt, Robert
Cleveland, and Mark Roemer. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Van Dyk, Jere. 1990 (May). “Across the Line in East Harlem. National
Geographic 177(5): 52–75.

Vergara, Camilo. 1991 (March). “Lessons Learned, Lessons Forgotten:
Rebuilding New York City’s Poor Communities.” The Livable City 15(1):
3–9.

Vergara, Camilo. 1991 (June 17). “The View from the Shelters: New York’s
New Ghettos.” The Nation 252(23): 804–10.

Village Voice. 1990 (April 3). “Pregnant Addicts Turned Away,” pp.
11–12, by Jan Hoffman.

Wacquant, Loïc. 1993a. “Décivilisation et démonisation: La mutation du
ghetto noir americain.” In Christine Faure and Tom Bishop, eds.,
L’Amerique des franíais, pp. 103–25. Paris: Editions Franíois Bourin.

Wacquant, Loïc. 1993b. “Urban Outcasts: Stigma and Division in the Black
American Ghetto and the French Urban Periphery.” International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research 17(3): 366–83.

Wacquant, Loïc. 1994. “The New Urban Color Line: “The State and Fate of
the Ghetto in Postfordist America.” In Craig J. Calhoun, ed., Social
Theory and the Politics of Identity, pp. 231–76. New York: Basil
Blackwell.

Wacquant, Loïc. 1999. Les Prisons de la misère. Paris: èditions Raisons
D’Agir.

Wacquant, Loïc. 2000. “The New ‘Peculiar Institution’: On the Prison as
Surrogate Ghetto.” In Theoretical Criminology 4(3): 377–89.

Wall Street Journal. 1989 (July 18). “Born to Lose: Babies of Crack
Users Crowd Hospitals, Break Everybody’s Heart,” A1, A6, by Cathy Trost.

Ward, David. 1989. Poverty, Ethnicity, and the American City 1840–1925:
Changing Conceptions of the Slum and the Ghetto. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Williams, Edward Huntington, M.D. 1914 (February 7). “The Drug-Habit
Menace in the South.” Medical Record 85: 247–49.

Williams, Terry. 1992. Crackhouse: Notes from the End of the Line. New
York: Addison-Wesley.

Willis, Paul. 1977. Learning to Labor: How Working Class Kids Get
Working Class Jobs. Aldershot, U.K.: Gower.

Wilson, Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the
Underclass, and Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wolf, Eric. 1956. “San José: Subcultures of a ‘Traditional’ Coffee
Municipality.” In Julian Steward, ed., The People of Puerto Rico, pp.
171–264. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

Wolf, Eric. 1990. “Distinguished Lecture: Facing Power – Old Insights,
New Questions.” American Anthropologist 92(3): 586–96.

INDEX

abortion, 272, 273, 284, 295, 345n20, 361n23

academics, 11–12, 14–18, 61–2

Anglo/middle-class biases, 11–12, 14, 15, 44, 145, 176, 215, 241–2, 280,
285, 325, 356n14, 360n13, 362n28, n5

and inner-city/poverty research, 12, 14–15, 16, 17, 46–7, 56, 58–9, 62,
63–4, 260–1, 280, 284, 341n19, 361n28

sanitizing/editing data, 12, 13, 14–15, 17–18, 207–8, 325, 341n19, n20,
342n24, 344n13, 359n11

see also anthropology; author; ethnography;

theoretical approaches; U.S. ideology

Acosta-Belén, Edna, 356n14

African-Americans, 6, 16, 32, 36, 46, 160, 163, 284, 291–2, 320, 324,
345n17, 352n5, n10

among dealers, 37, 44–5, 108, 194, 225, 291–2, 333, 335

in East Harlem, 7, 31, 33, 36, 41, 56, 61, 65, 76, 190, 225, 263, 346n12

in history, 60, 61, 278, 347n19, 360n16

racism against, 1, 26, 37–8, 45, 60, 61, 74, 85, 167, 169, 172, 273,
278, 344n11, 359n10, 360n16

relationship to Puerto Ricans, 26, 37–8, 44–6, 85, 174, 182, 205, 273,
335, 350n4

Africans, 58, 167

slavery, 48, 50

Afro-Caribbean culture, 25–6

Agee, James, 64

agency/social structure, 12, 15, 16–18, 53–4, 55, 115, 118, 120, 121,
123–4, 137, 138, 140, 143, 191, 193, 203, 221, 240, 242, 243–4, 301–2,
323, 325, 354n4, 355n6

personal responsibility, 1, 16, 17, 54, 96, 116, 117, 118, 125–8, 162,
179, 189, 191, 193, 196, 212, 240

AIDS/HIV, 38, 53, 329, 332, 333, 334, 358n20

alcohol, 49, 79, 179, 191, 206, 299

and alcoholism, 40, 106, 125–6, 128, 129, 183, 228, 241, 272, 273, 302,
310, 313, 329, 355n5, 361–2n28, 363n11

bootleg, 19, 29, 49, 66–8, 99, 225

conversations while drinking, 20, 26–7, 40, 41, 42–3, 95, 96, 97, 98,
110, 112, 122, 125–7, 130, 133, 177, 178, 189, 193, 219, 225–6, 233,
234, 239, 246, 265, 271, 281, 304, 310

dealers drinking, 26, 86–7, 90, 94, 97, 100, 103, 105, 124, 125–9, 185,
247, 266, 298, 308, 310, 331, 333, 335

Alger, Horatio, 326

Algerian immigrants, 353n1

Allen, Woody, 353–4n3

Alzheimer’s disease, 330

American Dream, 75, 322, 326

American Lawyer, 342n1

American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), 98–9

angel dust, 3, 19, 30, 88, 263, 291, 340n8

anthropology, 13–18, 31, 44, 46, 64, 176, 189, 341n19, 355n6

cultural relativism, 15, 189, 360n13

see also academics; ethnography; theoretical approaches

apartheid, see inner-city apartheid

Arab stores, 303

see also Palestinians; Yemeni

Arroyo, Puerto Rico, 51, 178, 298–9

Asians, 324

ataque de nervios, 225, 226, 238, 246, 300–1

Austrians, 347n19

author, 360n15

class/ethnicity/gender of, 13, 19, 21, 23, 29–32, 33, 35, 41, 43, 161,
172, 182, 207–8, 215–16, 345n16, 359n9

disagreements with crack dealers, 17, 19, 21–5, 27, 35, 39, 46–7, 97,
116–17, 118, 125–7, 160–1, 162, 167, 188–9, 191, 193, 203, 205–7,
209–11, 232, 271, 281, 282, 283–4, 290, 293, 310–11, 315, 318,
359–60n13, 361n23

and emotions, 17, 39, 44, 47, 84, 88, 188–9, 205–7, 210–12, 283

family of, xi–xii, 1, 22, 32, 33, 72, 136, 161, 215, 216, 217, 262–3,
264, 280–1, 283, 303, 355n3, 356n12, 358n19, 361n21

friendships with women, ix, 17, 39, 207, 215–17, 269, 336, 362n8

perceptions of, 25, 29–32, 33, 40–4, 68, 108, 109, 161, 172, 264

and physical security, 19–20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31–3, 34–5, 39,
45, 47, 73, 88, 181–2, 247, 314, 344n13, 358n19

and police, 21, 30–2, 39, 109

relationship to dealers, ix, xi, 1, 2, 11, 13, 19–23, 26–7, 28, 29–31,
39–44, 45, 46–7, 54, 80, 91, 108, 128, 172, 179, 182, 189, 204, 205,
207, 216–17, 263, 281, 342n24, 343n9, 344n10

relationship to neighborhood, ix, xii, 1, 15, 17, 19–22, 29, 31–2, 34–5,
84, 261–5, 281, 285, 317, 344n10, 345n16

tape-recording, 13, 23, 26, 37, 42, 46, 95, 101, 103, 104, 119, 134,
138, 185, 193, 207, 210, 215–16, 217, 223, 224, 232, 245, 247, 254, 256,
269, 341n20, 354n4

theoretical approach of, 1, 11–12, 13–18, 53–4, 193, 203, 318–19, 325–6,
354n4, see also theoretical approaches

automobiles, 3, 20, 21, 22, 28, 88, 105, 200, 245–6, 265, 293, 333, 336,
344n11, 355n3

see also crime, car burglary

Avon Products, 330

baptism, 72, 332, 333

Benmayor, Rena, 356n14

Boston, 149

Bourdieu, Pierre, 28, 175, 342n23

Brazil, shantytowns, 285, 341n19

Bronx, 5, 56, 61, 109, 304, 333, 336, 348n31, 348–9n51

Orchard Beach, 83

Brooklyn, 56, 61, 169, 332, 333, 347n24

Bensonhurst, 33, 344n11

Coney Island, 83

Brown, James, 38

Bureau for Child Welfare (BCW), 329, 330, 331, 359n13

bureaucracy, 28–9, 116, 135, 176, 178, 181, 219–21, 243–5, 248, 322,
357n17

see also cultural capital

Burger King, 116–17

Bush, George, 350n77

Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico, 298–9

Castellano, Paul, 73

Central Americans, 166; see also Costa Ricans; Hondurans

Central and Eastern Europeans, 56

Central Harlem, 285, 343n8

Centro de Estudios Puertorriqueños, 356n14

cerebral palsy, xi, 188–9, 283

Chicago, Illinois, 180, 181, 341n14, 344–5n15, 357n17, 364n9

children, 2, 169, 198–9, 259, 286, 320, 325

author’s relationship to, 35, 68, 213, 261–7, 311–12, 335

babies, meaning of, 194, 213, 216–18, 222, 227, 242, 250–1, 262–3, 271,
272–6, 278, 281, 283–5, 307, 316–17, 332

bearing children, 179, 210, 218–20, 261, 271, 277–8, 295–6, 304, 307,
331, 335, 336

and crime, 70, 174, 194–205, 261, 265–7, 275–6, 278–85, see also school,
truancy from

daycare for, 3, 228, 260, 266, 304, 306, 325, 331, 336, 340n10

as dealers, 4, 84, 192, 194, 247, 265–7, 331, 335

of dealers, 34, 118, 151, 154, 211, 220, 222, 224, 226, 227, 228, 229,
233–4, 237–9, 244, 250–2, 256, 265–72, 275–6, 304–6, 308–12, 315–17,
329–34, see also fathers, as dealers

and drugs, 39, 69–70, 84, 125, 191–2, 199–200, 229, 265, 266, 275,
277–8, 283, 315, 321, 332, 337, 361n22, n23, n28

economic responsibility of fathers for, 78, 82, 120, 151, 183, 217, 246,
276–7, 286–7, 288–90, 292–5, 296–7, 300, 304–6, 308–13, 315–17, 329–30,
332, 334, 335, 336, 337, 356n12, 362n2

foster, 274, 278, 331, 334, 336

in history, 66, 69–70, 260–2, 295–6

institutionalized, 182–3, 190–1, 261, 267, 268, 272, 278, 331, 334,
359–60n13

and sexual relations, 68, 141, 174, 178, 182, 189, 192, 197, 205, 207,
208, 210, 212, 219, 223, 252, 265, 267, 269–71, 278, see also rape

in the street, 35, 66, 77, 174, 191, 198, 203, 213, 225, 259–67, 276–8,
312, 315, 326, 335–6, 337, 358n5

and violence, 174, 177, 179, 180, 181–5, 187–8, 190, 191–2, 193, 194,
198, 199, 214, 218–19, 220–1, 222, 233–4, 237–8, 259, 260, 261, 264–5,
268–70, 274, 275–6, 284–5, 302–3, 313, 314, 316, 329, 330, 355n5, 358n2,
359n13

working, 114, 120, 121, 137, 138–41, 151, 181, 244, 264–5, 292, 332

see also crack dealers, childhoods of

Chinese, 169, 278

restaurant, 20, 73

Cincinnati, Ohio, 140

class, 14, 259, 278, 291, 307, 319–20

conflict, 115, 145, 147–8, 150, 155, 166

lumpen, 139

middle, 8, 32, 46, 60, 115, 132, 145, 158, 176–7, 191, 215, 241, 242,
260, 280, 282, 322, 356n14, 362n28

upper, 50, 55, 94–5, 115, 154, 186, 324, 325, 341n15

working, 31, 35, 57, 59, 65, 97, 115, 137, 139, 140, 141–2, 155, 164,
176–7, 215, 242, 322

see also author; theoretical approaches; whites

cocaine, 1, 3, 19, 21, 40, 179, 278, 339n2, 358n20, 360n16

dealers using, 40, 42–3, 86–7, 89–91, 94–7, 101–2, 105, 110, 116–19,
122, 125–8, 134, 149, 150, 160, 185, 196, 217, 227, 229, 234, 235,
239–40, 247, 266, 267, 271, 275, 282, 299, 304–5, 309, 311, 312, 331

history of, 68, 74–5, 278, 350n77, 360n16

prices of, 4, 75, 99, 228, 249, 266, 299, 321

selling, 40, 68, 74–5, 82, 87, 99, 130, 249–50, 252–3, 321, 336, 337,
343n7

Columbia, 314

Colombia, 75, 335, 351n5

Columbus, Christopher, 48

Community Service Society, 65–6, 261

computers, 47, 136, 149, 155

Connecticut, 60, 123, 180, 181, 182, 186

Bridgeport, 272

New Haven, 204

Conservation Corps, 331

construction work, 3, 56, 162–5, 331, 352n10, 353n12

consumption, conspicuous, 91, 196–9

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth, 361–2n28

Costa Ricans, 33, 167

Covello, Leonard, 168

crack, 1, 19, 75, 280, 334, 339n2, 258n20

addicts, 2, 10, 17, 20, 25, 31, 36, 39, 67, 69, 75, 77, 78–81, 85, 86,
87, 88, 89, 94, 97, 105, 263, 280, 281, 283, 284, 289, 331, 332, 337,
347–8n25, 351n5, 358n20, 361n23, n.24

epidemic, 1–3, 74, 75, 78, 278, 319

pipe (“stem”), 79, 112, 161, 290, 339n2, 343n3, 362n7

prices, 3, 4, 74–5, 81, 82, 99, 100, 102, 247, 263, 335, 343n6

and sex, 78, 81, 105, 185, 278–80, 290, 354n7, 360n15, 361n24, 362n7

in woolas, 112, 305

see also crack dealers; crackhouses; Game Room; social clubs, the
crackhouse; substance abuse

crack dealers, 265–7, 328, 330, 331, 332, 333, 340n4

childhoods of, 21, 22–3, 24, 27–8, 82, 114, 120, 121, 137–41, 151,
174–85, 187–92, 194–8, 199–213, 218–21, 223, 225, 300–3, 309, 310,
312–14, 355n5

using crack, 26, 78–81, 86–8, 96, 118, 128, 159, 161, 229, 232–3, 234,
266, 275, 281, 305, 330, 355n3

customers of, 84–5, 87, 94, 97, 99, 102, 103, 105, 108–9, 119, 162,
283–4, 289, 292, 332

labor relations among, 22, 26–7, 77, 81–96, 93–4, 99–100, 103–5, 107–8,
123, 135, 160, 355n7

logistics of selling, 1, 3, 40, 74–5, 77–8, 81–4, 86, 90, 91–4, 99,
100–13, 119, 123, 209, 216, 226, 228, 247, 251, 263, 266, 283–4, 289,
290, 299, 332, 333, 335, 336, 363n11

poverty of, 54, 86–7, 92–3, 118–19, 123, 191, 196–9, 204–5, 291, 308,
311

relationship to book project, ix, 12, 19–21, 23, 25, 27, 46–7, 203, 269,
342n24

wages/profits of, 4, 75, 81, 83–4, 86–7, 90–3, 97, 100, 102–3, 104, 105,
123, 321, 335, 339n2, 343n6, 351n6; see also crack; employment, dealing
versus; substance abuse; underground economy

crackhouses, 3, 5, 13, 19, 24, 30, 58, 60, 66, 67, 83, 265, 279, 280,
281, 283, 285, 337

see also Game Room; social clubs

crime, 12, 20, 55, 104, 174, 256, 321, 322, 339n3

arson, 19, 109, 164, 187, 351n8

burglary, 24, 197, 198, 200–2, 203, 312, 336

car burglary, 23, 95, 194, 195–6, 197, 198, 200, 203, 266, 316

history of, 48, 65–71, 349n74

holdups, 20, 24, 81, 107, 108, 229, 335

laundering money, 28–9, 132, 135

legal, 12, 76, 97, 129, 164, 165, 328–9, 331, 336, 346n10

mugging, 12, 30, 33, 36, 42, 79–80, 187, 203–5, 264, 314, 334

petty theft, 74, 179, 194, 199

see also Mafia; violence

criminal justice system, 89

bail, 20, 72, 83, 89, 95, 251–3, 349n72, 358n20

bullpen, 37, 38, 50, 247, 254–6

courts/trials, 37, 112–13, 114–16, 129–30, 180, 217, 219–20, 251–3,
256–8, 272, 273, 349n72, 352n11

family court, 219–20, 247, 258, 309, 311, 329–30, 334

prison, 20, 21, 37–8, 92, 108–9, 137, 190, 191, 203, 216, 217, 225, 226,
227, 228, 229, 244, 246, 247, 251–3, 273, 277, 293, 294, 312, 317, 318,
321, 331–2, 333–4, 335, 364n8

probation/parole, 112, 115–16, 217, 257, 290, 334, 335

women in jail, 180, 191, 225, 247, 250–7, 268

see also law enforcement; police, New York City

criminologists, 12

Cuba, 49, 52

Cubans, 294, 355n4

cultural capital, 24, 108, 256–7

exclusion, 28–9, 132, 135–6, 137, 142–5, 148, 158–9, 161–2, 170–1,
175–7, 256–7

see also class; employment; racism; school; street culture

Damocles Sword, 326

Dávila, Richard, 355n6

Davis, Larry, 111

daycare, see children, daycare for

De la Cancela, Ví ctor, 362n5

Detroit, Michigan, 340n9

Devil’s Playgrounds, 229, 342n1

Devine, John, 342n23, 345n15, 363n1

disco music, 356n12

Dominicans, 76, 82, 101, 167, 169

Donahue, Phil, 20, 47

Dorris, Michael, 361n28

Dunlap, Eloise, 284

Dutch, 55, 66, 264

East River, 5, 58, 193, 299, 301, 312, 314, 346n14

see also FDR Drive

East Harlem, 5

history of, 16, 48, 55–75, 260–2, 347n19, n24, 347–8n25, 348n31, n46,
349n74

negative images of, 10, 18, 20, 32–5, 61, 62–4, 229, 342n1

poverty in, 2–7, 54–5, 56, 62–6, 164, 265, 322, 340n5, 346n12, 359n9,
362n1

statistics on, 2, 3, 4, 6–8, 33, 65–6, 334, 340n5, n6, 345n16, n21,
347n19

and street culture, 10–11, 14, 19, 30, 34–5, 53–4, 213, 265, 321, see
also street culture

see also African-Americans; inner-city apartheid

economic restructuring, 11, 17, 51–3, 114, 115, 120, 137, 138, 139, 140,
141, 169, 215, 222, 240, 260, 285, 288, 319–20, 345n15, 352n1

recession, 103, 120–1, 128, 130

see also factory work; office work; service sector

economists, 114, 124, 164

Edin, Kathryn, 341n14

El Barrio, 339n1

see also East Harlem

employment, 53, 100–1, 103, 124, 128, 137, 140, 262, 273, 307, 321–2,
331, 334, 336, 340n9

dealers and, 114–73, 181, 190, 303–6, 308, 332–3

dealing versus, 3, 83, 89–91, 94, 95–9, 115, 117–18, 119, 125–7, 129–36,
139, 160, 171, 304, 320–2, 328, 332, 334

disrespect at, 115, 132, 141, 142–4, 146–7, 151, 152–3, 154, 158–9, 162,
176, see also office work; street culture

exploitation at, 116, 139, 159, 164–6, 168–9

fired from, 95, 99, 115, 122, 148–51, 154, 166, 305–6, 310

looking for, 4, 114, 115–18, 120–5, 127, 165–6, 247–8, 290, 336

“off the books,” 1, 3, 78, 154, 305, 329, 331, 332, 335, 356–7n16

resistance to exploitation in, 98–9, 115–19, 130, 132, 148–54, 155–60

statistics, 4, 6–8, 12, 124, 340n9, 352n1, n3, n10, see also New York
City, statistics

and substance abuse, 94–5, 118, 120, 125–6, 164, 304–6

training programs, 120–1, 124, 126, 129, 159–61, 260, 323, 329, 362n8

and unemployment, 4, 114, 124–6, 194, 299, 303, 311, 340n9

wages, 4, 95, 96–7, 98, 117, 122, 123, 124, 128, 130, 147, 148, 154,
165, 166, 169, 247–8, 303, 328, 333, 356–7n16, 362n3

see also children, working; economic restructuring; women, at work

Ethiopia, 40

ethnography, 11–18, 35, 63, 280, 285

negative stereotypes and, 11–12, 14–16, 18, 207

politics of representation, 11–13, 207, 342n24

see also academics, and inner-city/poverty research; anthropology;
author; theoretical approaches

factory work, 29, 41, 50, 51, 52, 56, 114, 131, 137–42, 154, 162, 222,
240, 352n1, 354n2, 355n5

see also economic restructuring; office work; service sector

family, 59, 355n4

breakdown, 53, 59, 221–2, 260, 280, 287, 297, 359n13

compradrazgo relations, 82, 294, 350n3

conflict, 80, 81, 124, 309

divorce, 78, 247, 258, 300, 334, 344

extended, 82, 137–8, 195, 203, 231, 253, 272, 363n10

household formation among dealers, 6, 78, 82, 93, 118, 119, 123–4, 127,
129, 136, 154, 191, 200, 203, 216, 218, 219–20, 223–4, 230–2, 234, 239,
240, 243, 245, 249, 258, 267, 272–7, 287–9, 292–7, 299–300, 301–12,
314–17, 325, 329–36, 357–8n18

in-laws, 231, 252, 253, 290, 291, 296, 297, 299, 330, 331

marriage, 78, 80, 81, 82, 200, 216, 219, 220, 223, 227, 230–1, 235, 249,
257, 301, 304, 307, 314–15, 317, 320

patriarchy, 36, 37, 53, 78, 82, 124, 129, 168, 199, 211–12, 215, 218–19,
221–4, 226–7, 240, 242, 271, 275–7, 278–80, 285, 287–9, 292, 296–7, 299,
301–3, 310, 312, 317, 354n2

political economy of, 123–4, 174, 191, 215, 221–3, 243, 287–90, 292–3,
295–307

poverty, 53, 64, 65, 215, 248, 260, 285, 287–8, 293, 296, 307, 320,
324–5, 346n12, 357n17, 357–8n18, 362n1, n3

Puerto Rican rural, 53, 82, 136, 214–15, 219, 221–4, 288–9, 292, 295–7,
298–300, 312, see also Puerto Rico, culture of

siblings of dealers, 20, 27, 78, 123, 125, 127, 180, 191, 197, 202, 211,
212, 223, 230, 252, 253, 268, 274, 298–9, 302, 307–8, 313, 314, 329,
330, 350n2, 358n20, 359n13

violence, 177, 179, 180, 184–5, 198, 199, 214, 215, 217, 218, 220–7,
229–30, 231, 233–9, 240, 256, 259, 273, 274, 288, 301–4, 310, 313, 330,
354n2, 355n5, 359–60n13, 363n11

see also author, family of; children; fathers; grandparents of dealers;
mothers

FAO Schwartz, 263

Fatal Attraction, 232–3, 355n11

fathers, 178, 222, 296–7

attitudes toward street culture, 10, 178, 281

as dealers, 118, 151, 246, 247, 287–9, 291–6, 300, 303–12, 328, 354n7,
356n12

of dealers, 13, 87, 97, 129, 179, 183, 191, 298–302, 306, 308, 309, 310,
312–14, 343n9, 355n5

as parasites, 119, 231, 289, 312, 316

stepfathers, 13, 272, 274, 313, 330, 333, 363n11

as substance abusers, 78, 118, 267, 300, 301, 302, 310, 354n7, 355n5,
363n11

see also children, of dealers; children, economic responsibility of
fathers for

FDR Drive, 5, 350–1n5

see also East River

Filipinos, 33

Finnish immigrants, 56, 347n19

fire marshals, 109, 299

First Avenue, 5, 56, 59

Foley, Douglas, 342n23

food stamps, 8, 49, 93, 119, 123, 196, 322, 329–30, 345n2

Fordham, Signithia, 342n23

France, 353n1

French, xi, 44

Galapagos Islands, 289

Game Room, 91–3, 99–100, 103–5, 249, 290

author’s access to, 23, 25–7, 39–41, 216

conversations at, 23, 25, 35, 37, 42, 45, 49, 76, 83, 85, 88, 90, 93–4,
138, 140, 162, 170, 178, 205, 209–10, 212, 217, 219, 228, 232, 246, 265,
315

founding/closing, 75, 77, 81, 113, 216, 226, 333, 336

as hang-out scene, 22, 25, 40, 78, 94, 99, 160, 170, 265, 105–8, 216,
217, 247, 315, 356n12, n16, 361n21, 362n6

micro-neighborhood of, 10, 39, 72, 81, 130, 261, 330, 333, 335, 336,
337, 343n7, 346n12, 356n16, 359n9, 362n8

gangs, 174, 194–5, 197–8, 203, 219, 247, 335, 358n19

history of, 58, 59–60, 70, 82

La Mafia Boba, 343n5

The Cheeba Crew (TCC), 22–3, 105

see also crime, burglary; crime, car burglary; rape, gang

Gans, Herbert, 362n2

garment industry, 3, 29, 51–78, 137–8, 139, 196, 240, 241; see also
economic restructuring

gender relations, 14, 53, 82, 129, 136, 143, 153, 171, 203, 214–15, 219,
223, 231, 241, 242, 257, 259, 260, 288, 296, 307, 316, 324

among crack dealers, 78, 118, 217, 219, 228–9, 230–2, 245, 247, 249,
258, 271–5, 277–8, 293–7, 302–4, 306–8, 310, 314–17, 355n7, 356n12

and elopement, 218–19, 223, 355n4

girlfriends/boyfriends, 22, 40, 41, 79, 80, 81, 85, 93, 95, 97, 98–9,
107–8, 118, 124, 136, 141, 179, 203, 209, 217, 223, 231, 234, 235, 244,
250, 264, 272, 273, 277–8, 289, 293, 295, 312, 314–16, 329, 335, 351n5

and romantic love, 3, 218–19, 220–1, 222–7, 244, 267, 273, 274–5, 304,
306, 314, 316, 355n4, 359n11

see also family; fathers; masculinity; mothers; patriarchy; rape;
sexism; sexual relations; women

Georgia, 38

Germans, 56, 58, 347n19, n24, 348n31

Germany, 34

Gibson, Margaret, 342n23

graffiti, 176, 192

art, 40, 71, 186–7, 189, 264, 279, 343n9

Hall of Fame, 186, 191, 193

grandparents of dealers, 178, 292

grandfathers, 51, 82, 106, 111, 179, 199, 217, 228, 247, 248, 277, 289,
298, 313, 335, 363n11

grandmothers, 13, 36, 118, 133, 179, 180, 181, 184–5, 191, 274, 295–6,
298–9, 303, 313, 330, 343–4n9, 359n7

great-grandparents, 51, 82, 199, 292, 314, 330, 356n12

guns, 34, 60, 71, 81, 107, 112, 200, 217, 223, 224–5, 235–7, 239, 240,
241, 247, 255, 259, 272

see also violence, gunshot

Haitians, 347n24

Harris, Jean, 180

Hawkins, Yusuf, 344n11

Head Start, 325

Hell Gate, 55, 58, 67, 68, 75, 83, 133, 138

Bay of, 5, 346n14

heroin, 3, 19, 20, 21, 34, 75, 81

addicts, 4, 10, 20, 67, 68, 69, 70, 138, 159, 172, 179, 180, 183, 250,
301, 303, 337

dealers using, 42–3, 89, 90–1, 95–6, 101–2, 122, 125–8, 133–4, 155,
156–7, 247, 281–3, 294, 299, 304, 308, 309, 311, 330

history of, 67, 68–70, 74–5, 278

overdose, 156–7, 173, 301

selling, 2, 20, 29, 82, 125, 281, 333, 339–40n4, 343n6, 351n8

speedball, 42, 69, 91, 95–6, 122, 127–8, 133–4, 299, 304, 312, 358n20

Hispanics, see Latinos

holocaust, 342–3n3

Auschwitz, xii, 21

homelessness, 2, 79, 105, 126, 274, 288, 337, 347n25, 357n17

homosexuality, 38, 43–4, 192, 210–11, 343n5

homophobia, 38–9, 43–4, 117–18, 192

Hondurans, 351n8

hospitals, 190, 224, 225, 255, 256, 266, 268, 269, 283, 314, 334, 351n7

Beth Israel, 336

Lenox Hill, 106

Metropolitan Municipal, 5, 115, 165, 191, 202, 220, 333, 334, 353n3,
359n13

Mount Sinai, 5, 291

working in, 115, 128, 256, 291, 307

see also Ward’s Island

housing projects, 29, 164, 170, 215, 258, 329, 335, 336

conversations in, 42, 95–6, 122, 258, 281

dealers living in, 4, 78, 123, 128, 136, 152, 185, 222, 229, 240, 241,
247, 274, 329–30, 332

and drugs, 4, 81, 82, 95, 100, 247, 332, 335, 336, 343n6

in neighborhood, 1, 5, 29, 35, 41, 65, 159, 165, 203, 258, 343n8, 358n19

in Puerto Rico, 299

statistics on, 6, 65, 274, 345n21, 346n12, 359n12

Hungarians, 347n9

I Like it Like That, 354n2

Idaho, 345n20

illiteracy, 21, 27, 41, 144, 145, 152, 156, 176, 177, 179

immigration, 15, 53, 54, 55, 56–62, 137, 140, 165–9, 260, 297, 301, 334,
351n8, 353n1

rural, 50–3, 130, 167–8, 169, 176, 179, 199–200, 221, 240, 241–2, 280,
295, 298, 355n5

undocumented, 79–80, 166, 169, 345n20, 353n16

see also East Harlem, history of; Mexicans; Puerto Ricans, immigration
of

inner-city apartheid, xi–xii, 1, 8, 13, 17, 29, 31–4, 39, 65, 158, 164,
173, 185–6, 195, 215, 223, 241–2, 260, 263–4, 284–5, 288, 318–19, 322–3,
325

and social marginalization, 2, 119–20, 130 143, 158, 174, 215, 284–6,
288, 324, 327, 354n4, 359n9, see also academics; U.S. ideology

Irish, 31, 51, 56, 57, 58, 146, 158, 347n19, n24

Isabela, Puerto Rico, 240, 355n5

Italians, 31, 58, 72, 76, 147, 225, 344n10

conflict with Puerto Ricans, 59–61, 62, 163, 167–8, 347n24

history of, 57–60, 61, 62, 65, 70, 74, 168, 261, 347n19, n31

as landlords, 19, 337, 342n1

racism against, 58–9, 61, 62, 347n24

see also Mafia

Jamaicans, 166, 343n7

janitor/porter/maintenance engineer, 89, 90, 94, 124, 129, 165, 273,
328, 329, 336

jazz, 341n15

Jefferson Park, 5, 350n5

Jews, 56, 59, 60–1, 143, 147, 165

racism against, 103, 347n31, 353–4n3, 356n16

jí baro, 49, 50, 52, 54, 133, 135, 136, 179, 215, 217, 218, 221–2, 240,
275, 288, 292, 312, 326, 346n4

see also immigration, rural; Puerto Ricans; Puerto Rico

Juarbe, Anna, 356n14

Katz, Michael, 243

Kentucky, 49

King, Ben E., 64

Koch, Mayor, 94

Ku Klux Klan, 45

La Farmacia’s corner, 19, 20, 21, 45, 67, 68–9, 83, 99, 160, 195, 229,
336, 337, 342–3n3, 355n5

La Vida, 16

Latinos, 1, 6, 32, 33, 49, 53, 138, 163, 167, 169, 173, 324, 339n1,
352n10, 362n5

see also Puerto Ricans

Laviera, Tato, 353n2

law enforcement

arresting drug dealers, 4, 37, 39, 82, 92, 101, 102, 109–13, 217,
249–53, 257–8, 265–7, 272–3, 321, 331, 334, 350n77, 351–2n9

CIA, 25

FBI, 25, 72, 73

undercover officers, 21, 29, 30, 33, 37, 39, 40, 41, 68, 106, 108,
111–12, 217, 250–1, 263, 272, 331

War on Drugs, 39, 74–5, 112, 279, 345n20, 350n77, 352n11

see also criminal justice system; police, New York City

lesbians, 254–5

Levine, Harry, 360n15

Levitt, Helen, 64

Lewis, Oscar, 16–17, 64

Lexington Avenue, 5, 19, 20, 55, 202, 220, 225, 249, 341n16, 342n1

subway, 19, 20, 56

library, public, 67–8

Lower East Side (of Manhattan), 56

McDonald’s, 116–17, 124, 307, 329, 336

MacLeod, Jay, 342n23

Macy’s, 309

Mafia, 34, 60, 70–4, 75–6, 162–3, 164–5, 347n25, 349n72, n73, n74,
353n16

Genovese crime family, 60, 72, 73–4, 344n12, 353n12

Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, 299

marijuana, 3, 22, 74, 112, 278, 305, 343n4

dealers using, 96, 189, 190, 191, 192, 194, 247, 331, 332

selling, 30, 75, 192, 194, 333, 350n77

Martinez-Alier, Verena, 355n4

masculinity, 222, 227, 238, 292, 300–1, 354n2, 362n5

resistance to increased rights of women, 214–15, 254–8, 271, 276–7, 279,
288, 301, 307, 354n2

sexism/misogyny of, 23, 85, 95, 97, 146, 175, 197, 204–5, 207, 208, 209,
211, 212, 213, 215, 219, 225, 228, 230, 231, 240, 271, 276–7, 279–80,
284, 289–90, see also rape

in street culture, 80–1, 95, 137, 141–3, 146, 162, 164, 171, 182, 189,
192, 196, 205, 215, 227, 230, 231, 288–98, 302–4, 315–17, 335, 354n2,
363n11

Medicaid, 4, 100, 243, 322, 331, 340n6, 351n7

mental/emotional vulnerability, 47, 88, 115, 121, 122–3, 176, 183, 184,
190–1, 194, 207, 217, 220, 224, 226, 245, 246, 247–9, 253–6, 259, 268,
269, 283, 285, 297–8, 325, 329, 330, 336, 350–1n5, 356n16

see also ataque de nervios; suicide; violence, mental instability and

Merchant Marines, 301

Merton, Robert, 364n9

mescaline, 3, 19, 134

metallurgy, 131, 139–40

methadone, 3, 173

Mexicans, 79–80, 116, 130–1, 166–8, 278, 333–4, 354n2

from Guerrero, 169

from Piaxtla, Puebla, 130, 169

Michelin man, 273

military, U.S., 263, 333, 336, 361n23

Army, 87, 125

Miró, Joan, 264

Mohanty, Chandra, 356n14

Morningside Park, 5, 344n10

mothers, 194, 219, 259, 267–73, 343n9

attitudes toward street culture, 10, 195, 196, 197, 198, 260, 263, 281,
361n21

as dealers, 4, 17, 34, 226, 228–9, 233, 234, 237, 238, 243, 244–52,
256–7, 275–6, 277, 355n3, 362n6

of dealers, 13, 42, 44, 51, 78, 123, 126–9, 137, 139, 152, 162, 168,
175–6, 177–80, 183–5, 188, 191, 195, 196, 197, 198–9, 202, 219–20, 224,
248, 266, 297–8, 300, 302–3, 306, 307–8, 310, 313, 329, 333, 357–8n18,
362n6

income-generating strategies, 3, 4, 226, 229, 241, 243–4, 247–9, 274–5,
325, 329–30, 356n16, 357n17, 357–8n18, 362n6

in jail, 180, 191, 225, 247, 250–7

in Puerto Rican culture, 217–18, 219, 222, 250–1, 260, 262, 267, 269,
274–6, 356n13, see also family, patriarchy

single, 194, 226, 241, 242, 245, 246–7, 249, 260, 276–7, 278–80, 286,
287, 293, 294, 316–17, 329, 362n1, n2

using drugs and alcohol, 179, 180, 183, 229, 260, 263, 264, 272–3,
275–6, 278–85, 329, 331, 334, 337, 343–4n9, 355n3, 358n20, 361n22, n23,
361–2n28

see also children; gender relations; pregnancy; women

Moynihan, Daniel Patrick, 16

multinational corporations, 49, 51, 52, 167, 178, 319, 346n10

municipal employees, 103

museums, 335

Frick, 263, 264

Guggenheim, 264

Museum of Modern Art, 5, 264

Whitney, 195, 264

Nader, Laura, 18

National Geographic, 342n1

Native Americans, 53, 55, 124, 324

Reckgawawanc, 55

Sioux, 361–2n28

Taino, 50

Nazis, 34

New Jersey, 203, 268, 336

New York City

employment in, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 51, 114, 115, 124, 138, 139, 140, 162,
164, 166, 169, 170, 215, 287, 340n9, 352n1, n10

politics, 343n17, n20, 348–9n51, 353n16

poverty in, 2, 7, 8, 53, 320, 345n16, 348–9n51

statistics, 1, 2, 6–8, 53, 65, 114, 274, 320, 334, 339n3, 345n16, n21,
346n12, 357n17, 358n2, 259n12

see also East Harlem; economic restructuring; poverty

New York Daily News, 342n1

New York Post, 20

New York Times, 58, 71, 280, 336, 337, 341n16, 359n8, 360n15

96th Street, 35, 55, 164, 195

Norwegians, 56

numbers rackets, 3, 30, 34, 72, 74, 133, 179, 344n12, 349n72

nurses, 4, 308

aides, 128, 256, 291, 331, 336

Nuyoricans, 46, 136, 178–9, 341–2n20

in crack dealing network, 44, 136

culture of, 26, 44, 50, 215, 288, 326

literature of, 59, 64, 353n2, 354n2

structural conditions of, 48, 114, 137–9, 143, 169, 170

see also jí baro; Puerto Ricans; Puerto Rico

Ocala, Florida, 330

office work, 4, 115, 142–9, 150–6, 158–9, 162, 170, 177, 336

see also economic restructuring; employment, resistance to exploitation
in; factory work; service sector

Ogbu, John, 342n23

110th Street and Lexington Avenue, 5, 19, 20, 55, 202, 220, 225, 341n16,
342n1

history of, 69

Operation Open City, 342n1

Pac-Man, 86, 88, 90, 104, 110, 111, 277

Palestinians, 337, 341n16, 343n3

see also Arab stores

Park Avenue, 5, 56, 185, 334

patriarchy, 78, 124, 149, 212, 214–15, 222–3, 230, 241, 278–9, 301, 314,
317, 354n2, 363n11

inversion of, 229–32, 238–9, 240–1

see also family; gender relations; masculinity; sexism; women

Pennsylvania, 293, 294

Phoenix House, 330

Piaxla, Puebla, 130, 169

pill mills, 4, 100

Pleasant Avenue, 5, 58, 59, 68, 347n25

Pleasant Avenue Connection, 68

Poles, 347n19

police, New York City, 4, 21, 30–2, 34, 39, 68, 70, 77, 109, 112, 125,
134, 140, 195, 200, 220, 229, 268, 269, 303, 352n10

brutality, 35–7, 263, 265

corruption, 71, 109, 265, 351–2n9

informants to, 22–3, 24, 88

Tactical Narcotics Team (TNT), 39, 112, 249, 345n17, 349n77

police auction, 28, 333

see also criminal justice system; law enforcement

Ponce de León, Juán, 48

Portuguese, 204

Poughkeepsie, New York, 336

poverty in the United States, 15, 16, 18, 318–20, 324–5, 362n3

see also crack dealers; East Harlem; family; inner-city apartheid; New
York City; Puerto Ricans; U.S. ideology

pregnancy, 17, 81, 192, 194, 213, 216–17, 218, 219, 221–2, 225, 272–4,
285, 295, 304, 307, 316–17, 336, see also abortion

and drugs and alcohol, 17, 250, 260, 263, 278, 281–5, 337, 361n22, n23,
n24, 361–2n28

prison, see criminal justice system; law enforcement

Proctor and Gamble, 347n25

prostitution, 16, 18, 254, 255, 279–80, 284, 291, 294, 334, 361n24

public assistance, 62, 103, 119, 123, 126, 128, 154, 160, 196, 226,
243–7, 248–9, 304, 322, 324, 325, 329–30, 331, 332, 341n14, 356n16,
357n17, 357–8n18, 362n7

statistics on, 3, 6–8, 53, 62, 78, 217, 243, 340n6

public policy, 65, 68, 74, 83, 219–20, 242–4, 260, 261, 284–7, 314,
318–19, 320–5, 327, 348–9n51, 363n1

public sector breakdown, 1–2, 9, 34, 63, 65, 68, 109, 125, 164, 169,
229, 285–6, 319, 322–4, 344–5n15, 352n10, 359n12, 359–60n13

Puerto Ricans, 7, 11, 13, 19, 41, 76, 350n4

diaspora of, 51, 215, 297, 326

immigration of, 11, 16, 48, 49–53, 59–62, 97, 221, 240, 241–2, 260, 288

and poverty, 11, 53, 61, 65, 298–9, 320, 346n12

racism against, 11–12, 15, 16, 17, 52–3, 54, 59–62, 130–1, 136, 145–6,
147, 168–71, 173, 203, 204, 207–8, 241, 269, 256–7, 345n22, 347n24, see
also Italians, sconflict with Puerto Ricans

and social indicators, 11, 53, 61, 65, 124, 298–9, 320, 345n2, 346n12,
352n3, 359n9

see also African-Americans, relationship to Puerto Ricans; jí baro;
Nuyoricans; Puerto Rico

Puerto Rico, 293, 345n2

author’s visit to, 240, 298–9

and colonialism, 11, 48–9, 52, 53, 55, 288, 326, 346n11, 348n36

contemporary relationship to United States, 11, 49, 52, 346n10

culture of, 11, 25–6, 50, 52–3, 82, 129, 133, 136, 168, 178–9, 198–9,
217, 219, 222–3, 224, 226, 240, 242, 249–50, 281, 288, 296–7, 298–9,
312, 314, 324, 326, 352n6, 359n10, 362n5, see also family, patriarchy

history of, 48–53, 54, 82, 221, 288, 292, 296–7, 298–9, 346n4

plantations in, 48, 49–50, 51, 52, 176, 178, 198–9, 215, 219, 242, 296,
299, 356n13

return visits by Nuyoricans to, 135, 178–9, 203, 220, 224, 297, 298

see also jí baro; multinational corporations

Queens, 32, 268

Far Rockaway, 83

Forest Hills, 350n77

Jamaica, 269

racism, xi–xii, 9, 15, 17, 18, 45, 53, 56, 74, 85, 131, 147, 161, 162,
166–7, 169, 204–5, 208, 273, 291, 324, 347n24, 348n31, 354n4, 359n11

experience of dealers, 33, 37, 136, 143–6, 147, 163–4, 170–2

in history, 56, 57–62, 63, 72, 347n24

institutionalized, xii, 1, 8, 11, 32, 173, 325, 355n4

internalized, 34, 41, 170, 172–3

and street culture, 8, 9, 34, 170, 322

see also African-Americans; inner-city apartheid; Italians; Jews; Puerto
Ricans; U.S. ideology

Rao, Joe, 60, 72

Rao, Vince, 72, 349n74

rap music, 22, 105, 118, 131, 172, 194, 262, 264, 266, 289, 356n12

Public Enemy, 352n5

rape, 23, 174–5, 187, 207–8, 213, 215, 228, 265, 269–72, 291, 314,
339n3, 351n5

gang, 175, 189, 205–13, 219, 267, 354n6

of males, 23–4, 37–9

Reagan, Ronald, 350n77

real estate, 19, 74, 145, 164, 336, 342n1, 343n3

Reinarman, Craig, 360n15

religion, 55, 202, 213, 252, 262, 275

Catholicism, 48, 129, 136, 221, 222, 224, 225, 226, 270, 275, 281, 284,
312, 361n23

churches, 56, 57–8, 72, 261, 347n24

Jehovah’s Witnesses, 172

priests/reverends, 48, 261, 284, 345n17, 347n24

Santerí a, 26–6, 296–7, 314

Riker’s Island, 5, 38, 95, 331

Rivera, Edward, 59

Rivera, Geraldo, 72

Rivers, Joan, 331

Rodriguez, Clara, 345n22

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 55

“Rose in Spanish Harlem, A,” 64

Russia, 364n8

Russians, 347n19

Salerno, Fat Tony, 72, 73, 74, 349n72, n73, 353n16

salsa music, 35, 105, 191, 262, 278, 356n12

San Francisco, California, 344n10

San Juan, Puerto Rico, 288

Sanday, Peggy, 354n6

Sayad, Abdelmalek, 353n1

Scandinavians, 56

Scarsdale, New York, 180

Scheper-Hughes, Nancy, 285, 341n19, 355n6

school, 4, 41, 172, 252, 264, 273, 304, 308, 324, 330, 334, 363n1

careers and, 190–1, 194

Catholic, 249, 276

disruption of, 176, 177, 183, 187–8, 190, 191–2

dropping out from, 87, 116, 129, 137, 138, 139, 140–1, 143, 151, 180–1,
215, 266, 287, 321, 331, 332, 334

drugs at, 69, 82, 125, 191–2, 229, 321

elementary and junior high, 69, 125, 137, 175–8, 185–8, 190

employment versus, 137–42, 151, 181

family and, 175–6, 177–8, 179–81, 183–4, 185, 188, 252, 316

GED, 144, 247

high, 87, 116, 168, 299, 332

reform school, 182–3, 335

sexual/gender relations at, 182, 187, 189, 192

special education, 188, 190, 192

and symbolic violence, 21, 175–7

teachers/counselors at, 41, 58, 176–7, 182–3, 187, 188, 190, 191

truancy from, 174, 178, 187, 194, 196, 331

violence at, 181–4, 187–8, 191, 192, 264

see also cultural capital

Second Avenue, 5, 48, 250, 262

Section-8 subsidized housing, 65, 362n6

security guards, 115, 116, 147, 160, 293

service sector, 51, 52, 114–15, 131, 141, 352n1

Finance Insurance Real Estate (FIRE), 76, 115, 142, 147, 148, 154, 155,
158, 169, 170, 172, 186, 215

see alsoeconomic restructuring; factory work; office work

sexism, 85, 146–8, 208, 217, 229, 240, 273, 359n11

see also family; gender relations; masculinity; patriarchy; rape; women

sexual relations, 14, 140, 141, 192, 208, 215, 241, 257, 301, 360n15,
361n24, 362n5, n8, 363n11

of dealers, 78, 80–1, 95, 97, 105, 131, 182, 217–18, 227–8, 229, 230–2,
234, 238–9, 269, 271, 288–92, 294–5, 306, 315–16, 329, 330, 334, 335,
342n24, 350n2, 354n7

and jealousy, 80, 215, 217, 222–4, 226, 230–1, 235–6, 239, 257, 294,
300, 334, 354n2

see also children, and sexual relations; gender relations; masculinity;
rape; school; women

Sharpton, A1, 36, 345n17

Silverado Savings and Loan, 76

Simpson, Bart, 186

Singer, Merrill, 355n6

social clubs

the crackhouse, 19, 45, 55, 67, 71, 82, 83, 90, 99, 109, 133, 160, 197,
205, 228, 229, 240, 265, 266, 277–8, 284, 289, 290, 299, 337, 342n1

Happy Land, 351n8

legal, 3, 29, 89, 109, 134, 335

Yacht Club, 90, 94

see also crack dealers, logistics of selling; crackhouses; Game Room

Social Security Insurance (SSI), 49, 88, 103, 119, 190–1, 194, 217, 248,
274, 330, 335, 340n6, 356n16

sociologists, 12, 28, 114, 158, 284, 362n2

South (United States), the, 49, 64, 360n16

South Africa, 364n8

South America, 34

Spain, 48, 50, 240, 326

Spaniards, 138, 204

Spanish Harlem, see East Harlem

Spanish language, 39, 44, 52, 119, 127, 130, 170, 175, 198, 241, 242,
341–2n20, 346n11, 352n6

Staten Island, New York, 146

statistics, unreliability of, 2, 4, 6–8, 9–10, 12, 65, 259, 260

street culture, 8, 9, 19–22, 34–5, 41, 45, 54, 77, 82, 89–91, 115, 135,
141, 170, 174–5, 186, 194, 196, 198, 241, 279, 288, 322, 341n15, n20,
354n2

clothes in, 46, 118, 141, 157–62, 194, 197, 198, 199, 256–8, 265, 305,
314, 316, 341–2n20

hegemony of, 10–11, 34–5, 45–6, 77, 89, 265–7

and nonparticipants, 10, 34, 35, 68, 109, 263, 281

resistance and (self) destruction in, 8–11, 17–18, 53–4, 65, 70, 115,
118–19, 130, 131, 142, 143, 158, 160, 162, 173, 285, 326

see also children; employment; fathers; masculinity; mothers; racism;
rape; sexual relations; underground economy; violence; women

substance abuse, 2, 3–4, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 20, 21, 41, 53, 55, 77, 285,
332, 337

of dealers, 26, 78–9, 80, 81, 82, 84, 86–7, 88, 89, 96, 98, 100, 118–19,
120, 124, 125, 130, 194, 197, 198, 288, 308–9

history of, 55, 65, 66–70, 278, 319, 360n16

and public policy, 2, 68, 320–1, 349–50n77

recovery from, 81, 86–7, 89, 95, 97, 98, 115, 128, 134, 159, 172, 275–6,
284, 304–5, 312, 328, 330, 334, 362n28

and women, 17, 34, 78, 81, 85, 179, 180, 206, 225–6, 229, 250, 260, 263,
275–6, 278–85, 331, 337

see also alcohol; children, and drugs; cocaine; crack; fathers, as
substance abusers; heroin; mothers, using drugs and alcohol

suburbs, 14, 55, 60, 172–3, 185–6, 195–6, 323–4

suicide, 53, 85, 88, 183, 191, 211, 220, 221, 224, 255, 256, 275, 353n3

see also mental/emotional vulnerability

Taussig, Michael, 34

Tennessee, 49

Testing Assessment and Placement (TAP) centers, 120–1

theoretical approaches

cultural production, 12, 17, 137, 176, 342n23

culture of poverty, 16–17, 64

ecological analysis, 55, 63

feminism, 12, 214–15, 241, 285, 356n14, 362n5

political economy, 1, 11, 12, 15–18, 53–4, 137, 199, 221–2, 242, 259–60,
285, 301–2, 303–4, 325, 327, 362n5, see also family, political economy
of

postmodernism, 13–14, 363n1

psychological individualism, 15, 16–17, 53–4, 64, 137, 158, 193, 203,
207, 214, 220–1, 242, 259–60, 301–2, 303, 323, 325

see also academics; agency/social structure; anthropology; author,
theoretical approach of; ethnography; U.S. ideology

Third Avenue, 5, 56, 220, 262, 303

Thomas, Piri, xi, xiii, 59

Thorazine, 190, 194

Thrasher, Frederic, 59, 63, 66, 68, 70, 71

Times Square, 194, 339n3

Torruellas, Rosa, 356n14

Trump Tower, 263

underground economy, 1–4, 12, 24, 52, 54, 131, 256, 288, 325, 357–8n18

and drugs, 1–2, 3–4, 6, 8–11, 12, 68–9, 70, 75–6, 80–96, 119, 135, 167,
226, 320–2, 326, 335, 337, 340n4, n7

estimating size of, 6–8, 9–10, 12

see also crack dealers; crime; Mafia; mothers; street culture; women

unions, 94, 116, 141, 142, 155, 162, 165, 166, 328, 357n16

corruption, 73, 162–3, 165, 353n12

United Parcel Service, 336

U.S. ideology, xi–xii, 91, 326, 327, 345n20

and poverty/race/individualism, 11, 14–15, 16, 17, 53, 54–5, 57–9, 61,
63–4, 137, 173, 207–8, 242–3, 318, 322, 323–5

and gender, 279, 280–1, 324–5

and inner city, 12, 18, 32–3, 34, 39, 46, 65, 136, 158, 242–3, 280–1,
318, 325–6

and entrepreneurship, 54, 75–6, 322, 326

see also academics; agency/social structure; ethnography; inner-city
apartheid; public sector breakdown; racism; street culture

Upper East Side (of Manhattan), 5, 35, 63, 153, 164, 195, 196, 201, 251,
263–4, 328, 343n16, 359n9

see also crime, burglary; inner-city apartheid

upward mobility, 24, 59–60, 75, 91, 115, 137, 142–3, 151, 153–4, 170,
172–3, 178, 242, 322, 326, 344n12

Uzi (automatic weapon), 60, 247, 255

valium, 3, 19, 21

Vergara, Camilo, 348n51

violence, 9, 14, 15, 55, 279, 343n5

in crackhouse, 86, 88–9, 94, 105, 107, 185, 217

culture of terror, 34, 35, 88, 213, 345n15

fear of, 10, 22–4, 32–5, 37, 39, 107, 235, 239, 251–2, 314, 344n13,
350n5, 353n3

gunshot, 25, 44, 60, 84, 94, 162, 203, 209, 210, 232, 255, 344n14

instrumentality of, 23, 24–5, 35–6, 88–9, 135, 163, 181, 229, 332, 343n7

internalized, 9, 37, 39, 88, 212, 254, 264–5, 272, 285, 319, 326, 337,
341n19, 355n6

mental instability and, 26–7, 32, 33, 45, 86, 88–9, 94, 191, 193, 194,
203–5, 220, 224–5, 350n5, 353n3

murder, 1, 10, 24, 27, 34, 36, 45, 60, 71, 73, 88, 104, 123, 149, 167,
179, 180, 187, 191, 204–5, 224, 230, 231, 235, 246, 257, 262, 263, 285,
291, 292, 302, 314, 343n9, 344n11, 349n74, 350–1n5, 353–4n3, 354n2,
355n3, 359n7, 360n16, 361n23

racial, 45, 167, 169, 173, 204–5

shootings, 34, 40, 81, 167, 213, 222–5, 229–30, 291, 333, 335, 343n7,
n9, 344n13, 345n21, 351n5, 358n19

stabbings, 45, 79–80, 167, 184, 191, 224, 232–3, 259, 268, 302, 314,
350n2, 350–1n5, 354n2, 355n7

threats among dealers, 26–7, 104, 134, 204–5, 217, 230, 246

see also children, and violence; crime; family, violence; gangs; guns;
rape; street culture; underground economy; women, violence against

Virginia, 333

Wacquant, Loïc, 344n15, 349n51

Wall Street, 76, 336

Wall Street Journal, 280

Ward’s Island, 5, 115, 181, 190, 351n5

Warhol, Andy, 263–4

Washington, George, 151

Washington Heights, 5, 339n3

We Are the World, 40

welfare, see public assistance

Wendy’s, 123, 124

West Harlem, 344n10

West Indians, 169

West Side (of Manhattan), 5, 169, 335

Westbury, State University of, 349n77

whites, 21, 41, 54, 94–5, 115, 138, 143, 158, 166, 171–2, 195, 204–5,
215, 256–7, 260, 262–3, 282, 352n10, 362n8

in East Harlem, 23, 29–33, 43–4, 45, 60, 72, 108, 109, 111, 161, 172,
263

see also academics; author; class; East Harlem, history of; Irish;
Italians; Jews; racism; suburbs; U.S. ideology; women, at work

Willis, Paul, 342n23

Winfrey, Oprah, 47

Wolf, Eric, 346n4, 350n3

women, 6, 7

dealers, 4, 17, 27, 34, 226, 228–9, 231, 233, 234, 237, 238, 240, 243,
244–52, 256–7, 275, 277, 290, 355n3, 360n16, 362n6

new roles in street culture, 213–14, 219, 228–9, 231–2, 238–9, 241, 254,
258, 259, 260, 271, 276–85, 291, 307, 355n3, 362n8

rights and power, 213–16, 219, 222–3, 226–7, 240–2, 242, 247, 258, 260,
284–6, 316–17, 354n2, 356n14

violence against, 10, 34, 36, 124, 149–50, 204–5, 213–14, 218–19, 220–6,
229–30, 231, 232–4, 237–40, 245, 256, 273, 274, 276, 287, 301–3, 310,
330, 331, see also rape

at work, 4, 115, 122, 123–4, 127, 128, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 143–7,
148–54, 156, 158, 170, 171, 241, 247, 257, 290, 329, 340n9, n10, 352n10,
356n16

see also family; gender relations; masculinity; mothers; sexism; sexual
relations; substance abuse, and women

Woolworth’s, 124

Yale University, 204

Yemeni, 337

see also Arab stores
